The eighth annual session at JSC of the Lunar Science Conference had discussed the possibility of mining asteroids for the raw materials of space industrialization, the Chicago Tribune reported. Dr. David Criswell, associate scientist at the Lunar Science Institute, said that two developments would make asteroid mining feasible: an engine capable of towing an asteroid, and a method of locating asteroids rich in needed resources. Materials from asteroids would be 1000 times cheaper than materials launched from earth into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 24/77, 4-11)
The Washington Post reported Senate confirmation of 11 high-level nominees to the new Dept, of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale D. Myers, former NASA associate administrator for space flight, as undersecretary of DOE. Myers, an aeronautical engineer with North American Rockwell since 1943, had joined NASA in Jan. 1970; he had been a vice president and manager of the Apollo program at Rockwell. (W Post, Oct 21/77, B-5)
The Natl. Space Club announced that Dr. John E. Naugle, appointed NASA chief scientist Nov. 8, would speak at its Dec. meeting and present awards to Washington-area high school students in American Univ.’s 19th summer research program. Dr. Naugle had been NASA associate administrator since 1975 in charge of much of the agency’s R&D work. (NSC newsletter Dec 77)
MSFC reported that the contractor for the first high-energy astronomy observatory (HEAO-A), TRW Systems of Redondo Beach, Calif., would ship the spacecraft to Kennedy Space Center on Mar. 7. HEAO-A, a 2660kg unmanned mission scheduled for launch Apr. 15 into low circular earth orbit, would survey celestial x-ray sources and gamma-ray flux. (MSFC Release 77-32)
X-ray sensors on the U.K.’s Ariel satellite had detected an explosion of “catastrophic dimensions” in the constellation Ophiuchus [the Serpent-Bearer], the NY Times reported. Similar sensors on Heao 1, the U.S. high-energy astronomy observatory launched Aug. 12, had made the same observation. Dr. Daniel A. Schwartz of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics said intensity of x-rays from that area increased a thousandfold in the past 2wk, making it the second strongest, source in the sky (that in the constellation Scorpius, a continuous source of x-rays, was the strongest). No star of comparable brilliance appeared in previous photographs of the region. Ariel had first detected the x-rays Aug. 31; Heao 1 began recording the source Sept. 7. An observatory in Australia that had received data on the explosion had also recorded it in visible light; Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Laboratory said that a nova was rarely observed at widely separated wavelengths such as those of visible light and x-rays. (NYT, Sept 17/77, B8)
The Natl, Science Foundation reported that research and development spending in the U.S. would reach an estimated $40.8 billion in 1977, 9% more than the 1976 level of $37.3 billion. The federal government expected to increase its R&D outlay from $19.8 billion in 1976 to $21.8 billion in 1977, emphasizing defense, space, and energy. (NSF Release PR77-73)
NASA announced it had appointed Gerald D. Griffin, deputy director of Dryden Flight Research Center since 1976, to be deputy director of Kennedy Space Center as of July 1. He would replace Miles Ross, who resigned from NASA in May. Griffin had worked at NASA Hq for 3yr, as asst, administrator for legislative affairs, then as deputy associate administrator for operations in the Office of Space Flight. At Johnson Space Center, Griffin had been a flight controller during the Gemini program, a flight director on all 11 Apollo missions, and lead flight director on Apollo 12, 15, and 17. Among his awards were NASA exceptional service medals for his work on Apollo 12 and 15, the presidential Medal of Freedom group achievement award for Apollo 13, and the Hq creative management award. (NASA Release 77-109; DFRC Release 20-77)
MSFC reported on the first meeting of a science working group for a proposed earth-orbiting system called Advanced X-Ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), to study stellar structure and evolution, large-scale galactic phenomena, active galaxies and galactic clusters, and cosmology. Chaired by Prof. R. Giacconi of Harvard Univ. and representing universities and government laboratories working on x-ray astronomy in the U.S. and Europe, the group would define the scientific requirements. The 12.8m (42ft) craft weighing about 9000kg (20 0001b) would be designed for Space Shuttle launch and repair or retrieval in orbit. (MSFC Release 77-227)
FBIS reported on the 28th congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation in Prague, celebrating the 20th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik 1. Chairman Marcel Barrere of France reviewed at a press conference the “tempestuous impact of space exploration on the planet’s industry,” mentioning the joint U.S.-USSR approach to a manned flight project using the Shuttle and the Salyut orbital station. Presentations at the congress had included papers on the search for extraterrestrial civilizations, the U.S. scientists reporting on the Voyager mission, and the USSR on remote probes of planetary atmospheres for signs of gas exchange between soil and atmosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 24/77, Sept 28/77)
During May: Natl. Research Council’s News Report said a committee chaired by MIT’s Wilbur B. Davenport, Jr., had recommended that NASA resume support of comsat services research and development but stay out of the business of operating such services. The committee said that agency support of an operational program of public service satellite communications would “obscure the real costs of the public service”; agencies that needed to use or provide such services “would not be faced with the hard reality of determining whether a program is worthy of execution when compared with its actual cost,” the report said. (NRC News Report, May 77, 1)
NASA announced that LeRC had supplied news media in the Cleveland area with readings of daily solar energy available for use during the winter. Using a pyranometer, a device to record total solar energy reaching a surface, LeRC staff measured the kilowatt hrs of solar energy received on a 150m2 surface facing south at a 37° angle. Other NASA centers had made similar measurements, all related to solar energy research being pursued by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). (NASA Release 77-49)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics using data from NASA’s Uhuru satellite had discovered what seemed to be “superclusters” of galaxies more than 150 million light-years in diameter, bounded by areas of extremely hot gas acting as x-ray sources. The mass of gas required to produce x-rays would be 5 to 10 times greater than all material seen at other wavelengths, and would suffice to bind the galaxies into superclusters. Primarily hydrogen and helium, the gas was thought to be “primordial material” from an explosion that created the universe. In the debate over origins, “open universe” theorists supported the idea of a big bang 20 billion yr ago expanding outward forever; “closed universe” advocates said gravitational collapse would halt expansion and the material would fall back on itself, perhaps to repeat the cycle. Traditional optical and radio techniques had not found enough material in space to supply the gravity needed to “close” the universe; the new data indicated the missing mass might exist as vast amounts of hot gas between galaxies. Uhuru, first of a series of small astronomical satellites (SAS) for studying cosmic x-rays, had been launched Dec. 12,1970, as Explorer 42. The astronomers had noted the x-ray emissions while compiling the fourth Uhuru catalog from observations in the early 1970s. The project was managed for NASA by Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Release 77-138)
MSFC announced award of a 15-mo contract worth $99 663 to Desert Research Institute — part of the Univ. of Nevada system—for development and fabrication of a prototype particle generator for possible use in the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL), a payload scheduled for an early Shuttle or Spacelab flight. The generator would form nuclei with diameters of a hundredth to a thousandth of a micron (one thousandth of a mm) upon which water would condense to form clouds. Researchers would use the zero-gravity environment on Shuttle flights to perform cloud-physics experiments leading to an understanding of microphysical processes in the atmosphere, and to eventual prediction, alteration, and control of weather. (MSFC Release 77-19)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $918 523 contract to T.H. Taylor Construction Co., Montgomery, Ala., for construction of permanent and semipermanent steel working platforms on the modified dynamic test stand. The stand would hold an entire Space Shuttle assembly during mated vertical ground-vibration tests scheduled for 1978. (MSFC Release 77-54)
Johnson Space Center confirmed that NASA would turn off science instruments on the lunar surface and would dismantle the JSC control center for Apollo lunar-surface experiment packages (ALSEP) as of Sept. 30. The five stations still operating were put there by Apollo missions 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17. In July 1969 the original moonwalkers of Apollo 11 had left behind a prototype station with a design life of only 14 days; it had survived for 45 days and quit when its power supply failed. Specifications for the remaining five had included a lyr design life for 4, and 2yr for the Apollo 17 station; the Apollo 12 station was “well into its eighth year,” NASA noted. Built to record and transmit long-term lunar-surface data, the stations with their long life had provided researchers with a real bonus: instead of data from only one seismometer at a time, for instance, the group had operated as a sensor network, greatly enhancing available information on the moon’s internal temperature and magnetic field, charged particles in its environment, and especially moonquakes and meteoroid impacts. Although the experiments would be terminated, the transmitters would continue to operate, serving earth as an astronomy reference point. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use the signals in deep space work such as astrometrics and spacecraft navigation or monitoring the motion of the lunar orbit against a background of extragalactic stars to test gravity theories. The lunar stations had had problems: The Apollo 14 ALSEP ran for 4yr, quit for 2 days in March 1975, started up again, and had repeated this 6 times since. Understanding the trouble (temperature fluctuations resulting from the sun’s position had caused short circuits) would help in designing future science stations. (JSC Release 77-47; NASA Release 77-203)
Prof. James L. Elliot of Cornell Univ. reported sighting a large number of objects—possible satellites of Uranus, the seventh planet—while he was using the 91cm telescope on NASA’s Kuiper Airborne Observatory flying above the Indian Ocean. Another U.S. astronomer, Dr. Robert Millis of the Lowell Observatory in Ariz., reported similar observations while viewing Uranus from Perth in Australia. Each of the scientists claimed that the planet might have as many as 100 satellites ranging from 18 to 24mi in diameter. If confirmed, the new observations would give Uranus more satellites than any other planet in the solar system. (NYT, Mar 3/77, 77; C Trib, Mar 12/77)
A new $1.6-million infrared telescope with a 92-in-dia. mirror (the world’s largest) to be installed soon in an observatory atop 9656-ft Jelm Mt. in Wyo. would be sensitive enough to measure the heat of a warm iron on the moon, according to Today newspaper. Professors Robert Gehrz and John Hackwell of the Univ. of Wyo. had supervised design of the telescope, which would incorporate a sensor also of then-design: a computerized device sensing heat energy collected by the large mirror and converting it to an infrared contour chart depicting heat intensity as a topographical contour map would depict terrain. Jelm Mt. was considered the best site for the observatory because of the low water vapor in the area, a requirement for good IR reception. The two scientists had persuaded the state legislature of Wyo. in 1975 to appropriate $975 000 for the project; remaining funds had come from the Natl. Science Foundation. (Today, June 12/77, 12A)
Kitt Peak astronomers had suggested designs for a telescope 5 times larger than the 4.5m telescope at Mt. Palomar, Calif., to complement the Very Large Array radiotelescopes in New Mexico and the planned Space Telescope, the NY Times reported. An instrument using multiple-mirror technology (several mirrors connected by laser, aligned by computer to within an eighth of the wavelength of the observed light) would have the light-gathering potential of a huge single mirror without the high cost of manufacture or maintenance. The resolution possible with such telescopes would permit observation of weather patterns on other planets. (NYT, Apr 9/77, 22)
NASA announced retirement effective Dec. 31 of Gerald M. Truszyn-ski, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, after 33yr of service to NASA and its predecessor, NACA. In 1944, he had begun working at NACA’s Langley aeronautical laboratory as an engineer in instrument research and development, and had transferred 3yr later to the NACA station at Edwards, Calif., an instrument project engineer on the rocket-powered X-l, first airplane to surpass the speed of sound. In 1954 he had become chief of the instrumentation division at Edwards, heading development and operation of systems for NACA’s jet- and rocket-powered craft (X-l, X-2, D-558, and X-15) that pioneered supersonic and hypersonic flight. At NASA Hq after 1960, Truszynski occupied his present position in 1968, succeeding from the post of deputy that he had held since its creation in 1961. He had been responsible for planning, development, and operation of global tracking systems, networks, and facilities for communications and for data acquisition and processing in all NASA’s spaceflight programs. In 1969 he had received NASA’s highest award (the distinguished service medal) twice, for support of Apollo manned flights to lunar orbit and of the first moon landing. Upon his departure, Norman Pozinski would be acting associate administrator. (NASA anno Nov 5/77; NASA Release 77-248)
NASA announced that ARC had awarded two San Francisco Bay area firms a $2.3 million contract for managing construction of a major modification to the largest wind tunnel facility in the western world. Turner Construction Co. and Lord Electric Co. would modify the ARC 40-by 80-ft wind tunnel built in 1944 by adding a new 80- by 120-ft (24 by 36m) test section and increasing drive power from 36 OOOhp to 135 OOOhp. The modifications should enable ARC to handle new types of aircraft, especially large helicopters and vertical- and short-takeoff and landing aircraft. (NASA Release 77-191)
Nature magazine reported further on the recognition of ring systems around the planet Uranus announced earlier by Dr. James L. Elliot of Cornell Univ. [see March 31]. The occultation (shutting off from view) by Uranus of a bright object (star SAO 158687 in Libra) had been predicted by the Royal Observatory at Greenwich as visible only from an area on earth extending from equatorial Africa across the Indian Ocean to western Australia. No useful observations of a Uranian occultation had been made before; astronomers considered such observations important because they could furnish data on the size of the planet or stellar object, on limb darkening, and on extent and composition of any atmosphere, as well as an accurate measurement of the object’s position, valuable in calculations of celestial mechanics. Heavy rain at Johannesburg prevented observations there on March 10, but astronomers on the Kuiper observatory plane flying over the southern Indian Ocean east of Kerguelen Is. were able to see an occultation lasting about 25min with secondary occultations lasting 8 to 9min before and after. Observers at Madras and Perth also viewed the event and decided independently that the extended occultation resulted from satellites forming a belt about 48 000km from the center of Uranus. The belt was apparently circular, lying in the plane of the planet’s equator, and about 12 000km wide. Nature reported that Dr. Elliot was continuing detailed study of the event, and that direct observation of the belts might be possible with a sufficiently large telescope. (Nature, April 14/77, 587)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had scheduled four ferry-test flights of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise mated to its Boeing 747 carrier for Nov. 14, 15, 17, and 18 to prepare for the orbiter’s cross-country ferry flight in March 1978 from DFRC to MSFC for ground-vibration testing. Later flights would ferry orbiters from Rockwell Intl.’s facility in Calif, to Kennedy Space Center in Fla. for launch. Besides determining the best speeds and altitudes for the ferry flights, the test would measure holding-pattern and engine-out performance in cruise and landing/takeoff. The 747 crew would be Fitzhugh Fulton, commander, and Tom McMurtry, pilot, with Victor Horton and Skip Guidry as flight engineers; the 4 had flown the 747 in recent approach and landing tests. (DFRC Release 37-77; NASA Release 77-233; JSC Release 77-74) •
NASA revealed the contents of the space and aeronautics exhibit that would appear in the U.S. pavilion at the 32nd Paris Air Show, under the theme “The Continuous Challenge: 50 Years Since Lindbergh.” NASA planned to display concepts of space communities and their construction; living, farming, and manufacturing in space; and solar-power stations in space, together with a 3-screen presentation of the 50yr of flight since Lindbergh. A 2.4m Shuttle model would include the European Space Agency’s Spacelab, part of a major international cooperative space program, in its cargo bay. Also on display would be the Galileo 2 flying laboratory, its interior configured to simulate the reusable Spacelab with facilities for space experiments in medicine, manufacturing, astronomy, and production of pharmaceuticals. A life-size model of Mars landscape viewed by the Viking lander would demonstrate space exploration, and Landsat stereo photographs of earth would show the increasingly routine use of space to survey crops and natural resources, monitor pollution and weather, and collect global weather data. Other models and presentations would show the scope of NASA programs such as government-industry work to halve fuel consumption by transport aircraft and to develop safer, more efficient, and more environmentally acceptable civil aircraft. (NASA Release 77-20)
NASA announced plans to launch NATO III-B, second in a new series of comsats to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Jan. 27 as NASA’s first launch of 1977. The three spacecraft in the Phase III series, funded entirely by NATO, were built by Ford Aerospace; the third would be launched in 1978. The Delta rocket provided by Goddard Space Flight Center that would put NATO III-B in orbit had successfully launched three previous NATO satellites: Nato II-A and -B, in March 1970 and Feb. 1971, and Nato III-A in April 1976. (NASA Release 77-5)
NASA announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Aircraft Co. of Seattle a contract to design and ground-test composite structures for the Boeing 727 aircraft. NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program to decrease transport-aircraft fuel consumption by 50% had included contracts with several manufacturers to reduce aircraft weights by using composites (high-strength filaments in a polymer matrix, lighter than metal structures). Boeing would build five shipsets of composite elevators (five right- and five left-handed) using manufacturing techniques that might become standard procedure. Costs would be shared, $8 100 000 contributed by the government and $890 000 by the contractor. Langley Research Center would manage contractor effort over 3.5yr. (NASA Release 77-139; LaRC Release 77-27)
NASA announced appointment of Andrew J. Stofan as deputy associate administrator for the Office of Space Sciences, effective Jan. 8, 1978, succeeding Dr. Anthony J. Calio who had become associate administrator for the Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Stofan had been director of launch vehicles at Lewis Research Center since July 1974; he had begun there in 1958 as a research engineer, assigned in 1962 to the Centaur project and becoming project manager of the Titan-Centaur vehicle in 1970. (NASA Release 77-245)
Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978 — the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope—had met with strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agency; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle development. NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project, which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote accordingly. NASA had concentrated its Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until 1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scientists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects, or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted. (NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)
Political interference had delayed development of science and technology in China, according to Chien Hsueh-shen, director of the mechanics institute of the PRC Academy of Sciences. The W. Post quoted his statement in the journal Red Flag that China would “catch up with and surpass the world advanced levels.” Chien, now China’s “top missile scientist” according to the Post, had been a colonel in the U.S. Army Air Corps before returning to China in 1955. Meanwhile, provincial radio reports monitored in Hong Kong said that “political infighting” at a PRC base for nuclear weapons and missiles had “crippled defense construction” for months in 1976. (WPost, July 12/77, A-15)
ESA announced that NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, had signed at a meeting in ESA headquarters a memorandum of understanding on cooperation in NASA’s space telescope program. The European contribution would include a faint-object camera for high-resolution imagery in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared portions of the spectrum, with associated photon-counting detector, to be left in orbit as long as considered scientifically useful; the solar array to power the scope; and support of a scientific operations center to be established by NASA for managing the observatory. ESA would get 15% of the observing time for the duration of the program in return for its participation, and would share data with astronomers in its member states and the international community. NASA would develop and integrate the telescope, launch it into orbit on the Shuttle, supply tracking and data-acquisition services, and maintain the telescope throughout the program. MSFC would manage the space telescope, Goddard Space Flight Center would manage instrument development and observatory operation, and the European Space Technology Center (ESTEC) would manage the ESA effort. (ESA Release Oct 7/77; NASA Release 77-212)
During confirmation hearings, Dr. Frank Press, President Carter’s nominee as director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, had stated that NASA should broaden the scope of its technology-transfer efforts and its planned use of the Space Shuttle, AvWk reported. The administration should continue funding planetary exploration and space science (areas adaptable to the Shuttle’s unique capabilities), but should also make NASA’s technological knowledge available to industry. Press, former chairman of MIT’s Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, had specialized in earthquake research and detection of underground nuclear tests. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 21)
NASA announced it had scheduled the first free flight of the Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug. 12 at Dryden Flight Research Center. Briefing the press Aug. 11 would be Deke Slayton, ALT program manager at Johnson Space Center, and John Young, chief of the JSC astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron Cohen, manager of the orbiter project at JSC, on orbiter systems. (NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77)
Nature magazine reported that the NASA budget had met unexpected opposition in Congress, endangering 2 major scientific missions: the large space telescope, long regarded by space scientists as NASA’s top-priority project, and the Jupiter orbiter probe planned as a twin launch in 1982 of craft to orbit the planet and send probes into its atmosphere. Lobbying by NASA and the scientific community might rescue the projects, but loss of either would be a serious blow to the agency’s program. Nature said this yr’s efforts would be crucial because space science money had been squeezed out of NASA’s budget for 4yr to pay for the Space Shuttle, and further delay would probably kill future chances for approval of these missions. (Nature, May 19/77, 196)
NASA Activities reported on international cooperation in space. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace last year had signed an agreement with the USSR Academy of Sciences, effective May 11 when signed by academy president A.P. Aleksandrov, to study joint operation of Shuttle and Soyuz-Salyut spacecraft in scientific and applications “objectives of merit,” and the potential uses of a space platform and developing such a platform bilaterally or multilaterally. By the end of 1978, within a yr of beginning work on space-platform proposals, two study groups would bring in recommendations. The publication cited U.S.-USSR cooperation in rocket instrument tests during Aug., the U.S. biological experiments carried on a Soviet launch, and the arrangement for delivery to NASA of 7 lunar soil samples from the Soviet Luna 24 mission. NASA’s mandate called for “cooperation by the United States with other nations and groups of nations . . . and in the peaceful application of the results of that cooperation.” Best known current example would be Spacelab, funded by 10 member nations of ESA, and the concurrent development by Canada of the Shuttle’s remote manipulator system. NASA’s Landsat program had made data available to 130 countries, 7 of which had agreed to set up ground stations for direct reception of Landsat information. A joint NASA-AID project based on Ats 6 broadcasts of instructional TV to some 5000 remote villages in India had sent special films and live discussions to 27 countries in Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America. Other joint efforts included solar-terrestrial studies, solar probes, infrared astronomy, the Space Telescope, and a satellite-assisted global search-and-rescue project. A major benefit to the U.S from such cooperation would be a favorable balance of payments resulting from foreign purchases of data from reimbursable launches. (NASA Activities; Sept 77, 14)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administration of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) for periods up to 24hr. The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release 101-77)
JSC reported the first 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants were due for screening. Center Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that the quality of the applicants would make it “difficult to narrow the field . . . paring that number will be a real challenge.” (NASA Release 77-161) * NASA announced it had appointed Isaac T. Gillam, IV, deputy director of DFRC, succeeding Gerald D. Griffin, recently appointed deputy director of Kennedy Space Center in Fla. Gillam, who had directed Shuttle operations at Dryden in the current approach and landing tests, had joined NASA in 1963 after serving in the USAF as a pilot, missile launch Jcrew commander, and ROTC instructor. After receiving a B.A. from Howard Univ., he had done graduate work at Tenn. State Univ. and had been assistant professor of air science there. NASA had appointed him assistant manager of the Delta program in 1966 and program manager in 1968. In 1973, he became program manager for small launch vehicles, and had gone to DFRC in 1976. He had received NASA’s distinguished service medal for his work with launch vehicles. (DFRC Release 27-77; NASA Release 77-164; NASA anno Aug 4/77)
Johnson Space Center announced that a sixth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report this week for individual interviews and physical examinations. This group, all mission specialist applicants, included one woman. (JSC Release 77-56; NASA Release 77-215) •
LaRC announced it would dedicate on July 19 the site of a new wind tunnel, the National Transonic Facility, scheduled for completion in 1980 at a cost of about $85 million. The only facility of its kind in the world, the tunnel would use cryogenic nitrogen to test aircraft models in a realistic flight environment; cooling the medium to - 300°F would permit accurate simulation of Mach numbers and atmospheric-density ratios. Although NASA and DOD would be principal users of the tunnel, the schedule would be shared by other federal agencies, private industry, and the scientific community. Speakers at the dedication would be Dr. John J. Martin, assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development; Donald F. Hearth, LaRC director; and Oran W. Nicks, LaRC deputy director. A display of aircraft developed from LaRC transonic research would include a B-747 freighter; a wide-bodied DC-10 passenger plane; USAF fighters F-14, F-15, and F-106; a Learjet business aircraft; LaRC’s B-737 flying laboratory; a T-38 jet trainer; and a UH-1H helicopter. (NASA Release 77-144; LaRC Release 77-29)
NASA announced it and ERDA had contracted with Boeing Engineering and Construction Co. to design and build on a utility company site chosen by ERDA the largest windmill in history, a 2500kw generator with 300ft blades, to provide data on such systems coupled with conventional power plants. Lewis Research Center would manage the project for ERDA. (NASA Release 77-141)
FBIS reported that the USSR had completed a series of rocket launches in cooperation with France to compare procedures and instruments used by the two countries in high-altitude atmosphere sounding. The rockets were launched simultaneously from the French space center at Kourou, French Guiana, and offshore from the Soviet research vessel Akademik Korolev recently at work with the U.S. off the Atantic coast. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 27/77)
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
NASA announced that on Nov. 29 it would present first results of the scientific experiments on high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1 launched Aug. 12. Dr. Noel Hinners, associate administrator for space science; Dr. Frank B. McDonald of Goddard Space Flight Center, project scientist; and principal investigators for the experiments would report findings on pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes. Scientific instruments on the observatory offered highly sensitive detection and resolution of x-rays emitted by stellar sources throughout the universe; the spacecraft, rotating end over end, could survey the entire sky within 6mo. (NASA Release 77-242)
NASA announced it would share with the city of Hampton, Va., the cost of building a refuse-burning, steam-producing plant to serve the city and four federal agencies in the Tidewater area. First of this type of community facility to be jointly sponsored by a city government and federal agencies, the project was the result of studies at Langley Research Center on better use of potential energy sources and improvement of the environment. Cost of the plant, about $8 million, would be shared by Langley Air Force Base, the City of Hampton, and LaRC, and should be amortized within 20yr. Beginning in 1979, it would consume about 70% of the city’s waste and all refuse from LaRC, the air force base, the Army’s Fort Monroe, and the VA hospital in Hampton, and would produce about 306 million lb of steam per yr. Built on NASA-owned land, the plant would remain the property of NASA though leased to and operated by the city for at least 20yr. Ash produced through special incineration at up to 1800°F would be sterile, nonorganic, and nonpolluting, amounting to a seventh of the refuse biirned. (NASA Release 77-8)
NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Anthony Calio as Hq associate administrator for applications as of Oct. 1. Dr. Calio had served as deputy associate administrator for space science since Nov. 1975. He had begun working for NASA in 1963 at the electronics research center in Cambridge, Mass., then at NASA Hq. In 1968 he transferred to JSC and in 1969 became its director for science and applications. He had previously been a nuclear physicist with Westinghouse and the American Machine and Foundry Co., and was in the U.S. Army Chemical Corps from 1954 to 1956. Among his honors were NASA medals for exceptional service, 1969; exceptional scientific achievement, 1971; distinguished service, 1973. (NASA anno Sept 20/77; NASA Release 77-200)
MSFC announced that the state of Georgia would be first in the nation to have its own Landsat digital-analysis system, under a contract between the Georgia Institute of Technology and MSFC enabling state planners to assess land-resources usage and to monitor changes, and to set up a standard data base for a statewide land-use program. The two Landsat satellites now in near-polar orbit would provide images and recorded magnetic tape transmitted to a ground receiving station. A data-retrieval system developed by Johnson Space Center would help in establishing a state organization structure to distribute the data to regional, county, and local users. A local official could find out how a tract as small as 10 acres was being used, merely by dialing a central computer at Ga. Tech and getting a printout by telephone into a local terminal. (MSFC Release 77-8)
DFRC announced that the first manned test flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter, previously scheduled for May 26, had been postponed to a date no earlier than June 9, depending on successful completion of orbiter ground tests. The manned test would begin the second phase of Shuttle approach and landing trials to verify aerodynamic and flight-control characteristics of the orbiter. Cause of the postponement was delay in orbiter systems checkout and verification testing after completion in March of the first flights of the orbiter linked to its 747 carrier. (DFRC Release 18-77)
NASA issued requests for proposals from industry to design and manufacture the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) recently approved by the U.S. and the Netherlands. Scheduled for launch in March 1981, the observatory would use a telescope furnished by the U.S., a spacecraft built by the Netherlands, and a control facility supplied by the United Kingdom. The IRAS in a 900km polar orbit would survey the entire sky for a yr, at infrared wavelengths not usable by earth-based telescopes because of atmospheric interference, to study stars forming and at the end of their life cycle. JPL would manage the project and would design and operate a facility to produce an infrared sky map and a catalog containing up to 1 million infrared sources. NASA’s Ames Research Center would be responsible for the 60m-aperture infrared telescope. Prof. Gerry Neugebauer of the Calif. Inst, of Technology (operating JPL for NASA) would head the U.S. scientific team, working with as many as 500 U.S., Dutch, and U.K. scientists, engineers, and technicians. Industry proposals were due by Mar. 1, with contractor selection later in 1977. (NASA Release 77-33)
NASA announced development of ultrathin large-area silicon solar cells thinner than a sheet of newspaper for increasing the power-to-weight capability of solar arrays, considered a major breakthrough in applying solar energy to missions requiring multikilowatts, even millions of watts, of electricity. The Solarex Corp. of Rockville, Md., had made the thin cells some 40 to 50 microns thick (only one-sixth as thick as cells in present solar arrays) in sizes up to 38cm2, proving both structurally flexible and less fragile than expected. Energy conversion of the new cells virtually equaled that of conventional cells, 11% compared to 12 or 13% for the thicker cells. Lightweight cells would mean larger solar arrays for ion-propulsion systems in extended space exploration, and could supply power for platforms and remote-satellite power stations in the future. Solarex had delivered hundreds of the new cells to JPL at Pasadena, Calif., for test, evaluation, and design-application studies. (NASA Release 77-31)
DFRC reported it had made further study of the effect of insects sticking to the leading edges of aircraft wings [see A&A76, Nov. 23] by flying a small jet transport from four airports (Los Angeles, San Francisco, Sacramento, and San Diego) to study actual environments from which long-range commercial flights would be made. The program, conducted jointly with Langley Research Center, was part of NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program to achieve 20 to 40% fuel savings in a 1985 long-range transport aircraft. Such a craft would probably use laminar flow-control technology, depending on smooth airflow over the leading edge of the wings; insects adhering to the wings had made the airflow turbulent, canceling the fuel savings achieved with the laminar flow. NASA had equipped the wings of the test aircraft with a modified leading edge consisting of 5 panels of different materials, to demonstrate changes in the airflow caused by insects adhering to the different surfaces; it had also added a water cleaning system to study its ability to either wash off or keep off the insects encountered during takeoff and climb. It had then flown the plane over alfalfa fields and sewage ponds, and at Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, to encounter as many different quantities, kinds, and sizes of bugs as possible. Bob Baron, DFRC project manager, said results indicated a need for some sort of washing system to reduce effects of insect impacts on the laminar-flow surface. (DFRC Release 40-77)
MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to build a tethered satellite system for launch on an orbiting Space Shuttle. The idea had been to provide long-duration measurement, observation, or performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude, where density would be insufficient to support the flight of aircraft or balloons, but too thick for free-flying satellites. Exploration here had been limited to short-term flight of sounding rockets or low-level satellites. One concept had been to use a 100km cable to “troll” a tethered satellite from an orbiting Shuttle; the pull of gravity, with constant tension on the cable, would keep the captive craft at the end of its string, oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be global mapping of earth’s magnetic or gravity fields; cargo transfer between space vehicles; retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle maneuvering; transfer of large amounts of energy to a remote experiment, or from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source to a space station. MSFC would manage tethered satellite activity for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-82)
MSFC reported results of a gamma-ray detector launched on a balloon May 11 from the Natl. Scientific Balloon Facility at Palestine, Tex., to study sources of bursting and pulsating x-rays and gamma rays during an 18hr flight. MSFC scientists headed by Dr. Charles Meegan, principal investigator and associate of the Natl. Research Council, had sent a 420 000m3 (15 million ft3) balloon carrying an array of 12 large-area detectors with total payload weight of 590kg (13001b) to an altitude of 39km (126 000ft) to transmit data back to the launch site for recording. High winds had interrupted the successful mission and brought the balloon down with some payload damage. Investigators would use the data for the scheduled June 30 launch of NASA’s high-energy astronomy observatory (HEAO). (MSFC Release 77-93)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced that launch of a three-stage “N” rocket carrying an engineering test satellite had been postponed to Feb. 14 because of trouble in the control system of the rocket’s first stage. Launch had been scheduled originally for Feb. 6 from the space center at Tanegashima Is. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Feb 10/77)
JSC reported it had signed a contract valued at $200K with American Airline’s maintenance and engineering center at Tulsa, Okla., for maintenance and operations support of NASA’s Boeing 747 Shuttle-carrier aircraft NASA 905. Work would be done primarily at DFRC, site of the first atmospheric and glide-flight landing tests of the Shuttle or-biter. Eventual value of the contract could reach $806K. (JSC Release 77-13) During February: Japan, one of five countries that previously had agreed to be major investors in a $200 million international maritime satellite organization (Inmarsat), had declined to participate in a preparatory committee set up to act until formal documents were ratified, AvWk reported. Forty countries would be Inmarsat members; besides Japan, the other four major shareholders were to be the U.S., the U.K., the USSR, and Norway. The preparatory committee had met in London in Jan. under sponsorship of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization, an arm of the UN, and had set up three panels: one on satellite-system parameters; one on economic, marketing, and financial matters; and one on organization procedures, all of which were to meet in the interval before the next committee meeting set for Oct. 1977. Japan gave no reason for withdrawing. {AvWk, Feb 7/77, 23) March l: NASA announced the first use of a link between the communications technology satellite Cts and the portable earth terminal (PET): a teleconference between Housing and Urban Development Secretary Patricia Roberts Harris in Washington, D.C., and a group of California mayors at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif. Mrs. Harris conferred with the mayors from the PET bus parked outside the HUD building. Cts, a joint effort between the Canadian Dept, of Communications and NASA, had been built and integrated by Canada; NASA provided the 200w transmitter and developed the PET at Lewis Research Center. The PET bus, based at LeRC, would travel around the U.S. demonstrating how to save money through teleconferencing. (NASA Release 77-40)
The rapid approach of the Martian winter, whose temperatures would fall below - 123°C, had halted science experiments using the Viking 2 lander, NASA announced. Problems with the lander’s sample arm had forced controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to cancel a final biology experiment. The meteorology station and the seismic instrument would use power to gather data during the winter; all other power would go toward maintaining survivable heat levels inside the lander. (NASA Release 77-69)
The Univ. of Toyko’s Inst, of Space and Aeronautical Science launched a 13kg experimental satellite called Tansei 3 from the Uchinoura space center into an orbit with 3940km apogee, 826km perigee, using a 3-stage MU-3H rocket developed at the university. The rocket, used in preparation for next yr’s launch of Japan’s 5th aurora-observation satellite, was 23.8m long and weighed 49 tons. The MST-3 satellite, 7th launched by the university and 9th by Japan, carried control equipment for testing and would sent back scientific data for an estimated 15 days. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 10/77)
Marshall Space Flight Center reported it had coped with the threat of a serious power shortage when maintenance and emergency shutdowns dropped the Tennessee Valley Authority’s generating capacity by a third at the same time that severe cold weather moved into the area. On Friday, Dec. 9, TVA had asked NASA and the U.S. Army to reduce power use by half, as it expected the shortage to continue for some time. C. Horton Webb, director of MSFC’s facilities office, said the plant maintenance division had worked around the clock turning heat on and off to keep buildings from freezing, and had asked employees to help in minimizing use of electrical equipment. Security guards helped by closing blinds and turning off lights and equipment wherever possible. Webb said the combined effort had reduced power use by 50% on Saturday and 65% by Sunday morning. (Marshall Star, Dec 14/77, 1)
NASA announced it had investigated a unique propulsion system for sending a spacecraft to rendezvous with Halley’s Comet in 1986. The comet had made some 30 visits since 467 B.C., and its next appearance would offer NASA an opportunity to find out more about the origin of the solar system. A device using solar electric propulsion, suggested by MSFC and tested for several yr at Lewis Research Center, would aim solar energy concentrated by reflectors at conventional solar cells to provide electric power for a system of 8 ion engines capable of taking a spacecraft to an encounter with the Halley comet around Christmas Day 1985 just outside earth’s orbit. The spacecraft would reach the comet during its most active state as it passed near the sun, and could send pictures of the comet to earth, possibly sending a probe through the comet’s tail toward its nucleus to define its properties. NASA would decide in August 1977 whether to use the solar electric system, or a solar sail being developed by JPL, in its rendezvous with Halley’s Comet. (NASA Release 77-97; MSFC Release 77-87)
WFC announced it would receive this week the first of two rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) for contractor flight tests. Sikorsky Aircraft, which would conduct the tests, had designed the RSRA (a joint project of NASA and the U.S. Army) to fly as a regular helicopter, as a compound helicopter (both rotors and wings), or as a conventional fixed-wing aircraft. As the RSRA’s engines or wings were changeable, NASA planned to use it as a “flying wind tunnel” for trying out various rotor systems: articulated, hingeless, or gimbaled, or with variable geometry, variable diameter, or controllable twist. (WFC Release 77-7; NASA Release 77-149)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had resumed the atmospheric variability experiments (AVE) begun in 1964 to study processes associated with the onset and development of severe storms. Originally conducted to aid in scheduling Saturn rocket firings at MSFC, the experiments were designed to detect unusual weather conditions common to different localities before sever^ storms occurred, to improve short-term predictions based on data from weather balloons, weather satellites, and ground-observation posts. Sixth of the AVE series recently conducted over 24hr in an area including Texas, Alabama, Illinois, and North Dakota had monitored severe storms with hail and tornadoes in Missouri and western Tennessee, and a frontal system with low-pressure disturbances in Alabama. (MSFC Release 77-122) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NO' rr m' PAG1 llL INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Langley Research Center announced it would dedicate Oct. 11 the site of Project RECOUP (refuse-consuming utility plant), first jointly funded federal and municipal project of its kind, to generate steam from burning refuse [see Jan. 19]. Construction would begin in 1978 and be completed in 1980; NASA would share the $8.4 million cost of the plant with the US Air Force and the city of Hampton, Va. The plant would burn more than 80% of the refuse from Hampton, LaRC, the Langley Air Force Base, the Army’s Fort Monroe, and the Veterans Administration hospital; in a 24-hr operation, it would burn about 200 tons a day, doubling the capacity of Hampton’s landfill. LaRC would use the steam generated by the plant to augment its present heating system, saving about 2.4 million gallons of oil per yr. (LaRC Release 77-46)
The new federal Dept, of Energy opened its doors with Secretary James R. Schlesinger promising “to resolve our energy problems . . . through the effective work of all the people of this department.” Proposed by President Carter March 1, the department had become a reality Aug. 4 upon signing of its organization act and Schlesinger’s confirmation as secretary the following day. The department inherited nearly 20 000 employees and had a first-yr budget of about $10.4 billion. Programs it would administer included conservation, resource development and production, research and development, data management, environment, and regulation. (DOE Release R-77-001)
JSC and the Lunar Science Institute announced plans for the 8th annual lunar science conference in Flouston, March 14-18. More than 600 scientists from around the world would discuss new data about the moon, derived from studies of lunar samples and from Apollo surface and orbital experiments, as well as new interpretations of previous models of lunar origin and history. Several Soviet scientists would attend, to give NASA materials from the Luna 24 mission for analysis. Dr. Michael G. Duke, acting chief of JSC’s Lunar and Planetary Sciences Division, and Dr. Robert Pepin, outgoing director of the Lunar Science Institute, would cochair the conference. The conference would also be the second meeting on “planetary” science, continuing the practice of the 1976 conference, where planetary interests were discussed for the first time as a result of the accumulation of data from NASA and USSR missions to Venus, Mercury, Mars, and the outer planets. The assembled data on planetary origin and evolution had proved of primary interest to lunar scientists. (JSC Release 77-09)
MSFC announced that on Jan. 28 NASA had invited industry to submit proposals for supplying design, development, and manufacture of Space Telescope support systems module and optical telescope assembly. The telescope should permit observation of about 350 times the volume of space now acessible to ground-based telescopes. MSFC said it expected award of contracts by Oct. or Nov. 1977 if Congress authorized the mission and appropriated the necessary funds. The 2.4m telescope, included in NASA’s FY 1978 budget recently submitted to Congress, would weigh about 10 tons. The Space Shuttle would carry it as a payload in 1983, launching it to orbit at about 500km altitude at an inclination of 28.8° to the equator. Once there, it could serve for a decade as an in-space observatory operated remotely from the ground, but would be designed for maintenance and servicing by a space-suited astronaut or for retrieval and return by Shuttle for overhaul and subsequent relaunch. NASA would announce to the scientific community in Feb. an opportunity to submit proposals for scientific instruments to be carried on the Space Telescope for its initial launch. (MSFC Release 77-16; NASA Release 77-19)
DFRC announced it would drop-test at the Natl. Parachute Test Range, El Centro, Calif., the parachutes for recovering the reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters on the Shuttle. The tests would be a series of air drops to evaluate design, deployment, performance, and structural integrity of full-scale parachutes loaded with two configurations of drop-test vehicles offering various limit and overload conditions for the drogue and main parachutes at reefed and full open-canopy shapes. Engineers from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had responsibility for developing the Shuttle boosters, and from Martin Marietta, developer of the parachute system, would use the results to evaluate the adequacy of the system. (DFRC Release 21-77; MSFC Release 77-98)
New infrared detectors at Kitt Peak Natl. Observatory might have detected frozen methane on the surface of Pluto, AvWk reported. If verified, the observations would indicate a smaller size for Pluto and would change current theories of Pluto’s interaction with other planets. {AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
NASA announced that the Office of Management and Budget had called for an agency ceiling of 23 237 permanent positions by the end of FY 1978, 500 fewer than current. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, deputy administrator, said work force adjustments to meet the goal would include greater use of contractor R&D; consolidation of applications work at ARC, GSFC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories; reduction of support manpower at JSC, KSC, and MSFC; consolidation of GSFC data management; transfer of helicopter research from Langley Research center to ARC; and reductions in support office and facility staff agencywide. MSFC would lose 150; Lewis Research Center, 108; JSC, 90; KSC, 80; LaRC, 77; GSFC, 74. DFRC, Hq, and Wallops Flight Center would lose 30, 20, and 5, respectively. The shift in programs would add 45 to ARC and 6 to NSTL. (NASA Release 77-185)
The WPost reported that 9 USSR ships would join U.S. ships during June in “Polimode,” a joint study of ocean currents in the so-called Bermuda Triangle where numbers of ships over the years had disappeared without trace, inspiring best-selling books on the subject. A USSR research team had detected by satellite “powerful whirl formations” extending hundreds of miles and resembling cyclones on land, the Washington Post said. Tass, the Soviet news agency, said the formations apparently reached from the surface to a depth of several thousand yards. (WPost, Parade, May 15/77, 6)
MSFC reported it had established a project office responsible for managing all Space Telescope activities. Manager and deputy would be William C. Keathley and James C. McCulloch. (MSFC Release 77-38)
In its year-end issue, the Lewis News described the relationship between U.S. Army and NASA activities at the center. Civilian employees of the Army Propulsion Laboratory had been working among LeRC employees since 1970, as 1 of 3 Army air-mobility research and technology labs working jointly with NASA centers: Ames Research Center housed the aeromechanics laboratory and the research and technology lab headquarters, and LaRC included the Army’s structures laboratory. The only AMRT lab complex not on a NASA installation was the applied technology lab at Ft. Eustis, Va. LeRC and the Army pursued R&D activities under a unique agreement, with the Army providing funds for programs of mutual interest and adding about 40 persons (mostly engineers, scientists, and technicians) to the LeRC staff, all of them supervised by Lewis personnel. Army interests included the joint aeronautical research group, working on compressors, turbines, bearings, seals, and gears, with special attention to Army needs in small-engine technology; the technical support group of scientists and skilled technicians, set up to help with the inhouse workload created by Army activities at the center; and a small staff of engineers called the Army aeronautical research group, using LeRC facilities to pursue investigations of interest to the Army specifically. An instance was the engine test cell in Bldg. 14 recently activated and primarily operated by the Army, with help from LeRC experts and resources, said Propulsion Laboratory director John Acurio. Aiding Acurio in lab operations and efforts to improve aircraft propulsion were Curtis L. Walker, chief of the Army aeronautical research group, and administrative officer Gus Gold. (Lewis News, Dec 23/77,4)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had commenced studies on turbulence caused by insects sticking to aircraft wings. It would use a small jet transport flown at low altitudes to collect insects on the wings, in turbulence tests at higher altitudes and greater speeds. The Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers would assist the studies aimed at developing high-speed fuel-efficient aircraft, by taking advantage of their differing insect populations. (DFRC Release 13-77; KSC Release 93-77)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Inti. Business Machines of a $1 344 950 contract for 134 site data-acquisition subsystems to monitor performance of ERDA’s solar heating and cooling demonstration program at sites throughout the U.S. The IBM machines would provide data on solar energy at each site, amounts used for heating, cooling, and hot water, and other areas of performance, efficiency, and fuel saving. Each site would feed data to a central computer in Huntsville, Ala., for compilation of reports to business, industry, and the general public on the most economical and practical systems tested. (MSFC Release 77-184)
Dr. James L. Elliott of Cornell Univ. announced he had found 5 rings around the planet Uranus. Observations above the Indian Ocean with a 91cm telescope on NASA’s Kuiper airborne observatory had revealed the rings during Uranus’s occultation of a bright star (SAO 158687). Dr. Elliott had concluded earlier [see Mar. 3] that Uranus was surrounded by 100 moons; during the occultation, the same objects appeared as rings, not moons. Uranus and Saturn were the only two planets in the solar system found so far to have ring systems. Dr. Elliott’s original mission was to check Uranus for atmosphere and diameter; discovery of the rings was unexpected. (NYT, Mar 31/77, 63)
President Carter would propose budget changes to reduce emphasis on nuclear power and increase research on energy conservation, predicted Les Gapay in the Wall Street Journal. Sources in and out of the Carter administration said that Carter would amend the Ford budget for FY 1978 by cutting money for two major nuclear-power research projects: a multimillion-dollar program to develop a fast-breeder nuclear reactor that would produce more fuel than it consumed, and research on nuclear fusion, a new technology intended to provide commercial electrical power within several decades. Fusion was said to be more environmentally acceptable than other nuclear programs, and the U.S. had been spending several hundred million a yr on this research. Funds cut from the Energy Research and Development Administration would go toward research on energy conservation; ERDA had been studying ways to save fuel in building, transportation, and industrial processes. The Ford budget had asked for a 28% increase in energy research for FY 1978 (from $2.9 billion to $3.7 billion), most of it for ERDA and for nuclear power studies. (WSJ, Feb 17/77, 3)
Reduction of data from NASA’s 1976 gravity probe (GP-A) experiment had confirmed the equivalency principle, a cornerstone of Einstein’s general theory of relativity, MSFC reported. Using data from two identical atomic maser clocks, principal investigator Dr. Robert Vessot of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) in Cambridge, Mass., had demonstrated that time actually went faster in a weaker gravitational field, one removed from the earth’s mass. The clock that had been carried aboard a rocket to an altitude of 10 000km had run faster. (MSFC Release 77-41)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
Langley Research Center announced award of a 5yr $23 million contract to Wyle Laboratories for electronic instrument support to test and research facilities at the center. The contract, running from Oct. 1977 through Sept. 1979 with options to extend for another 3yr, covered inspection, calibration, maintenance, and satisfaction of measurement requirements on some 30 000 instruments and transducers valued at more than $50 million; also, design, modification, and maintenance of hardware and computer programs associated with digital data systems and special purpose computers used in the research facilities. (LaRc Release 77-15)
NASA announced that Dr. Bruce T. Lundin would retire as director of Lewis Research Center Aug. 26 after 34yr with NASA and its predecessor, NACA. LeRC deputy director Dr. Bernard Lubarsky would be acting director until a successor was named. In 1943, Dr. Lundin had begun working at the NACA Lewis Research Center on improvement of World War II aircraft engines. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. Lundin became assistant director of LeRC; in 1961 he became associate director for development, working on space propulsion and power generation. In May 1968 he was deputy associate administrator at NASA Hq, then acting associate administrator for advanced research and technology. He became director of LeRC as of Nov. 1, 1969, and had led the center’s research on solving the nation’s energy problems. He had not announced his future plans. (NASA Release 77-167; NASA anno Aug 9/77)
NASA announced plans to join with the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA) in a program to use solar energy for heat and hot water supply at 6 space centers from Va. to Calif. NASA would invest $500 000 and ERDA $1.25 million in up to 10 separate projects that had been scheduled for completion at NASA facilities by the end of the fiscal year, Oct. 1977. The programs could reduce utility bills by up to a quarter million dollars/yr. Five of the solar projects, all at MSFC, would heat an office building; heat liquid nitrogen to a gas, for experiments and manufacturing at 2 MSFC facilities; supply hot water for the cafeteria and restrooms in a 10-story building; and heat a warehouse used for storing hydraulic equipment. Other projects would supply hot water for cafeterias at Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, and KSC in Fla.; hot water for photo labs at Ames Research Center in Calif, and LaRC in Va.; and heat and dehumidification for areas containing sensitive computer and other electronic equipment in the mission control center at JSC in Tex. NASA would also provide funds for 5 smaller solar heat projects at ARC, KSC, and MSFC, to be operational by the end of Aug. The program should demonstrate the possibility of offsetting the comparatively high initial cost of solar energy systems through substantial savings on oil, gas, and electrical energy. (NASA Release 77-15; MSFC Release 77-15; ERDA Release 77-18)
MSFC announced that NASA had invited researchers to propose materials-processing experiments to be performed on the Space Transportation System (STS), as the Shuttle missions would be called. The experiments, basic or applied research projects in materials science, would exploit the weightless and ultra-high vacuum conditions of space to demonstrate their applications in materials science and technology. (MSFC Release 77-52)
LaRC announced it would open a major educational exhibit on energy Sept. 22 through 29. Assembled by the Energy Research and Development Administration, the exhibit in two 50-ft trailers would include films, animated sections, and visitor-operated consoles describing all types of energy now in use and possible future energy sources. Operating the displays for ERDA on the U.S. energy situation and what could be done about it would be Oak Ridge Associated Universities, a nonprofit educational and research organization of 45 colleges and universities in the southeast. (LaRC Release 77-41)
A native New Yorker, Dr. Frosch had earned A.B., A.M., and Ph.D degrees from Columbia Univ. From 1973 to 1975 he was asst, secretary general of the United Nations and assistant head of its environmental program. From 1966 to 1975 he was asst, secretary of the Navy for research and development, working on naval-research projects at the Hudson Laboratories of Columbia Univ. where he had been director from 1956 to 1963. Dr. Frosch had received the Arthur S. Flemming award in 1966 and the Navy’s distinguished public service award in 1969. (NASA release 77-107; NYT, May 24/77, 19)
NASA announced it would launch no earlier than May 25 GOES-B, second in a series funded by NOAA to meet DOC requirements for a geostationary operational environmental satellite system. Sms 1 and Sms 2, prototypes funded by NASA and still in orbit, had been launched in May 1974 and Feb. 1975; Goes 1, first operational spacecraft funded by NOAA, was launched Oct. 1975. GOES-B would augment existing coverage of earth weather and would become part of the global atmospheric research program (GARP). (MOR E-608-77-04 [prelaunch] May 24/77)
Threats to the earth’s ozone layer remained a matter for concern, Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times, especially fluorocarbons widely used as aerosol propellants and accumulating as chlorine byproducts in the atmosphere where they would break down ozone and expose the earth to more ultraviolet light. Health records from the United Nations had shown that people living in low latitudes where the ozone layer was thinner and sunlight more abundant had a markedly higher rate of skin cancers, especially of the often fatal melanoma. Although some scientists noted that atmospheric ozone would normally vary with latitude, season, and even with the sunspot cycle, public health officials said any total increase in ultraviolet exposure would probably increase the incidence of cancer. Other dangers to the ozone layer included supersonic planes and other high-flying aircraft, nuclear explosions, and the heavy use of nitrogen fertilizers. The Natl. Academy of Science had proposed outlawing fluorocarbon gases as propellants except in medical products. (NYT, May 15/77, 4-9)
ARC announced that a team of scientists using the 91cm (36in) infrared telescope on the Kuiper Airborne Observatory and the ground-based 230cm (90in) infrared telescope at Steward Observatory, Univ. of Arizona, had made the first discovery of planet formation in process and the first identification of a flat disc-shaped luminous stellar object. The object, MWC 349 in the constellation Cygnus, exhibited a surrounding mass of intensely glowing gas with a diameter 20 times that of the central body, emitting 10 times as much light; the luminous area would disappear in about a century as disc material spun into the central body. The End had been significant because it might show how planets had been formed in earth’s solar system. Members of the team were Drs. Rodger Thompson and Peter Strittmatter of the Steward Observatory, and Drs. Edwin Erickson, Fred Witteborn, and D.W. Strecker, all of ARC. Infrared instruments could view the object through dust shrouding the disc: the Kuiper telescope had detected infrared spectra that could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, and the Steward telescope could offer higher resolution. (ARC Release 77-33; NASA Release 77-119; NYT, June 16/77, A21; W Post, June 16/77, B-ll)
MSFC announced award of a $695 000 contract to Rockwell Inti. Space Div., Downey, Calif., for a study of solar power satellite systems. The study would identify and suggest solutions for technical and social problems that might occur in harnessing solar energy from space. (MSFC Release 77-73) During April: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported that Kingswood Sprott, Jr., had broken his own world class hot air balloon altitude record March 26 when he reached 41 000ft over Lakeland, Fla. The previous record set March 26, 1977, also by Sprott, had been 38 789ft. (NAA newsletter Apr 77)
MSFC reported that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun work on a huge primary mirror blank for NASA’s Space Telescope, designed to give astronomers a view to the edge of the universe. Corning would work under a $1.74 million subcontract from Perkin-Elmer Corp., which would be responsible for assembling the optical telescope. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the spacecraft and support system and integrate the telescope into it. Scientists expected the space telescope to detect light from objects 14 billion light-years from earth; it might, therefore, be able to provide views of the first galaxies at the time they were formed. The Hale telescope at the Mt. Palomar observatory in Calif, could penetrate only about 2 billion light-years because of the optical degradation from earth’s atmosphere. The space telescope would be carried by the Shuttle to an orbit more than 300mi above earth to avoid that interference. Corning would deliver the first of two 8ft discs to Perkin-Elmer within a yr and the spare by April 1979, for the process of grinding the blanks to an optical curvature. The blank would be 1ft thick with a 2ft-diameter center hole, and would consist of solid inch-thick top and bottom plates separated by a weight-saving structure of open cells lOin long and 4in square. It would carry a thin metal film constituting the mirror or reflective surface; glass had long served as best mirror material because its shape would change only slightly with changes in temperature, so that it maintained image quality. More than 40yr ago Corning had made the 200in blank for the Hale telescope out of borosilicate glass, having an expansion of 32.5 on a scale used by physicists; the material it would use for the space telescope blank would have an expansion of zero. Corning had chosen the new material, a titanium silicate called ULE (ultra-low expansion) first formulated in 1967, for ease of handling and ultrasonic testing. (MSFC Release 77-233)
Kennedy Space Center announced award to Inti. Business Machines Corp. of a $3 203 666 contract for a system to test Shuttle cargoes for compatibility with the orbiter before loading into the payload bay. The system, called CITE (cargo integration test equipment), would simulate the orbiter’s electrical and electronic environment, stimulate the payloads, monitor their response, and record the results. Keeping up with the fast turnaround time planned for Shuttle missions required payloads ready to plug into the orbiters without extensive onboard testing. The CITE would be mobile for use either in the assembly building to check out cargoes in vertical positions or in the operations building to check out horizontal payloads. (KSC Release 156-77)
The Energy Research and Development Administration reported that its scientists had developed a new way to reclaim used automotive oils, removing solid and liquid impurities in a solvent-and-distillation treatment. After heating the used oil to drive off volatile hydrocarbons and water, the process would add a solvent to make sludge of the contaminants; the remaining oil would go through normal processes of distillation, improvement of color and odor, and reformulation with additives. Iowa State Univ. had run a vehicle-fleet test for more than lOmo using the re-refined oils with no abnormal wear or performance; the product had not generated polluting byproducts. Most commercial rerefining had used an acid-based technology producing wastes more polluting than the used oil itself. (ERDA Release 77-14)
NASA announced it had named Dr. James J. Kramer associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, effective Oct. 23. He had been acting in that capacity since Dec. 1976. Starting at Lewis Research Center in 1951, Dr. Kramer had come to NASA Hq in 1971 as chief of OASTs noise and pollution reduction branch. (NASA anno Oct 21/77; NASA Release 77-227)
NASA announced it had selected Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space and Communications Group for negotiation of a $33 million contract to build, test, and deliver three geostationary operational environmental satellites, GOES-D, -E, and -F, as follow-ons in the synchronous meteorological satellite (SMS) series providing near continuous high quality observation of the earth and its environment. The GOES spacecraft would carry a visible infrared spin-scan radiometer atmospheric sounder (VAS) to obtain day or night cloud cover photos of the portion of the earth viewed from geostationary orbit, with temperature readings at various levels of the atmosphere; the $33 million contract did not include the three VAS instruments being produced under contract by Santa Barbara Research Center. They would also carry a space environment monitoring system of three separate sensors to monitor solar emissions. Goddard Space Flight Center would be project manager for the GOES systems developed and procured by NASA on a reimbursable basis for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which would operate the spacecraft after launch and checkout by NASA. (NASA Release 77-170)
Kennedy Space Center reported that NASA had awarded the Univ. of Ariz. a $50K contract extension to continue studying thunderstorm electrical fields and other phenomena in the Spaceport area. Total value of the contract, awarded in April 1974 and now extended to Jan. 15, 1978, would be $116 000. Under the direction of Dr. Phillip Krider of UA’s Inst, of Atmospheric Physics, scientists working with UA graduate and undergraduate students would use KSC’s sophisticated instrumentation during summer thunderstorms to study electrical-field changes and recovery curves created by lightning under varied conditions, and would create computer programs to determine and display the location of lightning discharges and thunderstorm characteristics. Techniques resulting from the study would help make Space Shuttle vehicle-processing, launch, and landing at KSC safe and efficient even in marginal weather. The U.S. studies would supplement a program known as TRIP (thunderstorm research international program), cosponsored by the Am. Geophysical Union and the Am. Meteorological Society, under which teams of atmospheric scientists would conduct research at KSC between 1976 and 1978. (KSC Release 33-77)
NASA reported that MSFC had awarded a lyr $150 000 contract to the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI) in Chicago to set up a team to find uses for aerospace technologies in manufacturing. The team would work with U.S. industries, industrial associations, and professional groups in areas related to machine tools, electronics assembly, and light fabrication and assembly. The team would be another of the groups created by NASA’s technology-utilization office to expand the use of aerospace technology on earth. (NASA Release 77-57)
NASA announced that Dr. Hans Mark, former director of Ames Research Center, had been sworn in at the Pentagon, Washington, D.C., Aug. 9, as Undersecretary of the Air Force by Defense Secretary Harold Brown. Dr. Mark, ARC director from Feb. 1969 to July 1977, had taught nuclear engineering at the Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley and engineering at Stanford Univ.; he had also taught at Boston Univ. and the Mass. Inst, of Technology. Born in Germany in 1929, he had become a U.S. citizen in 1945 and had been a consultant to the Institute for Defense Analysis (1958-1961), the USAF Scientific Advisory Board (1969-1976), and other defense-related and scientific organizations. C.A. Syvertson would be acting director of ARC until a successor was named. (ARC Release 77-38; NASA anno Aug 15/77)
NASA reported that Goddard Space Flight Center engineers had tracked a sailboat through the Bermuda Triangle to test the use of satellites for small craft search-and-rescue missions. Signals from a small transmitter on the vessel, relayed by meteorological satellite Nimbus 6 and applications technology satellite Ats 1, allowed GSFC controllers to monitor the ship’s position. The experiment also successfully tested a push-button distress-alarm system designed by retired NASA engineer James L. Baker. (NASA Release 77-72)
NASA announced it had selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., and Perkin-Elmer Corp., Danbury, Conn., to negotiate contracts totaling more than $131 million for two major elements of the Space Telescope. Lockheed would design, fabricate, and integrate the telescope support-systems module, provide systems engineering and analysis, and support NASA in ground and flight operations. Perkin-Elmer would design, manufacture, and deliver the optical assembly and equipment, including systems engineering, support of the launch, verification of the orbit, and plans for mission operations. The 8ft-diameter telescope, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1983, would offer an astronomical capability beyond anything possible from the earth’s surface or any telescopes launched so far because of its improvements in resolution, power, light sensitivity, and wavelength coverage. It would be refurbished periodically in orbit or could be returned to earth on the Shuttle for repair or upgrading. The support module would provide electric power, communications, data processing and storage, attitude sensing and control, and environmental control to the telescope assembly and up to 5 additional scientific instruments accommodated by the telescope. MSFC, which had overall project management responsibility, would manage the contracts for the support module and the optical assembly; GSFC would manage scientific instrument development. (NASA Release 77-153)
MSFC announced that all systems aboard the Heao 1 observatory launched Aug. 12 had been turned on and were operating as planned. Dr. Fred Speer, project manager for HEAO, said the observatory was already acquiring x-ray sources. Experimenters using Heao l reported they were pleased with the early performance of their instruments. (MSFC Release 77-153) Longest-lived lunar instruments were seismometers recording moon-quakes and hits on the lunar surface by outer space objects; four seismometers were still operating, and scientists said some could send data for up to 4yr more. Data from other instruments, monitored in a small control room at JSC, had included measurements of the moon’s field of gravity, heat inside the lunar surface, and solar wind and lunar ionosphere samples. Roy Kelly, a senior engineer for Bendix (manufacturer of the instrument packages), said the transmitters would be left on with no operational support available. An Aug. 26 NYT editorial said NASA’s decision to abandon monitoring was unfortunate because, if it continued the program “for just another year, there will be that much more data on lunar seismography and structure.” Apollo had cost the nation close to $30 billion; shutting down to save a few hundred thousand dollars seemed to be “a repudiation of one of the finest chapters in American exploration,” the paper said (NYT, Aug 23/77, 16; Aug 26/77, A-20)
NASA announced that Dr. David R. Scott, director of Dryden Flight Research Center, would leave the agency Oct. 30 to form with others a firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer. Deputy Director Isaac T. Gillam would be acting director until a replacement was selected. Before becoming director of DFRC in 1975, Dr. Scott had been deputy director since 1973. He had left the astronaut corps in 1972, having flown on Gemini 8, Apollo 9, and as spacecraft commander of Apollo 15 (fourth manned lunar landing, during which he was first to visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been technical assistant to the Apollo program manager at JSC and special assistant in the Apollo spacecraft program office. (NASA anno Oct 12/77; NASA Release 77-217; DFRC Release 34-77)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that, as part of the Solar Sail Development Project, it had awarded 6 contracts to build a spaceship powered by solar wind. The craft, using large extremely thin ORiGiftAL RASE- 53 OF POOR QUALITY Artist’s concept of solar sail making rendezvous in 1982 with Hatley’s comet. Launched from an orbiting Space Shuttle, an SOOm-sq structure could carry an 800 to 900kg spacecraft on such a mission. (NASA 77-H-128) metallic sails to capture the energy of solar photons, would tack like a sailboat into the “wind” to head toward the sun or would use photon energy to head for the outer planets. Speed of the ship would vary with distance from the sun, following the inverse-square law that solar intensity would decrease as the reciprocal of the distance from the sun, squared. Cost of the contracts for fabricating sail material and designing sails, booms, and navigation systems would total $800 000. (NASA Release 77-39)
NASA reported that Dr. Lo I. Yin, x-ray researcher at GSFC, had invented a hand-held device producing an instant x-ray image from a small source of radioactive material. The lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging scope) had resulted from research on space energy sources that converted their x-rays to visible images; Dr. Yin said the idea had not been feasible until the Army declassified an image intensifier produced at its Ft. Belvoir night vision laboratory. Cost of the unit, not yet on the market, might be less than $5000. Using no new technology, it contained off-the-shelf items such as the radioactive source and an x-ray phosphor screen besides the intensifier. Pulling a trigger unshielded the source, sending through the object being examined a low x-ray dose which the phosphor screen converted to visible light. The unit’s high intensification would allow use of a small radiation source of 10 to 20 millicuries resembling a pen-size battery; an attached camera could produce instant x-ray pictures with exposure 1000 times weaker than that of a conventional x-ray machine. Dr. Yin said a device invented for x-ray astronomy “where there is a scarcity of x-rays should [be] of obvious value in medical fluoroscopy where there are many x-rays.” Cooperating in evaluating the device would be the National Institute of Dental Research, Howard Univ.’s College of Dentistry, Howard’s cancer research center, and the Duke Univ. Medical Center at Durham, N.C. NIDR researchers had already worked up a configuration of the lixiscope for use in dentistry, and the cancer research center would compare it with existing techniques for detecting soft-tissue tumors or foreign bodies and for looking at bone fractures. Prime advantage of the unit would be for emergency and other field use requiring quick fluoroscopy (NASA Release 77-238) •
Six NASA rockets launched from Australia in Feb. would investigate stars, hot stars, white dwarfs, and exploding galaxies, NASA announced. Goddard Space Flight Center’s Richard M. Windsor, working as project manager with the Australian government, the Univ. of Adelaide, and several U.S. universities and scientists, would oversee launch of the lOm-long Aerobee sounding rockets from the Woomera range during the wk of Feb. 16-24. The Aerobee, which could lift a 181kg payload to an altitude of 210km, had carried nearly a thousand scientific payloads since it came into use in 1947. U.S. investigations would include a Columbia Univ. study of bursting x-ray stars to see if they resembled black holes; a Naval Research Laboratory study to determine whether the Large Magellanic Cloud resembled earth’s galaxy, comparing x-ray stars for luminosity, temperature, and fluctuation; another NRL study of x-ray sources in the Coma Cluster; a Johns Hopkins Univ. study of Alpha Centauri A, 4.5 light-years distant, and other stars similar to earth’s sun, for evidence of a solar corona in far ultraviolet; another JHU study, this one in UV measurement of early or “hot” stars, to obtain data for use in calibrating satellite-borne UV telescopes; and a GSFC study of the Large Magellanic Cloud using UV filters on a Schwarzchild camera to define distribution of hot stars, galactic dust, high-energy gas, young remnants of supernovas, and other celestial phenomena. (NASA Release 77-28)
NASA reported that an F-8 aircraft using the digital fly-bywire control system would simulate the Space Shuttle’s flight-control system during a series of 3 flights at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center. The flights, simulations of orbiter maneuvers after separation from the Boeing 747 Shuttle-carrier aircraft, would determine the thresholds of sensor failure and would test the programming of the Shuttle’s flight-computer system. (NASA Release 77-53; DFRC X-News, Mar 25/77, 2)
Kennedy Space Center announced it would hold a symposium Jan. 15 on minority opportunities at the Spaceport, to include talks on KSC procurement, future construction plans, and explanations of the KSC affirmative action plan and equal employment opportunity program. KSC had invited representatives of minority business firms and the general public to attend the symposium. (KSC Release 2-77)
KSC Emnounced award of a $25 970 contract to the research institute at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta to develop an automatic manatee-tracking system for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Attempts to track the manatee, Em endEmgered aquatic mammal, had failed because of poor monitoring systems. Tracking the movements of about 100 mEmatees in the Banana and Indian Rivers and Mosquito Lagoon nesir KSC would provide scientists with data on their living habits. (KSC Release 77-77)
NASA reported it had begun working on its plan to make Ames Research Center the lead center for helicopter research. Approved last summer, the plan resulted from NASA’s assessment of its research to see where realignment would improve effectiveness and reduce costs. As lead center, ARC would do research on small- and large-scale helicopter hardware using its aeronautical facilities such as the 40 x 80ft wind tunnel and flight-simulation equipment, and flight-test items like the tilt-rotor and rotor-systems research aircraft. A helicopter program office at NASA Hq would direct the overall helicopter program and coordinate research between ARC and the Langley and Lewis Research Centers. LaRC, working mainly on helicopter structures, would continue its studies of acoustics, airfoils, aeroelasticity, and avionics. LeRC would continue to emphasize propulsion, its first task being a proposed new program in helicopter transmission technology leading later to work on helicopter engines. NASA estimated that over the next 3yr the change would result in adding 72 positions to the ARC staff; LaRC helicopter work would phase down during that period but would continue to employ 72. The expected growth in long-haul aircraft technology at LaRC would add up to little long-term impact on that center’s manpower or the local economy. (NASA Release 77-8; ARC Release 77-19)
Langley Research Center announced award of a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract worth about $1.8 million to Vought Corp. for design, development, and qualification of a Scout launch-vehicle guidance system. Teledyne would do the designing under subcontract and Vought would integrate the system into the Scout. Work would proceed at the Vought plant in Dallas and Teledyne’s plant in Northridge, Calif., under LaRC direction. (LaRC Release 77-3)
Johnson Space Center announced that the ninth group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Nov. 7 for physicals and interviews. The group, 21 mission specialist applicants and 2 pilot applicants, included 12 civilians; 2 were women, bringing the number of female applicants interviewed to 20. Of the military applicants, 5 were Navy; 4, USAF; and 1 each from the Army and Marines. NASA had screened 183 applicants so far, 79 seeking to be pilots and 104 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-70; NASA Release 77-232) •
MSFC announced that NASA had selected Martin Marietta Corp. and Ball Brothers Research Corp. for negotiations of fixed-price contracts for parallel $290 000 definition studies of a Shuttle tethered satellite system [see May 27]. MSFC would manage the studies for the NASA Hq Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-181)
NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735 were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)
WFC announced it had completed tests using rockets, balloons, and supporting ground observations to obtain data on the natural state of earth’s ozone layer and on stratosphere pollution. As part of the joint WFC-GSFC applications sounding-rocket program (ASRP), the tests July 19-22 had measured daylong variations in the vertical distribution of ozone to establish a model for studying the effects of pollutants. (WFC Release 77-11)
NASA launched the first high-energy astronomy observatory, HEAO-A, from ETR on an Atlas Centaur at 2:29am EDT into a near circular orbit with 456.3km apogee, 431.4km perigee, 93.5min period, and 22.75° inclination. Heao 1, nearly 19ft long and nearly 9ft in diameter, weighting 56261b at liftoff (including 29601b of experiments and an 8311b separation system), had a 6mo design lifetime but would carry enough consumables and orbit at an altitude to allow extension of its mission up to lyr. It would operate in 2 modes, pointing and scanning: its batteries would point continuously at the sun as the vehicle moved l°/day in the ecliptic longitude, and its detectors would scan in wide circles perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic. TRW had built the spacecraft equipment module (SEM) containing all the subsystems used by all the experiments for operation and control, and a mission unique experiment module (EM) filling the requirements of each payload segment. Dr. Fred Speer, HEAO manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, said the spacecraft, rotating end over end, would survey the entire sky within its 6mo lifetime. This launch was the first in a three mission program to study x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays emitted by stellar sources, the other launches to be in 1978 and 1979. The HEAOs would carry large and heavy scientific instruments needed for observations at the high-energy and low-flux levels of these phenomena. Estimated cost of the 3 observatories was $237 million. The original plan in 1968 had been to launch a 40ft vehicle weighing 22 0001b; budget problems had reduced the size of the undertaking. However, the x-ray detector built by NRL as 1 of 4 experiments carried by Heao 1 was the largest instrument ever flown on an unmanned satellite, weighing almost 10001b. The NRL package, called the large area x-ray survey, was a 7-module array 20 times as large as any of its predecessors that would map the sky by recording incident x-ray fluxes and would determine the spectrum, time, and intensity variations of newfound x-ray sources. NRL’s Dr. Herbert Friedman noted that known x-ray sources now numbered about 200; Heao 1 might increase the list to several thousand. Celestial sources of x-ray emission included white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes, products of stellar catastrophe, as well as quasars and radio galaxies; also, a class of ministars almost too small for detection by the biggest optical telescopes might emit radiation 10 000 times as great as all the radiant energy of earth’s sun. The other experiments on Heao 1 were a scanning-modulation collimator to make parallel observations, using instruments designed by Harvard and MIT, to pinpoint locations of sources and determine their structure; a cosmic x-ray experiment designed by NASA and CalTech, to look for diffuse x-rays or cosmic rays; and another experiment from MIT and the Univ. of Calif. San Diego, to look for hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays. NASA planned a guest observer program for this mission, participants to be selected from responses to a “Dear Colleague” letter issued by the Office of Space Sciences. A malfunctioning rate gyro had delayed the planned June 30 launch; the Bendix-built instrument had been removed and returned to the manufacturer March 31, but further similar delays occurred [see July 26]. Early data from orbit showed spacecraft systems and experiments were operating normally. (NASA Releases 77-45, 77-56, 77-71, 77-83, 77-87; OSS rept S-832-77-01 [prelaunch] May 16/77, July 29/77; MOR S-832-77-01 [postlaunch] Aug 12/77, Apr 3/78; MSFC Releases 77-32, 77-64, 77-107, 77-142; KSC Releases 85-77,140-77; Spacewarn SPX-284; NYT, Apr 10/77, 23; Aug 13/77, 33; NRL Release 23-8-77S)
NASA announced tentative selection of 18 scientists to participate in the Space Telescope project. The 10-ton spacecraft scheduled for Shuttle launch in 1983 to orbit at 500km (310mi) altitude would make observations deeper into space, and with more detail, than heretofore possible, covering about 350 times the volume of space now visible from earth-based telescopes. It had been designed for remote operation from the ground, including maintenance or retrieval by a space-suited astronaut for return to earth to be overhauled and relaunched. The telescope could accommodate 5 different instruments at its focal plane: both the faint-object camera (ESA) and the wide-field camera could cover ultraviolet and blue spectra, the latter the red and near-infrared regions as well; the two spectrographs would offer a range of resolution impossible with a single instrument; and the photometer could calibrate the other instrument and image the galactic background. (NASA Release 77-239)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A. Frosch, and Chairman A.B. Wolff of the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace Programs had signed a memorandum of understanding on the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) project, a cooperative undertaking in which the United Kingdom would also share under a separate agreement. An earth-orbiting observatory built by the Netherlands and scheduled for launch in 1981 would carry a cryogenically cooled IR telescope furnished by the U.S. and a package furnished by the U.K. for command, control, and data acquisition. Nearly 500 scientists, engineers, and technicians from the participating nations would join in the first survey of the entire sky at infrared wavelengths undetectable by earth-based telescopes obscured by the atmosphere. The mission would have a lyr lifetime. Ames Research Center would manage the telescope, built by Belli Bros. Research Corp.; JPL would have U.S. project management responsibility. (NASA Release 77-210) •
MSFC reported that the Energy Research and Development Administration had selected 80 new projects for installing solar heating and cooling, on 27 of which MSFC would monitor technical design and construction. MSFC was already monitoring 32 commercial demonstration projects selected by ERDA in April 1976 as the first of a series; ERDA would issue a third solicitation for proposals later this summer, the announcement said. Dr. Henry H. Marvin, director of ERDA’s division of solar energy, said cooperative agreements negotiated by MSFC with the 27 proposers of projects would be signed within approximately 3mo. Government funding on a cost-sharing basis would cover only the solar portions of the projects; more than 90% of the funds would go to projects with substantial small business participation, and more than half the awards would go to teams using solar energy systems supplied by small businesses. (MSFC Release 77-89)
The new administration of President Carter would not initiate a working Landsat earth resources monitoring system until it found out how much money Landsat data users would invest in such a system, AvWk reported. The president’s science adviser Frank Press, director of the White House office of science and technology policy, would set up a committee to study the user-cost question. Press had told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space that it would be “premature to commit the federal government” to support of an operational system because of many uncertainties about remote sensing; he said that development of a sector to be served by Landsat data had not evolved “as rapidly as some anticipated several years ago,” and that “no comprehensive assessment” had been made “of the overall market structure for Landsat data applications. . . .” The subcommittee was considering a bill cosponsored by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky) and former astronaut Sen. Harrison M. Schmitt (R-NM) that would establish an operational Landsat system, the space segment to be run by NASA and the ground data distribution by the Dept, of the Interior. AvWk noted, however, that the Interior testimony had been altered at the last minute to deny support of the bill. {AvWk, June 13/77, 91)
NASA announced a yr-long schedule of test runs and captive-flight tests on the first-built Space Shuttle orbiter, Enterprise, that would take place at the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of flights with a modified Boeing 747 serving as a ferry aircraft and airborne launch platform would begin with several taxiing tests with the orbiter atop the carrier; following would be six inert-captive flights in which the jumbo jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to a 7620m (25 000ft) altitude. Unmanned flights would verify performance of the two vehicles in mated flight. Then would come a series of captive-active flights with the orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts. The first orbiter off the assembly line arrived at DFRC Jan. 31 from Rockwell Intl.’s Palmdale plant; upon completion of ALT, the carrier would take the prototype to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground-vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return to Palmdale to be prepared for orbital flight in the early 1980s. The orbiter now under construction (OV-102) would be the first used in actual orbital-flight tests, now scheduled to begin in mid-1979; six test flights would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start of operational flights, scheduled to begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16)
Pioneer 11 had covered two-thirds of its 2.3-billion-km (1.5-billion-mi) journey from Jupiter to Saturn; passing Saturn, it would head out of the solar system in the direction that the solar system takes through the galaxy, nearly opposite the path of Pioneer 10, now between the orbits of Saturn and Uranus, also on its way out of the solar system. Ames Research Center had managed the Pioneer project for NASA’s Office of Space Science; TRW Systems, Inc., had built the spacecraft. (NASA Release 77-112; ARC Release 77-33)
Science magazine carried an article by Drs. T.B.H. Kuiper of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and M. Morris of the Calif. Inst, of Technology on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, based on extrapolations of known physical processes and known behaviors of terrestrial animals and humans. Concluding that interstellar travel would be practicable and that advanced beings might have reasons for making contact with humans, the authors reviewed the options and the interstellar-beacon frequencies proposed for use in such contact. (Science, May 6/77, 616)
Dryden Flight Research Center reported that Ralph “Buzz” Sawyer of its flight systems laboratory had made a “paper airplane” to test a theory of reducing elevator flutter and had come up with a new type of aircraft its builder named Skyjacker. Sawyer, working on radio-controlled models, decided to change their airfoils into booms but wanted to test the idea without risking the $600 radio systems. He made a foot-long cardboard model and “heaved [it] off the roof’ of DFRC’s heat facility; the “paper plane” had demonstrated amazing stability. Sawyer obtained a patent on the design and built a demonstrator 18ft long with an 18ft wingspan that he flew for the first time in Jan. 1975. With a 200hp fuel-injected engine and a 3-blade constant-speed propeller, the Skyjacker had “very good low-speed” handling, was easy to fly and land, and (according to the designer) would not stall or spin. The craft had “lift panels” 6ft wide instead of actual wings, but derived lift from its configuration just as DFRC lifting bodies did; the design had no compound curves, and its flat surfaces would make it inexpensive to produce. Possible applications would include crop dusting and firefighting. (NASA X-Press, Dec 2/77, 4)
Marshall Space Flight Center director William R. Lucas announced that the teleoperator retrieval system project assigned by NASA to the center would be headed by John H. Harlow, who had been deputy manager of the Space Shuttle main engine project since 1976 and served previously as assistant manager in the Shuttle Projects Office. (MSFC Release 77-206)
ARC reported that the Galileo memorial scholarship program established in 1973 by the San Francisco section of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and ARC would award a $750 scholarship and other prizes. The program was open to high school seniors planning a career in physical or natural sciences, engineering, or mathematics, residents of the area or children of employees or retirees at ARC or of Galileo crewmembers. The program was a memorial to the men who died April 12, 1973, in an accident involving the Galileo I (a modified Convair operated by ARC as a flying laboratory for research in aeronautics, astronautics, astronomy, and earth observation). (ARC Astrogram, Dec 29/77, 4) During December: NASA reported that Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., civilian test pilot for DFRC since 1966 and a 23-yr veteran of the USAF, had received from the Society of Experimental Test Pilots the Iven C. Kin-cheloe award as test pilot of the year for his work in the Space Shuttle approach-and-landing test program in which he piloted the orbiter on 13 test flights beginning in Feb. and ending in mid-Nov. 1977. Fulton was also flying the “triplesonic” YF-12 aircraft for NASA; in the past, he had flown the XB-70 and was launch pilot for the X-15 and other research vehicles. This award was the second top-level honor for Fulton, who won the Harmon Trophy in 1962 as an Air Force pilot in the B-58 Hustler test program at Edwards AFB that set an international altitude record. In his work for the Air Force Fulton had received 3 Distinguished Flying Crosses, plus another DFC and 5 air medals for 55 missions in Korea and scores of humanitarian missions during the Berlin Airlift of 1948-49. (NASA Actv Dec 77, 8) •
Rockwell Intl.’s B-l division announced it had made significant savings in awarding a contract to Honeywell Inc.’s avionics division for equipment to test electronic systems on the USAF B-l strategic bomber. B-l division president Bastian Hello said the new equipment would use large amounts of off-the-shelf items and would be able to test a wide range of systems supplied by Rockwell, Boeing, and the AIL division of Cutler Hammer. The contract would direct Boeing and AIL to get test equipment from Honeywell under separate purchasing agreements. Rockwell should receive first deliveries of the equipment in 1978. The USAF would use the test equipment to maintain B-l operations; Boeing (offensive-avionics integrator) and AIL (defensive-avionics contractor) would use the equipment in supplying electronic instruments to the program. (Rockwell Release LA-6) June 16—Aug. 18: NASA launched Goes 2, second in a series of geostationary operational environmental satellites, from the Eastern Test Range at 6:51am EDT June 16 on a Delta vehicle into a transfer orbit. On second apogee the boost motor fired at 11:26pm EDT to put the spacecraft in a nominal orbit where it would move to a position specified by NOAA at 75 °W, and be turned over to NOAA for operations in about 30 days. Orbital elements were 36 859km apogee, 188.6km perigee, 23.7° inclination, and 651.8-min period. NASA announced on Aug. 18 that it had turned Goes 2 over to NOAA for operational use on July 29 at 1600Z. NASA engineers had completed a planned orbital checkout to ensure proper operation, having moved the satellite to 66.5 °W over the equator where most of the tests occurred. Of the original 801b of hydrazine carried for stationkeeping, more than 671b remained unused. The engineers had found minor problems in the data-handling equipment used to relay signals from earth-based data-collection platforms, and in the x-ray section of the solar-environment monitor; the data-collection problem had resulted from interference by VHF equipment that could be turned off for most of the mission, but the x-ray problem arose from faulty cabling that might require more calibrations. Goes 2 was officially certified as successful on Aug. 5-15, having achieved its mission objectives. (MOR E-608-77-05 [postlaunch] June 20/77, [postlaunch] Aug 18/77)
Langley Research Center announced that 21 area high school students had completed a 4wk hands-on career exploration program at the center, applying classroom concepts to actual situations. Each student had been assigned to a sponsor in science, computers, engineering, or mathematics to supervise the unpaid 8hr workdays. (LaRC Release 77-34)
NASA announced it had commanded the Viking 1 lander on Mars to dig a ft-deep trench in the surface and bring up soil samples to use in finding out more about the complex chemistry of the planet. The sequence, which would continue through March 15, would include pictures taken by the lander to show mission controllers how the digging progressed. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory had sent commands to the Viking 1 lander Feb. 10 and would start the Viking 2 lander’s digging sequence about Feb. 16. Viking 7’s orbiter would make a series of close passes near Mars’s satellite Phobos to take pictures and measure its temperature, while observing the effect of its gravity on the course of the spacecraft. Afterward, mission controllers would drop the orbiter to about 300km altitude over Mars from the current close-approach altitude of 1500km. (NASA Release 77-24; JPL Release Feb 10/77)
Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dec. to begin training for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9) February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15 pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline for applications would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; appointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the course. NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency, and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board would receive applications from members of the military services just before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: commander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists (who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 77-18)
The NY Times reported that a team of two Soviet crewmen, accompanied for a time by a woman plant expert, had completed a 4mo stay in an isolation chamber to test an artificial environment designed for long interplanetary space missions. The team had breathed oxygen and consumed water and food produced by miniature wheatfields and vegetable gardens occupying about half the space of their 1260ft2 test chamber called Bios 3. The plants, grown by hydroponics (mineralized solutions rather than soils), had exuded enough moisture for drinking and household needs and had provided a third of the proteins and fats and half the carbohydrates in the crew diet, supplemented with dehydrated rations of animal fats and proteins stored for the mission. The Times quoted an Izvestia story describing the experiment and reporting “no significant changes in the physiologic, biochemical and psychological functions of the subjects. Their weight has also remained virtually the same.” Dr. G. Lisovsky, head of the Controlled Biosynthesis Laboratory of the Krasnoyarsk Physics Inst, in Siberia, said that earlier experiments in the series begun shortly after the Gagarin flight of 1961 had tried chlorellas (green single-cell algae) as a source of protein and B-complex vitamins for long space trips. The algae had yielded sufficient oxygen and water but did not provide a balanced diet; researchers had then used early-maturing wheat and vegetables. Agronomist Mariya Shulenko had done the cooking while checking out the hydroponics; after she left, Gennady Asinyarov and Nikolay Bugreyev had shared the job. (NYT, June 30/77, 28) During June: John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for space flight, was one of 92 persons honored by election to membership in the Natl. Academy of Engineering. His citation was for “contributions to engineering theory and practice and leadership of organizations that pioneered major space programs.” (NAS News Report, June/77, 7)
NASA announced it had selected Ball Bros. Research Corp., Boulder, Colo., to negotiate a $13.8 million contract for the telescope system on the infrared astronomy satellite (IRAS), a joint U.S.-Netherlands mission to survey the celestial sphere in the infrared spectrum. The U.S. would provide a large cryogenically cooled instrument and the Netherlands would provide the spacecraft and would supervise integration. NASA would launch IRAS from WTR early in 1981 on a Delta for its yr-long scientific mission. The Ball Bros, contract would cover design, fabrication, test, and launch support for the telescope, plus spares, an engineering model, and ground-support equipment. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage the project, and Ames Research Center would be responsible for the telescope system (NASA Release 77-154)
The W. Post reported that the U.S. Naval Observatory had honored the memory of its astronomer Asaph Hall with a 2:30am party attended by Hall’s descendants (“a fine crop of teen-agers and young adults”) on the 100th anniversary of his discovery of the moon of Mars, which he had named Deimos (flight) and Phobos (fear) after the horses that drew the war god’s chariot. “It now turns out,” the Post added, that the little moons would crash into Mars within the next 70 million yr [see During June]. Other Naval Observatory observances honoring Hall included a reception, a group of technical meetings, a dinner, and a 100th anniversary memorial entry in the logbook of the observatory’s 26in refracting telescope. [W Post, Aug 13/77, Bl)
NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals for use and development of the unfunded Space Telescope [see Feb. 1]. Capable of holding five different instruments at the focal plane of its 2.4m mirror, the Space Telescope would expand the volume of observable space 350 times beyond that of the largest ground-based telescope, offering new information for astronomers and other scientists interested in fundamental questions of cosmology and astronomy. GSFC would manage operations of the telescope’s missions and develop its instrumentation; MSFC would be responsible for overall management of the telescope system. (NASA Release 77-58)
NASA announced that the Arizona Dept, of Transportation and 2 federal agencies had demonstrated solar energy potential by using an array of solar cells to power a dust-storm warning system in central Ariz. The state had installed the system over an 80mi area on Interstate 10 between Phoenix and Tucson, and west on Interstate 8 near Casa Grande, to help motorists avoid accidents in low-visibility conditions resulting from blowing dust. In normal mode, the signs would display directional information; when dust storms struck, the message would change to give motorists the radio frequencies on which storm-alert instructions would be available. The state agency (working with LeRC, which had managed the applications project for the Energy Research and Development Administration) would replace propane-fueled 60w generators at 40 signs in the system with solar arrays, halving the cost. Each sign would use solar electricity to power the lighting, changeable-message feature, and radio communications activated by a link from Phoenix when dust storms were imminent. (NASA Release 77-106)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
The Natl. Science Foundation reported that federal funding for research and development had risen significantly between fiscal yrs 1974 and 1978, having shown only slight growth in the 1969-1974 period. Total federal R&D funding for FY 1978 was about $26.3 billion, $8.9 billion more than for FY 1974. For the 1974-1978 period, 6 functional areas accounted for nearly all the increase in federal support: defense, 44%; energy, 25%; space and health, 7% each; environment, 5%; science and technology base, 4%. (NSF Release PR77-93)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $634 250 contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design, build, and test a machine that would demonstrate, on earth, the automatic fabrication of beams for space construction. Ground demonstration would be needed to develop a safe and efficient facility for use in space. Beam fabrication, part of the Space Industrialization Program, would be the first step in building large space structures. (MSFC Release 77-33)
Ames Research Center announced that NASA had chosen 29 experimenters for the atmosphere probe portion of the Jupiter mission [see Aug. 29]. The probe would carry 6 experiments into Jupiter’s atmosphere; 5 of the experimenters would be interdisciplinary scientists, and 24 would be assigned to the 6 experiments: helium interferometer, Dr. Ulf von Zahn, Federal Republic of Germany, principal investigator; mass spectrometer, Dr. H.B. Niemann, Goddard Space Flight Center; atmospheric structure, Dr. Alvin Sieff, ARC; nephelometer, Dr. Boris Ragent, ARC; net-flux radiometer, Dr. R.W. Boese, ARC; sferics receiver, Dr. L.J. Lanzerotti, Bell Laboratories. The probe would separate from the orbiter about 55 days away from the planet, continuing on a separate flight path for about 30min of highspeed descent while relaying information to earth through the orbiter. After the entry probe concluded its work, the orbiter would fly close to Jupiter’s moon Ganymede and near the large moons Io, Europa, and Callisto. ARC’S Dr. Lawrence Colin would be project scientist for the Jupiter probe; JPL would manage the Jupiter orbiter/probe project. (ARC Release 77-40)
Scientists at the McDonald Observatory in Los Alamos, N.M., had discovered that the red-giant star Betelgeuse, familiar feature of the constellation Orion, was 3 250 000 times larger than earth’s sun. Pictures taken at the observatory, using a new process with a special one-of-a-kind television camera tube produced by RCA, had shown the star expanding and throwing off matter into space at a prodigious rate; the photographs for the first time had viewed and measured the shell of matter around a red giant. Betelgeuse and its shell had proved to be 400 times larger than the orbit of Pluto; it had measured nearly 3 trillion miles across (2800 billion miles). Earth’s sun in comparison was 864 000 miles in diameter at its equator, and earth itself was only about 8000 miles in diameter at the equator. The pictures had verified a theory that red-giant stars were a primary source of raw material for making new stars, according to astrophysicist Maxwell Sandford of McDonald laboratory. The red giants would routinely lose matter to relieve internal pressures built up by consumption of nuclear fuel, and the pictures had shown the loss to be much greater than previously thought. (Today, June 3/77, 11 A)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced reorganization of the agency effective Nov. 8 “to strengthen NASA organization and improve our effectiveness ... we will reduce the number of staff offices reporting directly to the Administrator.” Headquarters operations would consist of 3 functions: the office of the Administrator, for general management; the chief scientist, chief engineer, and 5 program offices for program planning, management, and review; and 8 staff offices to give program, staff, and functional support. Each of the 5 program offices would have an associate administrator to manage aeronautics and space technology; space sciences; space and terrestrial applications (formerly applications); space transportation systems (formerly space flight); and space tracking and data systems (formerly tracking and data acquisition). (NASA Release 77-228)
NASA announced that the launch of HEAO-A (the high-energy astronomy observatory) originally scheduled for April 1977 had been set for Aug. 12. Problems with the spacecraft’s gyroscopes, required for attitude control, had caused the delay. Analysis and testing had produced design changes to improve gyroscope reliability for the expected 6mo mission lifetime. HEAO-A would be first of three astrophysical observatories orbited over the next 3yr to study radiation from stellar sources throughout the universe. (NASA Release 77-156)
Lewis Research Center announced it would participate in programs to demonstrate the feasibility of using an airborne infrared scanner to pinpoint residential heat loss. The cities of Cleveland, Ohio, and Springfield, 111., would reimburse the center for its services. A NASA C-47 aircraft, flown over areas designated by Cleveland’s city council as eligible for low-interest winterizing and rehabilitation loans from the U.S. Dept, of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), would record on magnetic tape the images of rooftops showing hot areas as white, warm areas as gray, and cool areas as black. Homeowners in the target areas could view the results at community centers and apply for block grant money from HUD as necessary. The city of Springfield had requested similar assistance for a HUD loan program. LeRC had used a thermal infrared technique in 1975-76 to scan NASA centers for energy loss, saving the agency about $350 000 in the first yr of the program. (NASA Release 77-13; Lewis News, March 11/77, 3)
The USAF launched the Navy’s navigation technology satellite Nts 2 from Vandenberg AFB on an Atlas F booster into a 12hr circular orbit of 63° inclination at about 11 600mi altitude. First of a system to be called NavStar, the Nts 2 carried two cesium-beam time standards (atomic clocks) to produce precise time signals and 14 solar-cell experiments for its builder, the Naval Research Laboratory. The joint-service NavStar system upon completion would consist of 24 satellites (8 in each of 3 circular-orbit planes) to provide users with longitude, latitude, and altitude information around the clock in any weather. It would give a customer his location within 33ft, his speed within about 4in/sec, and the correct time. Uses of NavStar would include tactical-missile navigation and precision delivery of weapons; aid to space, air, land, and sea travel; grid mapping and geodetic surveys; aerial rendezvous and refueling; and search-and-rescue operations. The USAF had announced plans to launch five of its own satellites later in 1977 and 1978 for NavStar testing. (D/SBD, June 20/77, 279; June 27/77, 320; AvWk, Oct 11/76, 47; NRL Release 20-7-77C; AFSC Newsreview, Aug 77, 3)
Langley Research Center announced that Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, who had been director of the center 1968-1975 and was now a vice president of Owens-Illinois, Inc., would speak at the center colo-quium Nov. 14 on recent developments in solar energy. Dr. Cortright, in charge of overall technical direction at the large multinational corporation now interested in uses of solar energy, would discuss technical, economic, and legislative aspects of the newly developing industry that would depend for wide application upon being price-competitive with other energy sources in spite of being inexhaustible and nonpolluting. The next few years would see its first domestic applications in areas such as space heating and air conditioning. (LaRC Release 77-54)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it would accept proposals for a study contract to define possibilities of receiving electrical energy from the sun in large quantities for use on earth, through a concept called Satellite Power Systems, consisting of a number of spacecraft in stationary orbit using photovoltaic or solar-thermal power instrumentation to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy, convert that to microwave energy, transmit it to earth stations for conversion back to electrical energy, and distribute the power to users. Other NASA studies had established the technical and economic feasibility of satellite power systems, but an agreement between NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration would result in additional data on key issues and critical areas, and the ability of the concept to deal with these issues and areas. MSFC would accept proposals for the study through Jan. 24. (MSFC Release 77-1)
Johnson Space Center announced it had awarded a $399 600 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to ESL, Inc., of Sunnyvale, Calif., for using Landsat data in a vegetation inventory for eastern Alaska under a NASA project conducted jointly with the Bureau of Land Management. The BLM had begun an automatic inventory system for 474 million acres under its jurisdiction; the Alaska area would represent a tundra ecology. If the joint task were successful, NASA had options for work on grassland and sagebrush ecologies. (JSC Release 77-31)
NASA announced that MSFC had issued requests for proposals from industry to make studies of, and supply data for NASA to use in developing techniques for packaging, transporting, fabricating, erecting, and operating large structures in space, in preparation for a major demonstration in space in 1983 or 1984. An early Shuttle flight would carry an automated beam-fabrication module to make aluminum structural members; later flights would demonstrate use of both aluminum and composite materials. After a few beams were manufactured on early flights, later missions would perform limited assembly, culminating in fabrication and erection of a large structure for continuing use, such as a lOOkw solar-power facility to supplement onboard Shuttle power for various experiments. The capacity demonstrated in these missions would aid in creating a more complex assembly as part of a space-construction base in 1985 or thereafter. The proposal called for completion in 9mo and another 2mo to prepare a report. MSFC would receive proposals until Mar. 18, 1977, and would manage the study project for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 77-35)
NASA announced that the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had negotiated contracts with 5 firms for enough silicon (photovoltaic) solar cells to supply a combined total of 190kw of power for use by the federal government. JPL would manage the contract for the Dept, of Energy (DOE), sponsor of the program to reduce the price of the cells below 504 per peak watt by the end of 1986, while raising production capability to 500,000kw annually. The DOE program, besides reducing costs, would study the use of solar-cell materials potentially less expensive than silicon crystals and of alternatives such as optical concentrators. Firms receiving contracts were ARCO, 20kw, $321 950; Motorola, 50kw, $676 614; Sensor Technology, 40kw, $643 907; Solarex, 30kw, $559 454; and Solar Power, 50kw, $757 665. Panels of solar cells previously purchased under the program were powering an irrigation system in Nebr., a test system for residential use at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory in Mass., a dust-storm warning system in Ariz. [see May 23], automatic weather-reporting systems in 6 states, and other remote uses. (NASA Release 77-246)
JPL announced that NASA had selected an ion-drive propulsion system rather than the solar sail [see June 21] for use by automated interplanetary shuttles in earth’s solar system toward the end of this century. NASA scientists had studied the concepts for a yr before making the choice on the basis of lower risk and greater potential for growth. LeRC had orbited ion rockets, forerunners of the ion-drive spacecraft, in 1969 as part of SERT (space electric rocket tests). Those rockets were still operating in space. An ion-drive ship would carry a cluster of mercury-ion engines and generate power from solar-cell arrays converting sunlight to electricity. First use of the ion-drive system might be a Halley’s Comet rendezvous in 1986 by a spacecraft launched from the Shuttle in 1981 or early 1982. (JPL release Sept 12/77; NASA Release 77-187; WStar, Sept 13/77, A-6)
Ames Research Center reported that on May 10, 10 female volunteers would complete a month-long test [see March 24] to set standards for passengers on future spaceflights. The test included 9 days of total bed rest, to simulate effects of weightlessness, and centrifuge rides to simulate reentry into earth atmosphere. ARC had scheduled a press conference to announce and discuss the results of the test; Dr. Harold Sandler, principal investigator, would attend with members of his staff and the volunteers. (ARC anno May 4/77)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
NASA announced that biologists working for it and the Natl. Science Foundation had identified a “new” form of life that might date back to earth’s first billion yr: a methane-producing organism representing what might be the oldest form of life as well as a line of evolution totally separate from the two traditionally recognized lines of bacteria, and animals and plants. A research team headed by Dr. Carl Woese of the Univ. of Ill.-Urbana, described as a world expert on the genetic code, said the organisms were a distinct class no more related to typical bacteria than to higher forms. Biologists working with a group of methane-producing organisms had assumed they were ordinary bacteria; however, analysis of ribosomal RNA had shown the genealogy of the new form to be distinct from those of both bacteria and the animals or plants. Dr. Woese said the study might shed light on a missing stage of evolution, the chemical stage that immediately preceded identifiable life on earth. (NASA Release 77-229)
Postlaunch reports on the Voyagers said both were functioning as expected. The one launched first, called Voyager 2 because it would arrive second at Jupiter and Saturn, had had difficulty with attitude control as well as with its science-platform boom; its data showed that the craft was merely obeying faulty software, which ground control had corrected. The boom was stable enough to capture satisfactory star-field images. Voyager 1, launched later, had not achieved the proper velocity during two trajectory corrections; Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineers said rocket exhaust was apparently pushing against the craft, and had changed the procedure accordingly. (NASA Release 77-209; MOR S-802-77-01/02 [postlaunch] Oct 6/77)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded to the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti., a contract modification for additional work and services to the Space Shuttle main engine program, covering long leadtime hardware and material procurement to provide follow-on engines. Each engine, designed for use up to 50 times before overhaul, would be capable of 1 668 075 newtons (375K lb) of thrust at sea level and 2 090 654 newtons (470K lb) at altitude. (MSFC Release 77-78)
NASA announced that JSC’s space and life sciences directorate payload to be managed by the Hq Office of Applications on the second flight of Shuttle orbiter 102 (sister ship to the Enterprise used in recent approach-and-landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center) in 1979 would investigate earth resources, environmental quality, and severe storms. The instrumentation and other hardware carried on the second flight would be reusable, to permit adjusting or modifying it for later flights at relatively low cost. The first orbital flight would mainly record performance and monitor space immediately around the orbiter for contamination; the monitor would fly on all 6 orbital flight tests in 1979 and 1980. NASA had estimated the cost of payload hardware, science and technical integration, and mission support at about $10 million. The 6 orbital test launches from Kennedy Space Center would aim at preparing the Shuttle for regular operations by May 1980. (NASA Release 77-181; JSC Release 77-48)
The Wall St Journal reported that the government of France had announced plans for a major overhaul of its “financially troubled aerospace industry,” that would include partial nationalization of Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet, maker of the Mirage jet fighter. A sharp drop in orders for civilian and military aircraft had forced companies to dismiss workers and cut down operations; the government hoped to introduce new products, step up sales, and increase cooperation with other European aircraft firms. (WSJ, June 9/77, 13)
NASA announced it would conduct the third “manned inert” flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about July 26 at Dry den Flight Research Center. At the controls of the orbiter atop its Boeing 747 carrier would be astronauts Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton, making their second piggyback run in this test series. They had made the first captive flight June 18; the second, on June 28, had Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. In the first flight, lasting 56min, Haise and Fullerton had checked out the orbiter flight controls at low altitude and low speed. For the third test, the 747 would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7895 meters (25 905ft) where it would “push over” in a practice separation; the orbiter and 747 crews would go through all the motions except actual separation. The flight would be a dress rehearsal for the first free flight of the orbiter, scheduled on or about Aug. 12. (NASA Release 77-146; JSC Release 77-41)
Kennedy Space Center announced it would host for the second consecutive yr a gathering of more than 85 meteorologists and atmospheric physicists for TRIP 77 (Thunderstorm Research Inti. Program 1977), including 21 principal investigators and their associates, continuing their studies of lightning and thunderstorms and the hazards resulting from them. The 1976 program had yielded much data on electrical charges within and between clouds and from clouds to earth’s surface. (KSC Release 127-77)
About 300 people had assembled at Cape Canaveral, the W. Post reported, to celebrate the anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11, the mission that first landed humans on the moon. On July 16, 1969, a Saturn V rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center had carried 3 astronauts, none of whom attended the observance. (fV Post, July 17/77, A-18)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had developed an autopilot device during flight tests of the YF-12 aircraft that would enable future high-speed planes to fly closer to the preset flight path. Experience gained from aircraft cruising at high speeds and high altitudes had shown deviations up to ± 4000ft in altitude and more than 30mph in speed from those planned. An aircraft flying across the country at Mach 3 could encounter normal changes in temperature and pressure as rapid changes that could affect the Mach number; conventional techniques to correct for those changes had caused large altitude deviations and poor-quality passenger comfort. The deviations could degrade aircraft performance or overrun the plane’s operating limitations. The new control system combining surface motion and throttle motion, Hot previously used together, with newly developed data sensors, had kept the YF-12 on a highly precise flight path even at high-speed conditions over extended periods of time. (DFRC Release 19-77) ____
FBIS carried an announcement by Tass that the USSR had launched “this morning” the French satellite Signe 3, product of a 2yr collaboration between the Toulouse Space Research Center and the USSR’s Space Research Inst, of the Academy of Sciences. The spacecraft had carried French-made instruments to observe ultraviolet emission from the sun; objective of the mission was to continue study of “already discovered sources of gamma radiation in galaxies and also to replenish the catalog of stars.” The announcement said that originally the French were to design the spacecraft and provide the equipment, while the USSR ensured launch; however, “the Soviet colleagues suggested so many design novelties . . . that it is actually more correct to regard the Signe 3 as a Soviet-French satellite,” according to French project director Antoine Miosi. This launch had begun a second decade of USSR-French cooperation in space exploration: Soviet spacecraft had carried French-made instruments, and the French Araks experiment had orbited a Soviet electron accelerator to study polar lights. (FBIS, Tass in English, June 17/77)
The United States planned to orbit in 1983 a 9080kg 645cm telescope that would observe images almost to the edge of space and the beginning of time, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. “Without the blurring of the atmosphere,” said Dr. John Bahcall of Princeton Univ.’s Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to see things that are 10 times smaller than we have seen, or 10 times farther away. It would be like reading the writing on a quarter that we could only tell was round before.” If approved by Congress, the $435 million Space Telescope would be carried from earth by astronauts manning the Space Shuttle. The telescope would investigate quasars radiating thousands of times the energy generated by ordinary stars of the same size, and would observe the birth of stars, map nearby planets and galaxies, and compute distances to the nearest stars. In addition to optics half the size of Mount Palomar’s, the Space Telescope would carry lenses and instruments to scan ultraviolet and infrared spectra not accessible to earthbound telescopes because of atmospheric blockage. The telescope would relay its views to earth using geostationary satellites over the U.S. NASA would send Shuttle astronauts to the telescope every 5yr to replace wornout or damaged parts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C-24)
