NASA launched from Cape Canaveral the high energy astronomy observatory Heao 2 on an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle [see Nov. 3]. This was the second in a series of three NASA high energy astronomy observatories designed to survey the entire sky for x-ray sources, make measurements of the gamma-ray flux, determine source locations and line spectra, and examine the composition and synthesis of' cosmic-ray nuclei. The 20ft 70001b Heao 2 was equipped to provide precise pointing capability of 1 arc-minute or better, and would focus on specific x-ray sources for detailed examination. Orbiting the earth at 290mi altitude, Heao 2 had a design life of lyr. Nicknamed “Einstein” by project scientists, the mission would operate under a consortium representing the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Mass. Inst, of Technology, Columbia Univ., and GSFC. The spacecraft was built by TRW, Inc., under NASA direction. (NASA MOR S-832-78-02 [prelaunch] date?; NYT, Nov 14/78, C-3)
MSFC announced that the American Inst, of Astronautics and Aeronautics (AIAA) had installed Dr. William Lucas, MSFC director, as a fellow at the 14th AIAA annual meeting Feb. 8. AIAA had selected Dr. Lucas “in recognition of your many outstanding contributions and acknowledged leadership in the professional aerospace community,” according to a letter from AIAA president R. H. Miller. Others named AIAA fellows were former astronauts Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and David Scott, Dr. Donald Hearth of Langley Research Center, and Harvard Lomax of ARC. Elected an honorary fellow was former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. {Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
NASA announced that MSFC had developed a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) vehicle for first use in late 1979, either to boost the Skylab orbiting space laboratory to a higher orbit or to deorbit it in a remote ocean area. The decision to reboost or deorbit was expected early in 1979. Concept of the system evolved from teleoperator supporting research and development under way since the mid-1960s. Anticipated long-range usefulness of the TRS for payload survey, stabilization, retrieval, and delivery missions; its recovery and reuse capability; and its adaptability for the Skylab reboost/deorbit mission had led to its further development. The TRS had a central-core propulsion system accommodating strap-on kits for additional propulsion. A 24-nozzle attitude-control system on the core provided 6 deg of freedom for control of the vehicle during rendezvous, docking, and initial orientation. Although thrusters originally used cold-gas propulsion, designers were studying use of low-cost hydrazine (hot gas). Preprogrammed instructions in the vehicle’s core and computer, or a Shuttle crew member, would control guidance and attitude maneuvers. The TRS and orbiter structure were new designs; other systems would be fabricated almost completely from either off-the-shelf components or those being developed under NASA contracts. (NASA Release 78-49)
French and West German space officials had told a House committee that increasing costs would limit use of the U.S. Space Shuttle and the European Spacelab, Av Wk reported. A NASA official had admitted that Spacelab could have been built less expensively under a single nation’s management, but denied that Space Shuttle operational costs had increased prohibitively. Wolfgang Finke, director of West Germany’s Dept, of Space and Transportation, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that not only had the price of conventional launches increased steadily, but also “the new space transportation system will not revolutionize the cost of space transportation. On the contrary, the estimates for the fare of a Shuttle roundtrip and the fringe costs going with it went up considerably, putting a real brake on our more ambitious plans to utilize the new system.” As for Spacelab, Finke said the results of a West German materials-processing experiment would need a series of experiments for confirmation, with a cost level “well above the range of traditional materials research costs.” Hubert Curien, president of the French space agency, said that “anticipated cost of Spacelab experiments now reaches such heights that their funding raises very serious problems for national budgets and constitutes a very severe limitation.” Finke noted in conclusion that administrative costs of international cooperation had increased costs of the overall project. A NASA official agreed that if Spacelab had been built in the U.S. under one management, total cost would have been less. (Av-Wk, May 22/78, 28)
NASA announced the successful launch of Landsat 3 (formerly Landsat-C), third of a series, from WTR at 12:54pm EST on March 5. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 913.96km; perigee, 897.3km; period, 103.108min; and inclination, 99.134°. Landsat was part of a U.S. program to develop remote sensing for improved earth resources management. The total program included development of remote-sensing instruments; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; and a spaceflight program. Landsat 3 carried two piggyback payloads, the larger (approximately 34kg) being a plasma-interaction experiment (PIX) by Lewis Research Center to measure plasma-coupling current and negative-voltage breakdown of a Solar-array segment and a gold-plated steel disk. Objective of PIX was to. establish design guidelines, materials, devices, and test methods for controlling detrimental interactions between high-voltage systems and the space-plasma environment. The PIX would remain attached to the second stage of the Delta vehicle. The second piggyback payload, the 27.3kg Amsat Oscar communications-relay satellite built by radio amateurs, ejected from the second stage approximately 12.3min after Delta separation from Landsat 3, would be available to amateur operators for science education, communications experiments, and search-and-rescue systems tests. The Oscar D carried two communications transponders having 1 to 2 watts of power output, and was magnetically stabilized. Changes in the Landsat 3 payload included alteration of the return-beam vidicon system to produce higher resolution panchromatic images for detailed ground mapping, and inclusion in the multispectral scanner (MSS) of a fifth band in the emitted terrestrial infrared radiation region. Objective of the MSS was to acquire multispectral high-spatial-resolution (80m) images of solar radiation reflected from earth’s surface, emitted infrared-radiation images of 240m resolution, and panachromatic RBV images of 40m resolution. The MSS would obtain contiguous images about once every 18 days, weather permitting. The multispectral images would aid research and operations demonstrations in agriculture and forestry resources, mineral and land resources, land use, water resources, marine resources, cartography, and the environment. Applications would include surveying land use; measuring factors causing stress on crops and forest; inventorying crops and forests; assessing crop vigor and health; classifying areas by geological or geomorphic characteristics; delineating promising areas for mineral exploration; determining water-runoff patterns and extent of snowcover; monitoring population movements and environmental hazards to man; mapping sea ice; and analyzing shorelines. Demonstration projects called Applications Systems Verification and Transfer (ASVT), focusing on landcover inventory for federal, regional, state, and private users, would also use Landsat 3 data. The Landsat-C spacecraft (basically a Nimbus design modified to accommodate Landsat instruments and mission requirements) had the following parameters: weight, 90kg; mission margin, 51.4kg; stabilization type, 3-axis earth-oriented; stabilization accuracy, 0.7° pointing error, 0.04° per sec rate; average power available for experiments, 375 watts; thermal range, 10 to 30C; data storage capacity, 60min of video data (25.2 million bits). Launch vehicle was a 2-stage Thor Delta approximately 116ft long and 8ft in maximum body diameter. The first stage was a McDonnell Douglas extended long-tank Thor booster incorporating 9 strap-on Thiokol Castor II solid-fuel rocket motors; second stage was powered by the TRW TR-201 liquid-fuel pressure-fed engine gimbal-mounted to control pitch and yaw through second-stage burn. A nitrogen gas-system using 8 fixed nozzles provided roll control during powered and coast flight, as well as pitch and yaw control after second-stage cutoff. Two fixed nozzles fed from the propellant-tank helium-pressurization system provided retrothrust after spacecraft separation. Total cost of the Landsat program (excluding costs of the launch vehicles, and including tracking and data network-systems support) would be $43.9 million through 1979. (MOR E-641-78-03 [postlaunch] Mar 8/78, [prelaunch] Feb 22/78)
Langley Research Center announced that Dr. Leonard Hayflick, senior cell research biologist at Children’s Hospital Medical Center of Northern Calif., would speak on “The Biology of Human Aging” Sept. 18 as part of LaRC’s colloquium series. According to Dr. Hayflick, the ability of the human body to maintain itself had been demonstrated from its large-scale immune and endocrine systems down to the cellular level; its highly adaptable self-maintenance ability had appeared in biological responses of astronauts to sustained zero-g environments. Why did this self-maintenance ability give way to the aging process and eventually death? Could the biological clock be altered, and would it be desirable to do so? Dr. Hayflick would discuss aging both from a demographic and a biological point of view. After explaining cell-culture technology and its implications, Dr. Hayflick would summarize some modern theories on the aging process. (LaRC Release 78-45)
NASA announced it had launched the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) from KSC at 12:36pm EST on Jan. 26, 1978, aboard a Delta rocket. KSC had delayed the launch for 4hr to secure an access door on the Delta heatshield. The Delta had injected IUE into a transfer orbit with 46 342km (28 784mi) apogee, 167km (104mi) perigee, and 28.7° inclination. IUE was part of a joint program by NASA, ESA, and the United Kingdom’s Science Research Council (SRC); more astronomers (200 from 17 countries) would use IUE than had used any previous satellite. The satellite’s telescope, aimed by ground controllers, would examine the ultraviolet spectrum between 1 150 and 3 200A, a region inaccessible to study from the ground. Studies would range from planets in earth’s solar system to some of the most distant objects in the universe, including quasars, pulsars, and black holes in space. Astronomers would study a wide range of stars to learn how they were born, live, and die; the material between these stars from which they are formed and are still forming; strange objects emitting radio waves or x-rays, or both; the sedate nearby galaxies and the violent distant quasars; and earth’s planetary neighbors and their satellites. IUE would complement and extend current NASA observations from the two orbiting astronomical observatories, OAO 2 and Copernicus, and ESA’s TD 1 satellite. IUE’s follow-on would be the 10-ton Space Telescope (ST) to be launched by the Shuttle in 1983. The IUE spacecraft was an octagonal cylinder approximately 1.5m tall and 1.3m between opposing faces. Overall length of 4.2m included a telescope tube at the forward end and an apogee motor extending from the rear. Solar arrays on opposite sides of the spacecraft when unfolded in space would measure 4.3m (14ft) wide. Spacecraft weight was 14791b, of which 2721b was scientific instrumentation. After stabilization, the spacecraft would continuously point one of its two solar arrays at the sun. Goddard Space Flight Center would have a constant view of IUE; ESA’s Villafranca station near Madrid, Spain, a view at least lOhr per day. GSFC had designed, integrated, and tested IUE and provided U.S. ground-support facilities; ESA had built the solar array and the Madrid ground facilities. SRC, in collaboration with Univ. College, London, had provided four television camera detectors to transform spectral displays into video signals for transmission to the ground. The joint agreement had allocated 16hr of viewing time a day to NASA, 8hr to be shared jointly by ESA and the United Kingdom. The U.S. had spent $57 million on the spacecraft, Delta rocket, and other items; ESA had spent $21 million; SRC and Univ. College had spent $9 million. (NASA Release 78-8; MOR S-868-78-01 [prelaunch] Jan 19/78, [postlaunch] Feb 2/78; NYT, Jan 27/78, A-8; ESA Release Jan 20/78; Goddard News, Jan-Feb 78, 1)
MSFC announced NASA had extended the mission lifetime of the first earth-orbiting high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1, originally scheduled to end Feb. 12, to at least mid-November when the second of the series was due for launch. The high quality of scientific data received from Heao 1 had prompted the decision to extend the mission. Launched Aug. 12, 1977, Heao 1 had been the first of three planned large unmanned orbital observatories managed by MSFC; the third would be launched in 1979. Heao 1 had been a scanning mission for fully mapping the celestial sphere; the second Heao mission would point very precisely at x-ray sources identified by Heao 1, which had already significantly advanced knowledge of celestial x-ray and gamma-ray sources. By extrapolating these results, the scientists expected to increase the number of x-ray objects identified by the first 6 mo of data from 200 to 1000 or more, with further increases during the extended operation. Heao 1, although basically a scanning instrument, had been versatile enough to stop its rotation and point briefly at items of particular interest; resolution and sensitivity would increase tremendously in the pointing mode. Heao 1 was performing about 5 daytime pointings lasting about 3hr during a week; extended mission lifetime would enable the mission-control crew to add night pointings. Dr. Fred Speer, mission director, explained: “Astronomers would like to have their optical viewings and optical photography of stellar objects—which of course can only be done at night with optical telescopes—coincide with our pointings with the X-ray sensors aboard Heao 7, so that data can be correlated.” (.Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
NASA reported completion of a 3yr Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) using space-age technology to monitor global wheat production. A symposium at Johnson Space Center attended by more than 700 conferees from 22 nations representing federal agencies, private companies, universities, and foreign governments, presented results of the experiment. The experiment had begun in 1974 to determine if data from a Landsat orbiting some 805km (500mi) above earth could be used with surface observations and weather information derived from U.S. operational environmental satellites to predict the size of the world’s wheat crop. Major foreign study areas were Canada and the Soviet Union, with preliminary examination of wheat-growing areas of Australia, People’s Republic of China, Brazil, India, and Argentina. The U.S. Great Plains area served for extensive test and evaluation of techniques, since it was the best source of statistical data with known reliability. LACIE had been designed to improve global wheat-production forecasts by making foreign-production predictions as early as possible in the crop season. The goal of the project was to develop estimates accurate within 10% of the true production at harvest time in 9yr out of 10; tests over the winter-wheat area of the Great Plains showed the goal could be met. Using LACIE techniques to monitor Soviet wheat crops harvested in 1977, the system estimated a production of 91.4 million metric tons, less than 1% below the Soviets’ official announcement of 92 million tons. However, the system’s ability to achieve such accuracy from yr to yr had yet to be determined. Findings were presented at the four-day symposium by the LACIE participants: NASA, USDA, NOAA, and cooperating universities and industry. A peer-evaluation team composed of prominent scientists, chaired by Dr. Don Paarlberg, former director of economics for USDA, reviewed the LACIE techniques and reported on them to the symposium. Dr. Paarlberg stated that “LACIE results to date clearly demonstrate that present remote-sensing capabilities can be combined with or substituted for conventional methods of information collection in order to improve foreign crop production estimates.” He concluded that "... for global wheat regions such as the USSR the LACIE technology can be made operational ... for regions where technology requires improvement, funding for further research and development should be continued.” (NASA Release 78-179)
NASA announced it had appointed two U.S. scientists to an international group of five seeking to become payload specialists on the first Spacelab mission scheduled for late 1980. One American and one European would be selected to fly on the laboratory to operate the science instruments. The investigators, working group (IWG), composed of scientists representing all investigators, had selected Dr. Michael Lampton of Berkeley, Calif., space physicist at the Univ. of Calif., and Byron Lichtenberg of Natrick, Mass., vestibular researcher at the Mass. Inst, of Technology. The three payload specialists not chosen to fly would be backup specialists and would particpate in ground-based mission activities at Johnson Space Center. In a similar screening program, ESA had selected its payload specialists from among thousands of applicants from its member states. The Spacelab 1 mission would investigate stratosphere and upper atmosphere physics, materials processing, space plasma physics, life sciences, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and space technology. Marshall Space Flight Center had been responsible for payload-specialists training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission; ESA’s Spacelab Payload Integration and Coordination in Europe (SPICE) had managed training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-76; JSC Roundup, June 1/78, 4; DRFC X-Press, June 1/78, 3)
The House of Representatives, in a Committee of the Whole House, by a vote of 345 to 54 passed H.R. 11404, authorizing appropriations to NASA for research and development, construction of facilities, research and program management, and other purposes. Alterations in the bill resulted in a net increase of $43.7 million to the budget NASA had submitted. Included were a $4-million increase to maintain the option for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter; a $5-million decrease for expendable launch vehicles, slated to be phased out; a $3-million increase for space structures, power conversion, and microwave technology; a $3-million increase in energy-technology applications for solar-satellite power; a $ 10-million increase for applications research and technology development; a $ 1.5-million increase for industrial applications; a $4-million increase for technology applications (bioengineering); a $4-million increase for Spacelab systems implementation; and a $4-million increase for a Stereosat development program. In debate recorded in the Congressional Record, Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) of the House Committee on Science and Technology noted that NASA had scheduled 25 launches in 1978, 11 on Delta (launch vehicles) and 8 on Atlas Centaurs, with NASA personnel supporting 3 Atlas-F launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base: “Most of the launches in 1977	emphasized the use of space for the direct benefit of people on earth—such as communications, geodetic, environmental, navigation, meteorological, and earth resources. In 1978 plans call for missions virtually equally divided between emphasis on these applications and launches of spacecraft for primarily scientific and exploratory research. “Fifteen launches will be for paying customers other than NASA. They include the European Space Agency, ComSatCorp., the U.S. Navy, Japan, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the United Kingdom, and Canada. “The launch schedule for 1978 could not have been conceived of in 1958 when our space program began. In 1998 people will look back to 1978	and likely say the same thing. That will only occur if we support a strong continuing space program.” (CR, Apr 25/78, 3164-3166)
Dryden Flight Research Center reported that the KC-135, testbed aircraft to be modified with winglets in early 1979, had made its first flight at DFRC as a fully instrumental research aircraft. The data package would be ferried by air to Tinker AFB where it would undergo fatigue inspection. The transport-sized aircraft would return to DFRC in mid-Nov. for reinstallation of the data package. Baseline-data flights with the conventional wing would begin in 1979, followed by installation of the winglets for full-data flights. (DFRC X-Press, Sept 22/78, 2)
Sixty-five percent of the food carried on Shuttle missions would be cooked, packaged, and tested in a new JSC food lab, JSC reported. Or-biter menus would be standardized on a 6-day cycle. About 15% of Shuttle food—mainly flexpacks and thermostabilized food items—would be supplied by the U.S. Army’s Natick Research and Development Command in Mass. Another 20% would be off-the-shelf items, from chewing gum and snap-top puddings to peanut butter. The orbiter’s lower deck would contain a galley with an oven, serving trays, water dispensers, and other serving equipment. When the galley was installed and operational (about mission SS-7), an hr before meal time the crewperson cooking would spend about 5 min rehydrating dehydrated food items, loading meal trays, and placing them in the galley oven. After meals, trays and silverware would be cleaned and sterilized for reuse. JSC nutritionist Rita Rapp, who has seen space-food technology evolve from bland squeeze-tube pastes carried on Mercury spacecraft to the electrically-heated food trays in the Skylab wardroom, said, “We try to present foods in a normal way, more like people are accustomed to eating on earth. Operational experience permitted us to add new food items—wider selection and better packaging—as we learned weightlessness did not cause the problems everyone anticipated.” (JSC Roundup, Oct 13/78, 4)
The latest in a family of small-diameter 8-bladed propellers had completed wind tunnel testing at Lewis Research Center, the Lewis News reported. Third in a series tested and designed for new high-speed fuel-conservative aircraft, these propellers had unique extreme curve to the blades designed to improve performance and minimize cabin noise during flight. At simulated cruise conditions of 855km/hr (530mph) and 9145m altitude (30 000ft), the propellers proved less noisy and more efficient than previous models tested. NASA estimated that, at those cruise conditions, an advanced turboprop engine using the propellers could save 20 to 40% in fuel over current turbofan engines and 10 to 20% in fuel over advanced turbofan engines. LeRC work on the propellers was part of a NASA-wide effort toward 50% fuel savings in future U.S. aircraft, with testing expected to be completed in later 1980. Hamilton Standard Division of United Technologies Corp. had been contractor for design and fabrication of the advanced propellers. (Lewis News, Sept 1/78, 1)
FBIS reported that Oleg Gazenko, director of the USSR’s Manned Spaceflight Institute of Medico-Biological Problems, said in an interview that cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were physiologically “as healthy as they were before the [Soyuz 29] spaceflight” [see Nov. 2]. The record 140-day flight had caused some functional changes: . . . “the cosmonauts lost a part of the muscle mass, which they have now restored. They returned to earth with erythrocytes that were born in space. The average life span of erythocytes is 120 days, and they are fully renewed during this period.” Gazenko said that the cosmic erythrocytes tended to be smaller, though they fully retained the main function of carrying oxygen to the tissues. “As time passes, the erythrocytes that were born in weightlessness will perish. But what will those that will replace them be like? Identical to those that were born before the space flight? Apparently yes, because our organism is a wonderful instrument of self-regulation; it excellently arranges all the processes taking place in it in such a way that they would meet the demands made by those conditions in which man is staying.” Gazenko had directed research that substantiated the possibility of manned spaceflight, and had received the 1978 USSR state prize for studies of ways to counteract unfavorable effects of weightlessness on the human organism, making lengthy manned spaceflights possible. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 12/78)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had installed a new RCA domestic satellite (domsat) earth station with 10m antenna, now fully operational as part of the NASA Communications Network (NASCOM). RCA had received a contract to provide three 56-kilobit-per-sec (kbps) wideband data channels between JPL and GSFC, primarily to serve the Voyager project. The three channels, used with new NASCOM-installed “tri-channel” end terminals, would provide a 168kbps end-to-end data transfer capability. The antenna was the completion of a high-data-rate link to JPL from the Deep Space Network’s 64m tracking station at Madrid; Voyager high-rate telemetry received at Madrid would be beamed up to the Intelsat satellite, down to an East Coast receiving station, then to GSFC for transmission to JPL over the new domsat link. Although the 56kbps rate had formerly sufficed for telemetry received from overseas stations, the Voyager encounters with Jupiter scheduled to begin in the spring would need a higher (115.2 kbps) rate. (JPL Universe, Sept 15/78, 1)
Wallops Flight Center announced it had launched a two-stage solid-propellant sounding rocket, the Taurus-Tomahawk, at 2:47p.m. Oct. 31. Both the Taurus and Tomahawk rocket motors were currently in use, but this was the first test flight of the combined configuration, which would be used for future NASA sounding-rocket launches. Peak altitude was 554km (344 statute mi), and the successful test flight qualified the vehicle to launch scientific payloads. First operational launches would be in March 1979 from Poker Flat Research Range in Fairbanks, Alaska, to carry a 27.4kg (601b) payload to an altitude of 575km to conduct scientific experiments in the near-earth environment. (WFC Release 78-21)
Science Indicators 1976, ninth annual report of the National Science Board recently transmitted to Congress by the President, noted an increase in U.S. research and development expenditures during 1976 to an estimated $38.1 billion in current dollars; however, constant-dollar spending of $28.5 was only 2.5% above the 1974 level. Measured in current dollars, federally supported R&D expenditures in 1976 had climbed to an estimated new high of $20.1 billion; however, constant-dollar levels stood at $15 billion, 18% below the peak reached in 1967. National spending for basic research in current dollars had climbed substantially since 1960, to a new high in 1976. However, estimated constant-dollar expenditures in 1976 had advanced only about 2% above the 1975 level, remaining nearly 11 % below the peak year of 1968. The federal government was the source of most support for basic research in 1976, as it had been in past years. The federal share amounted to 68% of the total since 1971, compared with approximately 60% in 1960, whereas industry’s share had remained stable at approximately 15% throughout the 1970s, in sharp contrast to its 28% share in 1960. (NSF report, Feb 78)
AvWk reported that the Senate Commerce subcommittee on science and space had become the second congressional group to add another $4 million for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter to NASA’s FY79 budget, challenging President Carter’s decision to defer purchase. This equalled the amount provided earlier by the House Science and Technology Committee. Overall, the Senate subcommittee had increased NASA’s $4.371-billion budget request by $13 million, but failed to agree with some earlier House changes that had given NASA a $15.5-million increase. Among Senate subcommittee changes were $3 million for advanced manned-space flight programs, $4 million less than the House; language added to stress the importance of continuing lunar exploration; $2 million of $4 million deleted by OMB, restored for Spacelab experiments; and $3 million added for large space-structures work, making a total of $111.3 million for this item. (AvWk Apr 24/78, 27)
LaRC announced selection of Telos Computing, Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., for negotiations leading to award of a contract to develop software for the Natl. Transonic Facility (NTF) wind tunnel at LaRC that would allow networking of four medium-sized computers to be the nucleus of NTF’s instrumentation complex. The contract would cover collection and display of all research measurements, as well as automatic control of many wind-tunnel test parameters. Telos estimated the value of the cost-plus-fixed-fee contract at $1.2 million. Work would be performed at LaRC over a 3-yr period. (LaRC Release 78-86)
Dryden Flight Research Center reported it had aborted the first design-limit test of the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRB), when the 48 0001b dummy booster scheduled for airdrop from a B-52 flying over the National Parachute Test Range would not separate from its aircraft. After several unsuccessful attempts, pilots returned the B-52 to DFRC without incident and rescheduled the flight for the week of May 5. (DFRC X-Press, May 5/78, 2)
The Marshall Star announced that the most extensive study ever made of Venus had begun with the arrival at the planet of Pioneer Venus 1, the orbiter half of the two-spacecraft Pioneer Venus mission. It went into orbit Dec. 4 and was scheduled to take pictures and make measurements for one Venusian yr (225 earth days) or more. On Dec. 9, the four probes and transporter bus of Pioneer Venus 2 would plunge into the Venusian clouds at widely separated points to measure the dense atmosphere in detail from top to bottom. A spokesman at Ames Research Center, manager of the project for NASA’s Office of Space Science, reported Dec. 4 that Pioneer Venus 2 was on course and on schedule. (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 2)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said he would try his best to do away with $5.7 million in “federal pork” for lunar-rock analysis and “to force scientists to compete for lunar sample support with other basic research proposals in the geological sciences,” Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Proxmire said that NASA had spent a total of $41.2 million on lunar-sample analysis and had requested another $5.7 million for FY79. Although the House had approved the request, the Senate had adopted Proxmire’s recommendation to delete the funds, leaving the issue to be resolved in conference during Sept. Proxmire had maintained that lunar-sample research should not enjoy privileged status over other basic research in geology, geochemistry, and geophysics, but should “compete with all other research in these areas, preferably at the National Science Foundation—our principal basic research agency. If the lunar samples have the value claimed for them when the curatorial facility was built, this should be no problem.” Proxmire said the Senate Appropriations Committee had directed NSF to seek proposals for lunar analysis next year as NASA phased out its research program. His correspondence had charged that the primary purpose of lunar analysis appeared to be training graduate students and keeping university laboratories well equipped. “I do not in any way mean to show disrespect for these motives or the participants in the lunar sample program,” Proxmire noted. “However, we have programs for training graduate students. We have programs for providing research equipment to universities. NASA’s moonrock program should not be used for these purposes.” (D/SBD, Sept 6/78, 4)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
NASA announced 3 key personnel changes during April: Dr. William Schneider would become associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, responsible for planning, development, and operation of global tracking networks, facilities, and systems for communications and data acquisition and processing for all NASA spaceflight programs. Dr. Schneider had joined NASA and the Gemini program in June 1963, after 2yr as director of space systems at ITT’s Federal Laboratories. He had been mission director for 7 of the 10 manned Gemini missions, and had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his service as deputy director of the Gemini program. He had also been mission director and program deputy director for the Apollo mission, and had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his contribution to the success of the Apollo 8 mission. At the end of Apr., Clarence Syvertson had become director of ARC, where he had served as acting director and deputy director. Syvertson had begun with the NACA at ARC in 1948 as a research scientist and assistant branch chief, then chief of the Hypersonic Wind Tunnel Branch, and later was director of the Mission Analysis Division. In 1966 he had become ARC’S director of astronautics, a position he held until appointed deputy director. Syvertson had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for leadership of the joint DOT-NASA Civil Aviation R & D Policy Study, and in 1976 had been named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. R. D. “Duff’ Ginter, assistant associate administrator for energy programs in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, had announced he would retire in June after 28 years of government service with NASA and the U.S. Navy. Ginter’s contributions to space solar power, photovoltaic developments, wind energy systems, and automotive propulsion had placed him in the forefront of advanced technology applications. Ginter had begun his career with NASA in 1960 as chief of the Scout vehicle program. He later held several positions including director of the Centaur program, for which he received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal; director of the Technology Applications Division; director of the Energy Systems Division; and assistant administrator for energy programs. (NASA anno April 3, 10, 26/78; NASA Release 78-57, 78-65, 78-52; ARC Release 78-16)
Representatives of LeRC, ARC, LaRC, other government agencies, and industry had met at Dry den Flight Research Center for what was probably the final symposium on NASA’s YF-12 aircraft program begun in the late 1960s, the Lewis News reported. The airplanes would be mothballed by March 1979. DFRC’s Dr. James Albers, symposium chairman, said the symposium was to “disseminate recent research findings and stimulate exchange of information among participants engaged in design or research related to high supersonic flight.” The YF-12 had given NASA an opportunity for research on sustained supersonic flight. Several NASA centers had investigated propulsion-system performance and the dynamics of mixed compression inlets; aero-elastic effects and thermal problems of high Mach number flight; and techniques of measuring aerodynamic data and operational parameters in extreme temperatures. Researchers had conducted a parallel series of laboratory experiments to augment the findings of the flight program. The symposium ended with an industry-government panel on “Future Perspectives in Supersonic Flight.” {Lewis News, Dec 8/78, 7)
Fifteen scientists who would manage earth-orbital investigations for the third Spacelab in mid-1981 had met at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss preparations for the mission, the Marshall Star reported. Known as the investigators’ working group for Spacelab mission 3 (IWG-3), the group would work with NASA mission management to develop a payload offering the greatest possible scientific return and to select payload specialists who would perform experiments aboard Spacelab 3. Those at the meeting agreed on professional qualifications for payload specialists and on criteria for their selection, beginning in the second half of 1978. Sponsored by the NASA Hq Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications, Spacelab mission 3 would include materials processing in space, the atmospheric cloud-physics laboratory, the drop-dynamics module, and vestibular-function research. Experiments would obtain basic knowledge about crystal-growing processes in earth orbit, mechanisms for generating small latex spheres, dynamic behavior of free-floating drops of liquid, cloud formation in the atmosphere, red blood cell aggregation, and adaptation of life forms to space. MSFC would manage integration and operation of the scientific payloads flown on the first 3 Spacelab missions. CMarshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1)
Langley Research Center announced it had selected Frank Godfrey, contract specialist, to participate in the Education for Public Management program of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard Univ. As part of a.federal government effort to develop promising mid-careerists’ talents and abilities for management in the public sector, the program would train individuals identified by their agencies as having potential to assume increased responsibility for agency programs and policies. Godfrey, who had been at LaRC since 1974, had served as a loaned executive to the 1977 Peninsula United Fund Campaign and was on the adjunct faculty of St. Leo College. (LaRC Release 78-35)
Researcher William Bainbridge, who had polled registered voters in the Seattle area about attitudes on the space program, reported widespread enthusiasm for the knowledge and practical benefits derived from the space program, Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine said. Bainbridge had offered his poll sample a set of 49 statements as “not good,” “moderately good,” or “extremely good” reasons for continuing the space program: communications satellite benefits had received most positive responses; scientific knowledge attained through space exploration ranked second. The unconventional idea that ranked highest—communication with extraterrestrial intelligence—was approved by 53% of those polled. Bainbridge felt his results showed public appreciation of the practical and scientific results of the space program, and an anticipation of more benefits from new projects. (A&A, June 78, 60)
NASA announced it would award Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) its Distinguished Public Service Medal Oct. 3 during a 20th anniversary observance. Chairman Teague, who headed the House Committee on Science and Technology, had announced he would retire from Congress after 2 decades of service. NASA had declared his unswerving support of the agency and the U.S. space program an inspiration to all NASA employees. (NASA anno Sept 28/78)
ESA announced it had awarded to the European consortium Cosmos headed by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm, W. Germany, a contract for phases C and D of the scientific satellite Exosat to include fabrication, integration, and testing of the observatory intended to measure position, structural aspects, and spectral and temporal characteristics of x-ray sources. It would carry four experiments: two imaging telescopes for low-energy x-rays, a large-area proportional-counter array, and a gas-scintillation spectrometer for medium-energy x-rays. The observatory, mounted on a 3-axis-stabilized platform, would travel in a highly eccentric orbit whose apogee (roughly above the North Pole) would be at 200 000km altitude. ESA planned to launch Exosat in the second quarter of 1981 on an Ariane equipped with a fourth stage to put the spacecraft into the required orbit. (ESA Release Sept 11/78)
ESA reported it had scheduled 3mo of propellant-mockup tests of the European launcher Ariane to begin at the French Guiana Space Center launch site [see June 16]. Tests would check general conditions for launcher-assembly compatibility of ground facilities (platform, tower, etc.) with the vehicle, and for technical functioning of the fueling and draining facilities and systems both on the ground and on the vehicle. Thejatter three of four qualification flights scheduled from June 1979 to Oct. 1980 would launch Amsat (telecommunications for international radio amateurs), Firewheel (science/Germany), Meteosat-2 (meteorology/ESA), APPLE (communications/India), and Marots-A (maritime communications/ESA). (ESA newsletter Aug/78, 3)
FBIS reported the answer of Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov, USSR pilot-cosmonaut, when queried on the future of orbital stations. Feoktistov said they would develop as multipurpose scientific laboratories for extra-atmospheric astronomical observations, and for technological experiments to produce materials unobtainable under earth conditions. Orbital stations could seek out the most effective systems to develop methods for research and development and the design of scientific instruments and equipment. He went on to say: “Very broad prospects are opened up for manned stations if they are examined above all as the basis for industrial construction in space. Not everyone shares this view, but I personally believe that within the next few decades the development of technology will make it possible to actually set the task of creating power plants in space.” Feoktistov noted that such technology would mean putting millions of tons of diverse equipment into space to assemble enormous and complex structures. Such work could never be fully automated, he pointed out, and would require many people to control the equipment and carry out installation work. This would not happen quickly, he concluded, but it should not be relegated to the realm of fantasy. “After all, 17yr ago Yuri Gagarin’s flight also seemed a fantastic achievement.” (FBIS, Moscow Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya in Russian, Apr 12/78)
Most important uses of Landsat data would correspond to three of the world’s major problems: energy supplies, food production, and global large-scale environment monitoring. Innovations in the multispectral scanner system (MSS) would permit detection of day and night temperature differences in vegetation, bodies of water, and urban areas. The return beam vidicon (RBV) sensor improvements would increase recorded image resolution by 50%. Areas as small as half an acre would be identified and studied. Landsat-C also carried a data-collection system (DCS) that would collect data radioed directly from as many as 1000 remote ground platforms and relay them to a Landsat data-acquisition station. The DCS would collect data on volcano activity, stream flow, water and snow depth, water temperature, and sediment density. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for project management of the Landsat spacecraft, Delta launch vehicle, NASA image-processing facility, and worldwide tracking network. KSC would supervise launch. General Electric Co.’s Space Division was Landsat spacecraft prime contractor. (NASA Release 78-22)
GSFC reported that several Goddard-controlled satellites had observed the largest solar flare in recorded history July 11. The observations had furnished a new data base for scientists investigating the causes of solar flares and how they affected the earth. Explosions of solar flares on the sun’s surface had generated huge shock waves in the solar wind (ionized particles flowing at supersonic speeds over the earth and other planets) and had blasted into it new free-flying highly energetic particles that disorganized interplanetary magnetic fields. The flare had disrupted earth’s ionosphere and had blacked out shortwave radio communications for 2hr throughout the entire sunlit hemisphere. Two interplanetary monitoring platforms (IMPs) orbiting the earth had recorded the interplanetary magnetic field disturbances and the intensification of particle flow from the sun. Helios I, a sun-orbiting satellite observing the sun from the opposite side of the earth July 11, had recorded changes in and composition of the radio noise, plasma, magnetic fields, and energetic particles streaming from the sun. The flare had saturated the high-sensitivity detectors on orbiting solar observatory OSO 8, which had previously obtained data on smaller flares associated with the large-flare region. Atmosphere Explorer C had noted atmospheric heating from solar-wind particles deposited on the earth at high latitudes. The international sun-earth explorers A and B (Isee 1 and 2) had obtained data on the accompanying magnetic fields and energetic particles, and Applications Technology Satellite 6 had recorded data on high- and medium-energy plasma particles. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78,
AvWk reported that the high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1 was each day discovering about three new x-ray sources in deep space. NASA expected that by the end of the mission in early 1979 the spacecraft would have found more than 1000 new sources. Heao 1 data had also revealed a new black-hole candidate in the constellation Ara, bringing to four the number of such candidates identified. (AvWk, Oct 9/78, 13)
NASA announced that the two Pioneer spacecraft en route to Venus—the orbiter and the multiprobe—had passed major operations tests. Tests of orientation, timing, and separation systems aboard Pioneer Venus 2 for split-second release of three probes 9600km (6000mi) apart over Venus’s earth-facing hemisphere, and of systems on Pioneer Venus 1 (orbiter) controlling retrofire and injection into orbit (to take place behind the planet and out of reach of earth communications), had been satisfactory. Separate operations teams at Ames Research Center had sent 6400 commands to the orbiter since its May 20 launch and 3600 commands to the multiprobe craft since its Aug. 8 launch. Virtually all experiments and systems (including thermal, orientation, command, communications, and data-return and power systems) on each of the multiprobe’s five entry craft had been operated and were working well. The orbiter’s instruments had been checked and calibrated, including systems for insertion into Venus orbit Dec. 4. Twenty days and 13 million km (8 million mi) from Venus, the multiprobe would split into a transporter bus and four probes, the bus serving as fifth probe. The multiprobe had covered 140 million km (87 million mi), the orbiter 325 million km (202 million mi). Both spacecraft still had about 180 million km (112 million mi) to travel to Venus. (NASA Release 78-153; ARC Release 78-48; ARC Astrogram, Oct 19/78, 1)
NASA announced it had turned over Goes 3, third in a series of geostationary operational environmental satellites, to NOAA for operation on July 5, 1978, at 1600Z. Since its launch on June 16, NASA engineers, wishing to ensure proper operation, had completed an orbital checkout in 14da, rather than the 30da required for previous GOES missions. Goddard Space Flight Center’s newly installed GOES test laboratory had accelerated the schedule by allowing full-time communications with Goes 3; NOAA’s Wallops Island facilities had been available to previous missions only part-time. Engineers had checked out Goes 3 during its westward drift at 2 deg/day toward its operational station at 135°W, and had corrected the orbit inclination from 1.7° to the specified 1°. First pictures from the satellite’s visible and infrared spin scan radiometer (VISSR), received June 29, were of excellent quality. More than 521b of the initial 801b load of hydrazine was available, enough for more than 5yr of normal operations. A minor problem with the spacecraft data-handling equipment that relayed signals from earth-based data-collection platforms had resulted from interference by VHF equipment that could be turned off during most of the mission. The GOES laboratory would monitor operating data to detect any variables in performance with time and temperatures. NASA had advised NOAA that, based on preliminary analyses, the spacecraft was operating under no constraints. According to NOAA’s plan for final positioning, Goes 3 would replace Goes 1 at 135°W longitude; Ctatsjl, relocated over the Indian Ocean, would support the first GARP global experiment. (NASA MOR E-612-78-01 [postlaunch] Aug 2/78)
The Congressional Record reported that President Carter had nominated former astronaut Maj. Gen. Thomas Stafford to be Air Force deputy chief of staff for research and development. Stafford, who had spent more than 500hr in space, was serving as commander of Edwards AFB Flight Test Center. The nomination, which carried a promotion to the rank of Lt. Gen., was subject to Senate confirmation. {CR, Feb 28/78, S 2580; NYT, Feb 26/78, (27), 14) During February: Gossamer Condor, the manpowered aircraft that won the $85 000 Kramer prize in 1977, was on display at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., the National Aeronautic Association reported. The 96-ft wingspan had been cut into 4 pieces for shipping across country with the fuselage and stabilizer. Gossamer Condor had the largest wingspan and was the lightest of any plane in the museum, the wing-covering accounting for only 4.51b of the craft’s total 701b. An intricate web of piano wire held the structure together. Flight speed, reaching lOmph, had required the manpower equivalent of one-1 third of a horsepower. Designer Paul MacCready had substantiated his belief in the potential of ultralight craft. (NAA newsletter, Feb 78, 4)
Av Wk reported that Europe’s aerospace industry would probably get a sizable slice of procurements for the emerging global maritime satellite-communications system (variously designated as the second-generation system, the Marisat 2 system, or the pre-Inmarsat system). Great Britain’s ambassador Peter Jay and France’s ambassador Francois de Laboulaye had made strong representations on Europe’s behalf to U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The fact that all prime contracts (and most of the dollar volume of procurement) for the first global satellite communications system, owned and operated by INTELSAT, had gone to U.S. firms had been a sore point in U.S.-Europe relations for more than a decade. ESA’s Marecs satellite scheduled for launch on an Ariane booster would figure in both plans for the new global system that had received most-favored consideration, as U.S. government agencies (led by the State Dept.) and ComSatCorp struggled to formulate a U.S. position. One plan favored by the U.S. for the interim system was to combine maritime communications packages on three Ford Aerospace-built Intelsat 5 satellites with two or three Marecs satellites. The other favored plan was to combine commercial communications packages on the Leasat system being established by Hughes Communications Services, Inc. for the U.S. Navy with two or three Marecs satellites. (AvWk, Nov 27/78, 13)
Two experiments for HEAO-C had been delivered to the prime contractor, TRW, Redondo Beach, Calif., and the third was expected the following wk, MSFC reported. Scheduled for launch in late 1979, HEAO-C would survey gamma-ray emissions and study cosmic-ray particles from space. Like the first high-energy astronomy observatory launched in 1977, HEAO-C would be a scanning mission to perform sky surveys. The HEAO-B scheduled for launch in November 1978 would be a pointing mission, focusing on selected X-ray sources. The two delivered experiments were a high spectral-resolution gammaray spectrometer (experiment C-l) and a heavy-nuclei experiment (C-3). Arriving Oct. 23 would be C-2, the European-produced experiment on isotopic composition of primary cosmic rays. Mechanical integration of the experiments would begin as soon as KSC returned mechanical ground-support equipment it was using to prepare for HEAO-B’s launch. Meanwhile, TRW would check out individual experiments to assure the devices had arrived in good working condition. Following mechanical integration, TRW would make individual data runs through late Nov. Electrical integration would begin after KSC returned the computer equipment now supporting the HEAO-B launch. (Marshall Star, Oct 18/78, 1)
NASA announced that it and the U.S. Army Aviation Research and Development Command at WFC had accepted the first rotor systems research aircraft (RSRA) to provide the U.S. with a sophisticated and much needed research facility for continued development of rotary wing technology. NASA and the Army would obtain data from the RSRA helicopters to verify and to investigate technology of existing and advanced rotor systems. RSRA would make unnecessary costly and extensive modification of helicopter aircraft for flight investigations of each new rotor design, and could produce precise measurements of a variety of rotors under repeatable test conditions. RSRA featured the first helicopter-crew emergency-escape system (an active isolator/balance system) and could be configured as a helicopter, compound aircraft (helicopter with fixed wings), or fixed-wing aircraft. The active isolator/balance system’s main rotor vibratory forces and moments could provide wide band attenuation of vibrations to the fuselage, permitting installation of different rotors without retuning the fuselage. The emergency-escape system allowed upward extraction of the crew, using tractor rocket motors to sever the main rotor blades and separate and fragment the canopies. The system, consisting solely of mechanical and pyrotechnic components, was insensitive to electromagnetically induced radiation and lightning. Acceptance marked completion of the design, fabrication, and flight test of the second RSRA delivered in helicopter configuration. The first RSRA had been scheduled for acceptance after completion of flight tests in the compound configuration. Sikorsky Aircraft Div. of United Technologies Corp. had built the RSRAs for NASA and the Army. (NASA Release 78-148)
Despite tight new restraints on federal spending, President Carter had instructed his aides to give special protection to R&D programs — currently scheduled to get $28 billion—in the FY80 federal budget, the Washington Post reported. This came a day after the President had announced an anti-inflation program that included spending cuts plus reduction of the FY80 budget deficit to $30 billion or less, a goal at least $3 billion tighter than his previously announced target. In a handwritten note Carter instructed his aides: “I want to maintain our strong support for R&D as (percentage) of budget.” This meant high priority for spending consideration in a field usually considered a prime target for any budget-cutting program. One White House aide indicated Carter’s instructions meant that R&D would be virtually exempt from new federal spending constraints; another said that R&D might still face some restraints if inflation did not ease. The President had previously expressed special concern that basic research (which accounted for $3.5 billion of the total R&D budget and had been dwindling until the Ford Administration reversed the trend) be protected from any budget-cutting considerations. Frank Press, Carter’s science adviser, said Carter’s decision constituted the nation’s “first presidential expression of an overall science and technology policy.” (W Post, Nov 1/78, A-6)
MSFC announced plans to begin thermal-vacuum testing of NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory, HEAO-B, as part of a series of environmental tests on the satellite before scheduled launch in Nov. TRW Systems, Inc., HEAO prime contractor, would conduct the 2wk-long test to simulate thermal-vacuum conditions in space. HEAO-B had already undergone a number of environmental tests, including acoustic and mechanical vibration tests. {Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had fabricated and displayed a prototype roving ball planetary explorer, an instrument-laden reinforced-fabric ball capable of inflating and deflating automatically or on remote command from earth during possible Mars exploration. Driven by high winds known to prevail on the planet’s surface, or powered and steered by an inner drive system much like that of a bicycle, such balls or balloons could roam freely and conduct scientific experiments and measurements over a vast area. A ball could partially deflate if necessary for additional study of a particular area. This “bouncing ball” would offer the advantages of low cost, long life, and extended traverse of the planet’s landscape. As a Mars explorer, a ball would constitute a payload of 20 to 30kg (about 44 to 661b) capable of a traverse of 100 to 200km (60 to 120mi). The “skin” of the ball, “sandwiched” or laminated Mylar and Kevlar (both registered DuPont products), would be strong enough to cover some of Mars’s most difficult terrain. Schjeldahl Corp. designed and built the ball for the Aerospace Corp. for the ATMOSAT project. Jacques Blamont of France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) had proposed the concept. (JPL Universe, Mar 3/78, 1)
NASA announced it had selected 15 Space Shuttle pilot-astronaut candidates and 20 mission-specialist candidates as its eighth group of astronauts, including 6 women, 3 blacks, and an American of Japanese descent. The first women and minority astronauts could be in orbit within 3yrs. Selection criteria for the more than 8000 applicants had been motivation, educational background, and work experience. All but one of the 15 pilot candidates and 7 of the 20 mission-specialist candidates had come from the U.S. military services. Of the 35 selectees, 10 were from the Air Force, 9 from the Navy, and 1 each from the Marine Corps and the Army. The mission specialists selected had come from medical, biological, earth sciences, physical and chemical sciences, and engineering disciplines. The number of selections had been keyed to the expected need for Shuttle crews to supplement the 17 pilot and 10 scientist astronauts now on flight status in Houston. The new astronauts would begin 2 years of training July 1 at Johnson Space Center in Houston. ' Selected to train as mission specialists were Anna Fisher, Shannon Lucid, Judith Resnick, Sally Ride, Margaret Seddon, Kathryn Sullivan, USAF Maj. Guion Bluford, USMC Capt. James Buchli, USAF Maj. John Fabian, Navy Lt. Dale Gardner, Terry Hart, Steven Hawley, Jeffrey Hoffman, Ronald McNair, USAF Capt. Richard Mullane, George Nelson, USAF Capt. Ellison Onizuka, Army Maj. Robert Stewart, Norman Thagard, James Van Hoften; as pilot astronauts, Navy Lt. Cdr. Daniel Brandenstein, Navy Lt. Cdr. Michael Coats, USAF Maj. Richard Covey, Navy lt. Cdr. John Creighton, Navy Lt. Robert Gibson, USAF Maj. Frederick Gregory, Stanley Griggs, Navy Cdr. Frederick Hauck, Navy Lt. Cdr. Jon McBride, USAF Capt. Steven Nagel, USAF Maj. Francis Scobee, USAF Capt. Brewster Shaw, Jr., USAF Capt. Loren Shriver, Navy Lt. Cdr. David Walker, and Navy Lt. Cdr. Donald Williams. (NASA press conference Jan 16/78; Marshall Star, Jan 17/78, 1; W Star, Jan 17/78, A-5; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 19)
Lewis Research Center reported it had signed a $24 million 1 yr contract with Honeywell, Inc., Avionics Division, St. Petersburg, Fla., for management and engineering support of Centaur inertial guidance. This automatic self-contained navigation and guidance system with a digital computer unit would permit Centaur to compute and adjust its flight for delivery of a spacecraft to a preselected orbit without ground command. The nation’s first high-energy liquid-hydrogen liquid-oxygen rocket, the Centaur, as an upper stage on both Atlas and Titan III boosters, had helped launch Voyager 1 and 2, scheduled to fly by Jupiter and Saturn in 1979 and 1980. (Lewis News, Jan 6/78, 2)
Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded Boeing Services International, Inc., a 1-yr $24 071 643 extension of a ground-systems operational contract, which brought the contract total to $67 143 012. Services by Boeing would include facility and utility operations and maintenance for propellants; cranes, doors, and platforms; elevators; services and shops; nondestructive evaluation; and life support and industrial operations. (KSC Release 63-78)
Dr. Donald Hearth, LaRC director, had accepted an invitation to serve on the board of governors of the Natl. Space Club, the Langley Researcher reported. The club, a nontechnical nonprofit organization, had been founded in 1957 “to stimulate the advancement and application of space flight and related aerospace technologies for the benefit of all mankind.” It had sponsored luncheons with speakers from the aerospace community and had granted scholarships for postgraduate and doctoral studies in the aerospace sciences. The board of governors would offer advice and counsel and annually nominate and elect the recipient of the Goddard trophy, premier award of the aerospace community. (Langley Researcher, Aug 25/78, 3)
Lewis Research Center announced that NASA Hq had joined with the FAA in sponsoring a 3-day aircraft-icing workshop at LeRC. Attended by more than 100 icing specialists, sensor/instrument specialists, meteorologists, and weather forecasters, the workshop had assessed fixed-wing and rotocraft operational icing, evaluated facilities requirements for R&D and certification, examined ways to improve icing forecasts, and identified gaps in knowledge of aeronautical icing. LeRC had been chosen for the conference because its research on icing in the 1940s and 1950s was still important in aircraft certification; it also had the largest icing-study facility currently actively operating in North America. As a result of needs defined at the workshop, LeRC would begin a new program of research on icing. (Lewis News, Aug 4/78, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun work on a foot-thick primary-mirror blank for the Space Telescope, for which the center would have overall management responsibility. The telescope had been scheduled for launch in 1983. Corning would deliver two 8ft,discs to Perkin-Elmer Corp. for grinding and polishing and telescope assembly; Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the primary spacecraft and support system, and integrate the complete telescope. Glass had been used for the mirror blank as it would change shape only slightly with temperature changes during viewing; the titanium-silicate mirror blank would have zero expansion on a scale used by physicists. Aperture of the mirror blank was about 94in; diameter of the center hole was about 2ft. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)
NASA announced that two radio astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had discovered major changes deep in the atmosphere of Uranus. Dr. M. J. Klein of JPL and Dr. J.A. Turegano, a visiting research associate from the Univ. of Zaragoza, Spain, found that radio emissions from Uranus had become 30% stronger over the past lOyr. Klein and Turegano, who had used NASA’s 64m (210ft) radio antenna at Goldstone, Calif., explained that radio waves emanating from dense clouds on Uranus had originated deep in the atmosphere, where pressures might be more than 10 times greater than at earth’s surface. Observations in the spring of 1978 had confirmed the two astronomers’ discovery a yr earlier; the atmosphere of Uranus could be either warming or becoming clearer to the passage of radio waves, although the investigators doubted that temperature so deep in a planet’s atmosphere could warm more than 30% in only lOyr. They thought the change was more probably caused by the planet’s unique orientation: Uranus, unlike any other planet, spun on its side as it orbited the sun, and every 84yr (the length of one Uranus yr) the sun would shine directly on the North Pole. Forty-two yr later, the northern hemisphere would be dark with the South Pole pointed sunward. Ammonia gas in the planet’s atmosphere probably blocked radio emissions from Uranus’s deep interior. The scientists suggested that ammonia might have been preferentially depleted in the planet’s polar regions, either by convection currents or chemical reactions. If so, then the radio telescopes would be registering hotter temperatures deeper in the atmosphere than those recorded lOyr previously when the planet had a different orientation to the sun. Theoretical studies to discover the relationship of the radio measurements to global changes in Uranus’s climate, weather patterns, and atmospheric chemistry would help in drawing general conclusions about planetary atmospheres applicable in turn to specific studies of earth’s atmosphere. (NASA Release 78-130)
NASA announced it had presented Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, with NASA’s distinguished public service medal on Oct. 3 in an outdoor ceremony at NASA Hq. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch lauded Teague’s efforts on behalf of NASA, noting Teague’s “unswerving faith in the value and virtue of a dynamic and imaginative space program—a faith which he has conveyed to all the elements of the government, industry, and university team on which all progress in space depends.” Teague had announced he would retire from Congress after more than 30 yr of service in the House of Representatives. (NASA Release 78-150; NASA anno Oct 3/78)
NASA announced that the Jupiter-bound Voyager 2 was having problems with both its radio receivers that prevented Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineers from sending commands to the spacecraft. Early spacecraft data had indicated failure of one receiver, and the backup receiver might have had trouble receiving commands from earth; the spacecraft had continued sending information to earth. The Voyager had been designed to switch radio receivers if it had not received earth command for 7 days; the receiver that appeared to have failed had been the one on-line, and in 7 days the spacecraft computer should automatically switch to the backup receiver. Engineers would then attempt to reestablish communications by sending commands to the spacecraft. (NASA Release 78-56) The Voyager 2 spacecraft had accepted a command, the W Star reported, ending a week-long radio failure that had threatened its mission to Jupiter and Saturn. To protect the mission, engineers at JPL had begun reprogramming the spacecraft’s onboard computer “so it will still do its science when it passes Jupiter and send back the results whether we can talk to it or not,” said JPL spokesman Frank Bristow. Earlier in Apr., the spacecraft had automatically switched from the primary to secondary receiver because Voyager had not received an uplink from tracking stations for 7 days; the commands had not been sent because controllers had been preoccupied with scan-platform problems on Voyager 1. Controllers were reviewing their activities to pinpoint why they had overlooked an uplink, to ensure the lapse would not recur during the mission. (W Star, Apr 14/78, A-7; AvWk, Apr 17/78, 20)
NASA reported its scientists and engineers were continuing attempts to revive SeaSat, the ocean-monitoring satellite that had suddenly gone mute before an orbital pass over the Santiago, Chile, tracking station [see Oct. 11]. Gene Giberson, SeaSat project manager at JPL, said that engineers there and at GSFC were assembling and analyzing tracking-station data from the spacecraft to determine possible cause of data interruption. NASA engineers would then work backward to reconstruct a “failure model” matching the data received just before and up to the instant the spacecraft ceased transmitting. If such a match could be made, the next step would be to find an alternate method of reestablishing contact with the spacecraft. The steps could take up to 2wk. SeaSat had not had full benefit of its solar panels because they had received full sun during only half the spacecraft’s orbits. In December, when the spacecraft would be in full sun during 100% of its earth orbits, its batteries might be charged enough to overcome a problem caused by insufficient electrical power. (NASA Release 78-159; JPL Universe, Oct 13/78, 1)
Decisions not yet made by the U.S. government would determine the U.S. aerospace industry’s fate for years to come, said Aerospace Industries Association president, Karl Harr, Jr., in the AIA’s Aerospace Review and Forecast, 1977. Aerospace-industry sales in 1977 had increased appreciably, if not dramatically, in comparison with the previous year. Profit as a percentage of sales had climbed half a percentage point but remained below the average for all U.S. manufacturing. The industry had anticipated similar sales gains in 1978 and expected space activity to continue at approximately the same rate. Military sales should top those of 1977. The aerospace industry had pressed for elimination of barriers to “free and fair trade” in the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (GATT) negotiations; foreign-government subsidy of their manufacturers had made them highly competitive. The U.S. government’s attempts to control export of “strategically critical” technology could severely impact sales abroad. Other issues of concern to the aerospace industry were capital formation and dealings with the government such as renegotiation, overregulation, expanding paperwork, and government competition with industry. Harr said that negative decisions could lead to “forfeiture of the pre-eminent position the U.S. has long held in high technology.” (Aerospace, Spring 78, 3)
LaRC announced it had awarded General Electric Company, Newport News, Va., a contract to provide rigid closed-cell foam-insulation material for use in the National Transonic Facility (NTF), a cryogenic wind tunnel under construction at LaRC. The insulation would be installed on the internal surface of the tunnel’s cylindrical pressure shell. The contract, managed by LaRC and estimated by GE at approximately $1.4 million, covered just over lyr; work would be performed at GE’s Thermal Systems Programs plant in Tacoma, Wash. (LaRC Release 78-81)
AvWk reported U.S. avionics manufacturers were sure that a NavStar receiver suitable for general aviation use, with features comparable to those of a VOR omnirange distance-measuring equipment and area-navigation computer, would be available for under $5000 by the late 1980s. AEL, Inc., which had designed a microwave landing receiver that could sell for less than $1500 through normal distribution channels, said the price of a NavStar receiver in 1978 dollars could eventually be as low as $2000. The role of NavStar (DOD’s satellite-based navigation system) in civilian aviation would depend on availability of inexpensive receivers at least as accurate as the present VOR/DME navaids. The potential market for civilian NavStar receivers had aroused considerable interest among civil-avionics manufacturers, resulting in Langley Research Center’s receiving a number of bids in a recent competition for a technology/design study of a low-cost NavStar receiver. Magnavox Government and Industrial Electronics Co. had won the contract. (Av-Wk, June 5/78, 91)
NASA had formally designated as Project Galileo a 1982 mission to orbit a spacecraft around Jupiter for at least 20mo and send a probe into its atmosphere, NASA Administrator Robert Frosch announced. The designation had honored the 16th century Italian astronomer, first to observe Jupiter by telescope and discover its moons. Galileo would be the first planetary spacecraft carried by the Space Shuttle and the first planetary spacecraft named for a person, although NASA had christened the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 3 (0A03) “Copernicus” after it was launched. (NASA Release 78-11)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded Planning Research Corporation (PRC), McLean, Va., a $23 626 661 contract extension for engineering support services. Under the 12-mo cost-plus-fixed-fee extension, PRC would continue through May 19, 1979, its design engineering of Space Shuttle equipment and other tasks for KSC’s design-engineering directorate, including design of new and modified ground-support equipment and minor facilities-design support for all KSC programs. The Spaceport and Cape Canaveral in Fla., Vandenberg AFB, and Dryden Flight Research Center had received support under the contract. The extension brought the total contract amount since the original award in May 1974 to $97 306 220. (KSC Release 53-78)
As the climax of a 4-mo attempt to stabilize and trim the orbital position of Skylab, a NASA team of engineers and controllers from JSC, MSFC, IBM, and three tracking stations (Bermuda; Madrid; and Goldstone, Calif.) had successfully put the space station in an orbital position they hoped would prolong its lifetime in space, JSC announced. Maneuvers in June had put the space station in an attitude intended to reduce atmospheric drag at its orbital height of 389km (242 statute mi). Assuming that the gyros continued to function, NASA hoped the new attitude would extend the orbital lifetime of Skylab by 6 to 12mo to late 1979 or early 1980, giving NASA time to arrange an early Space Shuttle test flight to reboost Skylab into higher orbit, or deorbit it into a remote ocean area. Maneuvers had begun in Mar. when engineers and flight controllers at the Bermuda tracking station checked out Skylab systems and brought its batteries to a fully charged state. On June 8, flight controllers had turned on the dormant control-moment gyros in the Skylab attitude-control system. (The other part of the system, the thruster attitude-control system, would expel nitrogen gas through nozzles to move Skylab into various attitudes in its orbit.) A computer with various sensors to indicate position had controlled both systems. Although one gyro that failed during the last Skylab mission in 1974 could not be used, the other two gyros were activated and worked as expected. On June 9, controllers had commanded Skylab into a solar inertial attitude in which the spacecraft’s solar cells always faced the sun. On June 11, they had maneuvered it into the desired “end-on velocity-vector” attitude, docking port forward and long axis parallel to the ground along the flight path. Skylab had remained in that position while engineers continued to monitor it, periodically transmitting minor corrections to the onboard computer controlling Skylab’s position. (JSC Release 78-25; Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; June 14/78,1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78,1; June 23/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, June 2/78, 2; June 30/78, 2; W Post, June 12/78, A-19))
NASA announced plans to launch NATO-IIIC, third and final comsat in a new series to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), on Nov. 15 from Kennedy Space Center. A U.S.—NATO agreement had specified launch on a Delta rocket, and NATO would reimburse NASA $8.9 million for the launch vehicle and services. A Delta had previously successfully launched Nato IIA and IIB in March 1970 and February 1971, respectively; Nato IIIA in April 1976; and Nato IIIB in January 1977. NATO-IIIC would provide in-orbit backup to Nato IIIA and IIIB in the NATO Integrated Communications System (NICS). At a geosynchronous orbital altitude of 35 900km (22 300mi), NATO-IIIC would orbit earth once every 24hr synchronized with earth’s 24-hr rotation period, keeping the satellite on station over the same spot above the equator. Once in its transfer orbit, the satellite would be controlled by U.S. Air Force Satellite Control Facility network on behalf of NATO., The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) served as satellite contracting agency for NICS. Ford Aeronautic and Communications Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., built NATO III. (NASA Release 78-171; MOR M-492-207-78-03 [prelaunch], Nov 15/78; Spaceport News, Nov 10/78, 1)	,
Congress had strongly supported legislation establishing a power satellite research and development and demonstration program scheduled to become a major issue among changes to President Carter’s FY79 solar energy proposals, Av Wk reported. Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.) had introduced a bill directing the Dept, of Energy and NASA to begin research and development on technical problems in implementing a solar power satellite. However, Dale Myers, undersecretary at DOE, who had described the joint solar energy projects contemplated by NASA and DOE at a House Science and Technology space science and application subcommittee hearing, said he questioned the need for such a bill. {Av Wk, Feb 27/78, 47)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that its test engineers had successfully completed the first series of live firing tests of the Space Shuttle’s main propulsion system, with all major test objectives achieved. Rockwell Intl.’s Space Systems Group had conducted the test program for MSFC. The test version of the propulsion system had consisted of three Shuttle main engines mounted on an orbiter aft fuselage with a flight-type external propellant tank and associated systems. The first series of tests (Apr. 21, May 19, June 15, and July 7, 1978) had recorded systems operation at thrust levels from 70 to 90% of rated power for up to 100 sec; in the final test, engines were throttled down from 90% thrust to 70% and back up to 90%. The Shuttle would be the first spacecraft with throttleable engines. After removal from the test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories, the engines had undergone modifications for more firings later in 1978. The next test series would run the engine at rated power levels (357 0001b, or 1.67 million newtons at sea level) for more than the 500sec required to lift the Shuttle into orbit. Results of the tests would verify main propulsion system operation before the first manned orbital flight, scheduled for 1979. (Marshall Star, Aug 2/78, 1)
Using the space environment for materials processing had limited application, and should be considered only on a case-by-case basis, according to a report by the Natl. Research Council’s committee on materials processing in space, which had studied NASA’s program. The committee said the early NASA program had used poorly conceived and designed experiments, often with crude apparatus, from which weak conclusions had been drawn and in some cases overpublicized. However, meaningful science and technology could result from experiments in space if the problems to be investigated in space were soundly based in terrestrial science or technology, and if the proposed experiments addressed specific problems instead of being scheduled to take advantage of flight opportunities or space-facility capabilities. The committee said it had not found economically justifiable reasons for producing materials in space, and recommended that NASA deemphasize this area of technology. (NRC News Report, Sept 78, 7)
NASA announced that an Ames Research Center scientific team led by Univ. of Chicago astronomer Dr. Richard Miller and ARC astrophysicist Dr. Bruce Smith had been pioneering in computer simulations of cosmic events that might alter traditional ideas of how galaxies formed, what shapes they assumed, and what happened when they collided. Using ARC’S ILLIAC IV, world’s most powerful computer, the researchers had recreated the birth and evolution of stars and galaxies, compressing 200 million yr into several hr of computer time and reducing the distance light traveled in 100 OOOyr to the length of a television screen, to witness galaxies colliding and gas clouds begetting embryonic1 stars. Computer simulations had shown elliptical galaxies, thought to be oblate (shaped like a frisbee), to have a 3-dimensional prolate shape (oblong); astronomers had found observational evidence confirming the computer discovery. The researchers had instructed the computer to create swirling systems of 100 000 computer points, each point representing the mass of about 1 million suns to give the simulated galaxy a realistic total mass. Each point had felt the gravitational pull of its neighbors and had absorbed energy from exploding supernova. Furnishing a computer with the power of ILLIAC IV with a detailed program on formation and dynamics of galaxies had proved computer simulation to be a useful approach to explaining basic astrophysical processes. ARC scientists had filmed several computer simulations showing results unexpected in light of traditional astrophysical theories. For example, vast congregations of computer-generated stars had repeatedly evolved into stable prolate bars that rotated end over end to form what was perhaps the true shape of elliptical galaxies. When Miller and Smith had set two simulated 50 000-star galaxies on a collision course, the colliding galaxies had exhibited much greater interaction than was forecast. First they contracted, their gravitational fields reinforcing each other, then they bounced back in violent expansion flinging hundreds of stars out of the galaxies, resulting in merged galaxies containing considerably fewer stars. The two researchers’ most recent efforts had centered on tracing simulated masses of gas as they coalesced and formed stars. (NASA Release 78-108)
The Aerospace Industries Assn, announced that industry sales, earnings, backlog, export performance, and contribution to the U.S. balance of trade had improved substantially in 1978. Sales, at $37.3 billion, were up almost $5 billion over 1977; the major gain was in commercial sales. The high inflation rate had distorted sales data, but 1978 sales had increased about 15% above 1977, well in excess of the inflation rate. Industry profits as a percentage of sales rose half a percentage point to 4.7%. Aerospace exports had reached an all-time high of $9.3 billion, $1.8 billion more than in 1977. At a time when export sales were important to the U.S. economy, the aerospace industry recorded an international trade surplus of nearly $8.4 billion, leading all U.S. manufacturing industries in contributing to the nation’s balance of trade. Industry backlog at year-end, estimated at $51.4 billion, was a sharp increase over $44.3 billion in 1977, resulting mostly from a surge of new orders for commercial transports. (.Aerospace, Winter 78, 2)
GSFC announced it would welcome a first group of guest astronomers Apr. 3 to its international ultraviolet explorer (IUE) satellite observatory, the first designed so that astronomers with little knowledge of spacecraft design and orbital operations could walk in, conduct observations, and receive data within 24hr. Astronomers would use NASA’s IUE, placed in a modified synchronous earth orbit Jan. 26, to examine a wide range of celestial objects in the spectral ultraviolet region between 1150 and 3200A that included emissions of many common elements such as hydrogen, helium, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. Studies would range from the solar system to distant quasars, pulsars, and black holes. NASA had selected nearly 200 astronomers from 17 nations (including the USSR) to conduct observations from GSFC’s IUE installation and ESA’s facility near Madrid, Spain. First guest astronomers would be Dr. Jeffrey Linsky, Univ. of Colo, specialist in cool stars, and Dr. Sara Head of GSFC, a specialist in hot stars. They would be succeeded by groups of 3 or 4 on a 7-day-a-wk basis throughout the yr. After 45 scientists had completed data reduction, the information gathered would indicate which aspects of astronomy should be emphasized during the spacecraft’s remaining lifetime. (NASA Release 78-50)
Johnson Space Center announced it would sponsor a 2-day conference with the Univ. of Texas health science center on ways to use spaceflight’ in biomedical research. The first session, entitled Space: A Challenge for the Life Sciences, would have as speakers the JSC director, Christopher Kraft, Jr.; NASA’s director for life sciences, David Winter, M.D.; JSC director of space and life sciences Richard Johnston; and Univ. of Tex. health science center resident Truman Blocker. The conference would conclude with a panel discussion on spaceflight applications. (JSC Release 78-19)
DFRC and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had joined in a study of the “Mars airplane” (a derivative of the Mini-Sniffer), the DFRC X-Press reported. The idea of a Mars airplane resulted from a January 1977 meeting between David Scott, former director of DFRC, and JPL director Dr. Bruce Murray, who had offered JPL’s assistance in perfecting the hydrazine engine of the Mini-Sniffer remotely-piloted vehicle (RPV) designed to fly at 70 000 to 100 000ft. The plane was originally a low-cost alternative to the U-2 for atmospheric research; DFRC’s Dale Reed and JPL personnel had recognized the possibility that the Mini-Sniffer could cruise halfway around Mars in the planet’s low gravity and thin atmosphere, using its unique nonairbreathing hydrazine engine. Developmental Sciences, Inc. had received a $60 000 contract for designs to send four Mars airplanes folded into capsules to conduct low-altitude surveillance flights down Martian canyons and volcanoes and over icecaps. The researchers believed technology was advancing so quickly in lightweight solar cells, beamed-microwave energy, lightweight electric motors and batteries, and lightweight radioisotope electric generators, that it would soon produce a generation of high-flying long-endurance long-range aircraft, the paper noted. (DFRC X-Press, Dec 15/78,3)
Many significant technological advances of the past decade should be credited to NASA, said the Lewis News, quoting an article by Dr. Wo-jciech Rostafinski, an engineer in LeRC’s Fluid System Components Division and frequent NASA spokesperson on Voice of America broadcasts, in the Cleveland Plain Dealer. The article continued: “The magnitude and importance of NASA-derived technology benefits have already been reported. Broadly, payoffs from technology transfer are direct and indirect. One direct benefit is satellites that report on weather, pollution, and crops. . . . An example of indirect benefits—the so-called spinoffs—is the electronic circuit miniaturization, so widely adopted today by terrestrial computer and calculator designers. Countless other innovations could be given for both categories. “Now a question arises concerning the monetary return on the investment. In other words, why should we continue to spend large sums of money on ‘obviously’ abstract endeavors in space? . . . Let us check the figures. Since 1958, when NASA was created, in the span of a short (or long, depending on the ‘yardstick’ by which the time is measured) 20 years, NASA spent a total budget of $67.8 billion. This relatively lofty figure does not appear high at all when compared to other expenditures of the federal government. NASA appropriations have represented, on the average over the years, only 1.8% of the federal budget; in the last five years this has been down to 1%. Currently, NASA accounts for only 0.85% of the budget. Making a parallel with the budget of a family whose income is $20 000 a year, last year’s NASA appropriation represents $170 per year set aside as investment. Not a large figure; a small one, actually, when compared to today’s car prices, utility bills, or to the cost of eduction. ... “In 1971, Midwest Research Institute, studying the impact of technological activity, concluded that the $25 billion NASA spent in its first ten years had returned $52 billion through 1970 and by 1987 will have returned $181 billion. Five years later, Chase Econometrics also studied the economic impact of NASA R&D and concluded that an annual increase in NASA spending of $1 billion for the 1975-1984 decade would increase the GNP $23 billion by 1984; $23 billion for $10 billion during ten years .... “Summing up, it becomes obvious and clear that it is much cheaper and wiser to seek technological progress through rational research, federally organized and performed by government and industry. The return on such investment is sound. The relatively modest sums invested in the national aerospace programs entrusted to NASA are well spent.” (Lewis News, Mar 17/78, 1)
NASA announced it had asked scientists to propose experiments for a 1984 mission to obtain a first global view of the Venus surface. Launched by the Space Shuttle, the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) spacecraft would circle the planet for at least 7mo taking radar pictures and measuring the atmosphere and the surface. It would be the most detailed scientific examination to date of the surface of Venus, perpetually covered by clouds. Announcing the solicitation, Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for Space Science, said: “NASA is engaged in a continuing program of space exploration, a major part of which is directed at the solar system. The VOIR program is a key step in that endeavor . . . While considerable knowledge of Venus’s atmospheric properties will be forthcoming from the Pioneer Venus mission, and while the Soviet Venera missions have provided valuable data on surface properties at three localities, information regarding the surface morphology on a global scale and all of the insights that this scientific information provides is lacking. A major technical goal of the VOIR mission, therefore, is to obtain global radar imagery with sufficient resolution to address fundamental questions regarding the origin and evolution of the planet, and to lay the groundwork for subsequent more detailed investigations of the surface and interior.” Hinners emphasized that VOIR had not been approved but said that early selection of scientific participants and investigations would assure a well-defined program upon approval. Under present plans, in 1984 NASA would launch one spacecraft from the Space Shuttle to Venus with a typical trajectory beginning in Dec. 1984 to arrive at Venus in May 1985. The spacecraft would remain in an elliptical parking orbit around Venus through May and June 1985, while the Deep Space Network was occupied with the Galileo project [see Nov. 10]. In late June or early July a propulsion maneuver would put VOIR into a near-polar orbit at an altitude of 300km (180mi). Radar mapping and other science gathering would begin in July and continue for 5mo. VOIR imagery should verify the presence or absence of continents, ocean basins, mountain belts, rift valleys, fault belts, or volcanoes, and might reveal the nature and time sequence of plate tectonic activity, as well as any relationship between this and volcanic episodes in the history of the planet. If impact craters were present (as suggested by earth-based radar observations), the mission might determine their size and frequency. The VOIR orbiter, weighing approximately 5000kg (11 0001b) at launch, would consist of a bus with a synthetic aperture radar and other science instruments. (NASA Release 78-180)
Wallops Flight Center announced the first flight Apr. 10 in compound-helicopter configuration of its rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA), a new research helicopter equipped with rotors, wings, and 2 jet engines. The compound configuration included the addition of 2 auxiliary-thrust engines and a 13.7m (45ft) wing. Powered by its 2 TF34 turbofan engines, the RSRA had used the combined lift of its wing and 5-blade S-61 rotor system to achieve an altitude of 610m (2000ft). By testing rotor systems to maneuver the craft at a wide range of altitudes and air speeds not possible in wind tunnels, RSRA would improve assessment of rotor performance by distinguishing inflight rotor characteristics from aircraft-system characteristics, which could not be done on the ground or in other aircraft. When fitted with fixed wings, the RSRA could test unproven rotor systems too small to lift it in normal flights. Sikorsky Aircraft had built 2 RSRA vehicles under a program, jointly funded and managed by NASA and the U.S. Army, to develop technology to increase rotor-aircraft speed, performance, reliability, and safety, and to reduce helicopter noise, vibration, and maintenance. Sikorsky, under contract to LaRC, would test both RSRA vehicles for approximately 80hr flight time before delivering them to NASA and the Army for flight research at NASA’s ARC. Sam White, NASA RSRA project manager, said, “The RSRA will help eliminate the costly practice of having to develop or extensively modify helicopter aircraft in order to conduct flight investigations for each promising new rotor concept. The RSRA is readily adaptable to accommodate new rotors and provide precise measurements of a variety of rotors under repeatable test conditions.” (NASA Release 78-59; LaRC Release 78-16)
NASA announced that data returned by the American-British-European international ultraviolet explorer (IUE) satellite had suggested the existence of a massive black hole at the center of globular clusters in earth’s galaxy. A group of scientists headed by Dr. Herbert Gursky and Dr. Andrea Dupree, both of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, Mass., had examined six clusters, three of them x-ray sources. NASA, in cooperation with ESA and the British Science Research Council, had launched IUE in Jan. 1978 into a modified near-equatorial synchronous orbit to study a wide range of celestial objects in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Dr. Gursky said the onboard UV instruments had delivered unexpected information when they penetrated the background denseness of the clusters, which were like miniature galaxies 15 000 light-yr away, to observe the cluster core. What they saw, according to Gursky, was probably radiation from a group of 10 to 20 bright-blue stars orbiting the core: “These stars may well be orbiting a massive black hole the size or mass of one thousand solar systems,” he said. However, existence of a black hole was not certain, as rotation of the stars in relation to the center of the million-star cluster had to be studied first. If the stars were indeed orbiting a massive black hole, Gursky believed they were right on the edge or, if not, might be providing their own gravitational equilibrium. What surprised the observation team, Gursky said, was the ability of the short-wavelength instrumentation to cut clearly through the million-star cluster. “For the first time we are seeing in a clean way the center or core of those globular clusters, and we were surprised. You can see the clusters in visible light, there are lots of red giant stars there, which mask what is going on in the center. Now we have a tool, the IUE’s shortwave ultraviolet, capable of going for the first time right to the core through the whole cluster,” said Gursky. Although the team would continue to observe the six globular clusters, Gursky doubted their findings could be definite until NASA put the space telescope in orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1983. That telescope, using much more powerful instrumentation including short-wavelength ultraviolet, could study the blue stars in more detail. (NASA Release 78-122)
The Naval Research Laboratory reported that a team of its space scientists had evaluated two new types of far-ultraviolet electrographic cameras. Designed for possible use in the Space Shuttle program to investigate radiation spectra of distant stars and other celestial objects, both cameras would use alkaline halide photocathodes having more sensitivity in the vacuum ultraviolet below 2000A, and higher angular resolution, than cameras previously used. One camera, the internal-Schmidt-optics type, had an opaque photocathode like those NRL had used in previous sounding-rocket flights, in the lunar camera on the Apollo 16 mission, and on Skylab 4. The new camera, flown on two sounding-rocket missions, had on the first flight obtained far-ultraviolet images of the Andromeda galaxy and on the second had recorded the North America nebula in Cygnus and far-ultraviolet spectra of stars in Cygnus. The other camera developed by NRL, a more conventional end-window type, had a semitransparent photocathode intended for possible use at the focus of a large telescope or for making spectrographs on the Spacelab. This large-format electrographic camera, instead of using a phosphor screen, would record directly on film the electrons emitted by the photocathode, allowing better resolution and photometric accuracy. NASA had supported development of the electrographic cameras. (NRL Release July 20/78)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aerospace Corp. had almost completed fabrication of an automatic device for forming continuous structural beams in space. MSFC had developed the “beam builder” to demonstrate techniques for fabricating large structures in space; the device would form triangular beams from flat rolls of very light materials, a complete section of the beam being easily supported with one hand. Housed in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle in earth orbit, the machine would form continuous miles-Iong beams for building large structures such as satellite power systems and service platforms. (Marshall Star, Apr 12/78, 1)
NASA reported a board of inquiry’s findings on the Sept. 9, 1977, failure of an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle destroyed 55sec into the flight. Launched from Kennedy Space Center, the vehicle had carried an Intelsat IV-A. The board attributed failure to a rupture in the high-pressure “omega joint” in the Atlas-stage gas-generator discharge line, caused by contamination during production. Technicians had tested joints on all completed vehicles, and all those at KSC had passed; a few in the factory that were corroded or questionable had been replaced. Changing the fabrication process should prevent further contamination, the report stated. (NASA Release 78-3)
After a flawless launch from KSC on an Atlas-Centaur at 12:24a.m. EST Nov. 13, Heao 2 was functioning satisfactorily in a near-perfect earth orbit, the Marshall Star reported. The observatory was expected to become fully operational by Nov. 16. First steps in orbit were to open the solar arrays and to separate the launch vehicle, both of which happened exactly on time. Ground stations were receiving and evaluating engineering data, as one by one each instrument was turned on to low power and checked out. All leftover gas had to be purged from the spacecraft before high voltage could be turned on to avoid electrical arcing or damage to delicate onboard instruments. MSFC was in control of Heao 2 together with TRW flight-control engineers operating at GSFC. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 1)
NASA announced it would celebrate Jan. 31 the 20th anniversary of the first U.S. artificial earth satellite, Explorer 1, which had ushered the western world into the space age. Principal scientific achievement had been discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts surrounding the earth. Weighing 13.9kg (30.81b), measuring 15.2cm (6in) in diameter and 203.2cm (80in) long, and shaped like a stovepipe, Explorer 1 had been the product of two other organizations now elements of NASA: the development group of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) at Huntsville, Ala., and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of CalTech at Pasadena, Calif. In 1960 ABMA had become the nucleus of MSFC; JPL had gone under contract to NASA in Dec. 1958. ABMA had provided the modified Redstone booster and the basic satellite design, and JPL had furnished the solid-propellant upper stages of the carrier vehicle and had packaged and tested the payload. Explorer Vs launch from Cape Canaveral, Fla., on a Jupiter C vehicle at 10:48pm EST, Jan. 31, 1958, had come 45 days after DOD had given the Army the go-ahead to prepare a backup to the existing U.S. Navy Vanguard project. Explorer 1 had continued to transmit information on the space environment until May 23, 1958, when its batteries were exhausted; it had reentered March 31, 1970. Dr. James Van Allen had designed the scientific package that discovered the radiation belts named for him. The Explorer 1 launch had been part of U.S. participation in the International Geophysical Year. (NASA Release 78-13; MSFC Release 78-9; JPL Release Jan 27/78; NRC News Report, Feb. 78, 1; Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 2; Jan 20/78, 3; JPL Universe, Jan 20/78, 1; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 2)
NASA announced appointment of Samuel Keller as deputy associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications (OSTA), succeeding Leonard Jaffe, who had been appointed special assistant to NASA’s chief engineer. In his new position, Keller would be responsible for general management and direction of OSTA programs. He had held numerous management positions at Goddard Space Flight Center before coming to NASA Hq as assistant administrator for personnel programs; had worked in industry and government; and had been a pilot in the U.S. Air Force from 1956 to 1959. (NASA anno May 5/78)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
ESA reported on the mechanical-qualification tests of the CAT/ Apple/Meteosat-2 composite (a payload scheduled under the APEX program for the third test flight of Ariane in May 1980) taking place Dec. 12-22 in the CNES facilities at Toulouse. The tests were to check behavior of the payload structure and the subsystems under conditions arising during launch; results would be compared with mathematical models. Undergoing tests would be a dynamic mockup subjected by means of an electroacoustic exciter to longitudinal and transverse vibrations like those occurring in flight. The payload being tested had three satellites mounted one above the other: the Ariane technological capsule (CAT), carried on all Ariane test flights; Apple, a technological satellite of the Indian Space Research Organization, which would carry a communications experiment; and ESA’s meteorological satellite Meteosat-2 which would continue the Meteosat mission into 1980. Apple and Meteosat-2 would be the first satellites placed in geostationary orbit by a European launcher. These tests were the first conducted in Europe on such a heavy payload, 6.5m high and weighing 1574kg. (ESA Release Dec 20/78)
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
NASA’s Skylab workshop launched in May 1973 might descend to 150 nautical miles (173 statute miles, 278km) altitude and begin reentry into earth’s atmosphere as early as late summer of 1979, JSC Roundup reported, citing orbit data from the North American Air Defense Command’s satellite trackers, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and the Swiss federal observatory. NASA would try two ways of postponing Skylab reentry: first, to reactivate the workshop’s thruster attitude-control system in the spring of 1978 and put it into a very slow tumble, decreasing atmospheric drag and perhaps adding several months to its orbital lifetime; second, to use a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) launched on an early Space Shuttle mission (about Oct. 1979) and flown by remote control to dock with Skylab. Once docked, the TRS propulsion system could either raise Skylab’s orbit or control its reentry. Although Skylab would break up and burn during descent, some debris would probably survive reentry, and probably would land in an ocean, because 80% of the Skylab orbit had been over water (between 50°N and 50°S). Skylab, largest payload in earth orbit at 85 tons, and about 96ft in length, had been manned during 3 missions by 3 different astronaut crews. When the last crew had left Skylab, NASA estimated the workshop would remain in orbit until 1983; however, its altitude had dropped more rapidly than expected because of increased atmospheric drag caused by sunspot activity. (JSC Roundup, Feb 17/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, Feb 10/78, 2; Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 4; W Post, Feb 2/78, A-2; C Trib, Feb 6/78, Sec. 1; Nature, Feb 9/78, 499)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
LaRC announced it had begun a research program on problems of agricultural aircraft. Beginning in 1921, airplanes for agricultural use had required conversion from some other purpose; in 1950, the first aircraft was designed specifically for agricultural use. Agricultural aircraft had improved since then, but still relied on 1940s technology. The aerial-applications industry had recognized this, and asked NASA to study drift, swath guidance, liquid and dry material-distribution systems, and aircraft-handling characteristics causing pilot fatigue. The NASA study would also attempt to make the wake vortex of an airplane work for, rather than against, aerial applications. Aerodynamic concerns involved reducing drag for better fuel efficiency and developing appropriate high-lift concepts to improve takeoff, landing, and turning performance. LaRC would conduct the study at its vortex-research facility, its full-scale wind tunnel, and in actual flight tests. The vortex-research facility would test small-scale models of the agricultural aircraft for interactions of the aircraft wake with dispersed spray and granular materials. The full-scale tunnel and flight tests would use an Ayres Thrush S2R-800, one of the largest agricultural aircraft. (LaRC Release 78-130)
Ames Research Center Director C.A. Syvertson announced appointment of A. Thomas Young, director of the planetary program in NASA’s Office of Space Science, as deputy director of ARC effective Feb. 1, 1979. Young, who had held his current position since Nov. 1976, had served as missions operations manager and missions director of Project Viking as well as of other projects at LaRC, which he had joined in 1961. Young had received LaRC’s sustained superior performance award in 1967 for contributions to the lunar orbiter project and in 1977 for his work on Viking. In 1977 he received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for contributions to Viking. (ARC Release 78-53)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had begun a 3-mo exercise called Spacelab Critical Design Review, whose results would go to a final board meeting on design changes needed for Spacelab to fly. ESA’s prime contractor, ERNO, had assembled Spacelab data consisting of 34 volumes and approximately 3000 drawings and had packaged 5 sets, weighing a total of 5001b, for shipment to the U.S. KSC review groups would look for discrepancies to ensure that the data reflected the hardware design and that the design was compatible with KSC operations. The reviewers would submit any discrepancies to a screening group, which would select those to be forwarded (along with those identified by other NASA centers) to MSFC for consolidation and decision on which would be sent to Europe. Those finally selected would be consolidated with ESA-identified discrepancies and forwarded to ERNO. (Spaceport News, Feb 3/78, 1)
NASA announced it had awarded Vought Corporation, Dallas, Tex., a modification of its contract to provide Scout launch vehicles. Under the modification, Vought would provide NASA with 12 additional guidance systems for use on Phase 8 Scouts (107 vehicles had constituted Phases 1 through 7), the same system used on the launch vehicle since the Scout program began. Vought had been the Scout project’s prime contractor since 1959; the first Scout launched in 1960 was designed to put a 130-lb payload into a 300-nautical-mi circular earth orbit. The latest Scouts were designed to place a 404-lb payload in that orbit. Scout vehicles had been launched from Wallops Island, Va., Vandenberg AFB, Calif., and San Marco, Kenya. Vought valued the modification at approximately $6.5 million. Langley Research Center would manage the 2.5-yr contract. (LaRC Release 78-67)
Ames Research Center announced the scheduled arrival this month of the XV-15, a tilt-rotor research aircraft, which would have wingtip-mounted turbine engines that turned 7.6m (25ft) prop rotors. The engine-prop rotor assembly could be tilted up for helicopter-type vertical takeoff and landing, or oriented forward in the normal position for conventional flight as an airplane. Bell Helicopter Textron, Fort Worth, Tex., had built the aircraft under a joint program of ARC and the U.S. Army’s Research and Technology Laboratories at Moffett Field, Calif. The first XV-15 to arrive at ARC, modifed for remote control, would undergo 6wk of testing in ARC’s 12.2 X 24.4m (40 X 80ft) wind tunnel. Flight test of the second aircraft would begin at the Bell facilities in Fort Worth after wind-tunnel tests. ARC would eventually house both aircraft for Army/NASA evaluation of the tilt-rotor concept, and for ARC research on terminal-area (airport) navigation and on vertical- and short-takeoff-and-landing. (NASA Release 78-45)
NASA announced that Chimex Systems, Inc., of Houston, Tex., had received a subcontract from Computer Sciences Corp. of Falls Church, Va, for institutional computer systems engineering, development, and production operations under CSC’s 5-yr contract with Johnson Space Center. A major factor of CSC’s winning bid had been its plan to use minority subcontractors. This was the fourth NASA contract won by Chimex, which had provided keypunch services at Kennedy Space Center and engineering support and keypunch services at JSC. Under the new subcontract, Chimex would employ 40 people primarily in keypunch and data-distribution at an estimated $800 000 per yr for 5yr. NASA’s minority business awards for the first half of FY1978 had amounted to more than $37 million. (NASA Release 78-117)
NASA announced it had selected four American scientists as payload specialists for the second Spacelab mission scheduled for 1981. Those named were Dr. Loren Acton of Palo Alto, Calif., research scientist at Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; Dr. John-David Bartoe of Reston, Va., and Dr. Dianne Prinz of Alexandria, Va., both research physicists at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory; and Dr. George Simon of Alamagordo, N.M., chief of the solar-research branch at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory. Two of these scientists would be selected to fly on the orbiting space laboratory to operate the scientific experiments; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and assist the two in orbit. The Spacelab investigators’ working group (IWG), composed of Spacelab 2 principal investigators having experiments on the mission, had selected the payload specialists, each of whom was a coinvestigator on one Of the Spacelab 2 experiments. Scientific investigations on Spacelab 2 would be mainly in astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar-physics research, with others in plasma physics, botany, medicine, and space technology. Scientific instruments on the mission would be “pallet only,” exposed to space in the orbiter’s cargo bay. Payload specialists would operate their experiment equipment from the orbiter’s crew cabin, working in shifts to run the experiments 24hr a day. The mission, scheduled for launch from KSC in 1981, would orbit at an altitude of about 450km (250mi) for 9da. MSFC had been responsible for payload specialist training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission. (NASA Release 78-120; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1) August 4\ MSFC announced it had awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., a $2.7 million contract to develop and deliver a flight experiment solar-array wing by May 1980 for a Shuttle orbital-flight test in November 1980. A significant step toward producing large amounts of power in space, the experiment would verify structural and dynamic characteristics of the solar-array wing, its electrical performance, and the readiness of solar-array technology for planetary- and earth-orbit Space Shuttle payload applications. The solar-array wing, 32m (105ft) long and 4m (13.5ft) wide, folded and stored in the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay during launch, would be extended to its full length and retracted several times during the test. When its solar-cell surface was fully extended, the array’s 82 panels would convert solar energy to produce 12.5kw of power. Only three of the panels would be active in the experiment flight. The experimental solar-array wing would demonstrate that use of this technology to augment power for Shuttle and Spacelab could extend mission duration and lead to a solar-electric propulsion stage. Solar-array technology could have Shuttle-payload applications such as space-base construction, satellite power systems, and power modules. NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology had directed the solar-array program as part of a larger effort on solar-electric propulsion for long-term missions in the mid-1980s. (NASA Release 78-123; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 4; A/D, Aug 4/78, 151; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 15)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would be guest speaker Oct. 5 at a NASA-LaRC colloquium and a public lecture to commemorate NASA’s 20th anniversary. Slayton, one of the original seven astronauts selected in 1959 for Project Mercury and the only one still active in the space program, was orbital flight test manager for JSC’s Space Shuttle Project Office. He had been chief astronaut and director of flight crew operations before going into space in July 1975 with the ApolloSoyuz Test Project. Title of Slayton’s colloquium lecture would be “The Space Shuttle”; his public lecture, “Manned Space Flight: Past Triumphs, Future Challenges.” (LaRC Release 78-47; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 2)
A viation Week and Space Technology magazine reported that President Carter would soon receive from Secretary of Defense Harold Brown a plan for a unified U.S. space policy covering all government and private-sector programs. The plan was the product of a policy-review committee headed by Brown and consisting of representatives from NASA, the Dept, of Agriculture, Joint Chiefs of Staff, CIA, DOD, the office of the President’s national security adviser, and the Office of Science and Technology Policy; the Interior Dept, and NOAA had participated in a steering committee under the main group. After evaluating the effect of the U.S. space program on foreign policy, national security, and overall economic benefit, the group had agreed that national security considerations were the main hindrances to formulating a national space policy. The group had considered space-arms control (maximum pacification of space, with limitatidns on killer satellites); availability of reconnaissance-satellite data (greater federal agency access); regulation of private-sector remote sensing (resolution limits); interagency management (a coordinating committee, to be chaired either by DOD and NASA, or by the President’s science adviser); broadcast satellite policy (no restrictions on signals crossing national borders); and certain intelligence, DOD, NASA, NOAA, and civilian programs. (AvWk, Jan 2/78, 14)
Two National Academy of Sciences committees, those on space physics (of the Space Science Board) and on solar terrestrial research (of the Geophysics Research Board), would meet for the first time at MSFC, the center announced. The former was developing for NASA a strategy for a 1980s research program in solar system space physics. Committee members would include 35 top-level scientists from government, industry, and universities throughout the U.S. (Marshall Star, Oct 4/78, 2)
Air Force Magazine, in an article on Goddard Space Flight Center, called it the jack-of-all-trades among NASA’s space centers. It was NASA’s communications hub, with a system of landlines, undersea cables, and satellites reaching around the world and connecting the 21 sites of the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) that had served all NASA’s spaceflight activities. GSFC also had one of the world’s largest assemblies of scientists, who theorized either scientific or applications satellite missions and made investigations into disciplines such as astronomy, planetary atmosphere, solar activity, and near-earth physics. About a third of scientific experiments on U.S. spacecraft were conceived, designed, and/or built by Goddard scientists. The Goddard-developed earth-resources survey programs used orbiting Landsats capable of scanning the planet (except for the polar regions) every 9da. The photographs they provided had allowed detailed study of the earth faster, cheaper, and more accurately than aerial photography. Its impact on agriculture worldwide could be enormous; Landsat would make possible, for example, an inventory in Calif.’s Imperial Valley of more than 25 separate crops in nearly 9000 fields scattered over 458 000 acres. Landsat data would identify specific crops and indicate their condition, permitting very accurate agricultural production forecasts. NASA planned to launch in the early 1980s a pair of Goddard-developed satellites containing space-tracking equipment to replace all but sue of the present ground-based tracking stations, supplying data 85% of the time with greater efficiency and manpower savings. GSFC scientists were also making experimental and practical applications of laser technology. One program would eventually establish laser-satellite systems on each continent, to measure the most minute movements of the plates forming earth’s crust. (AF Mag, Aug/78, 68)
NASA and the state of Texas had signed a 3-yr agreement that the Texas natural-resources information system (TNRIS) would use Landsat computer-processed data in managing the state’s natural resources, Johnson Space Center reported. Project costs were estimated at $600 000 for NASA and $750 000 for Texas. Day-to-day operations would use a mix of manual and computer-assisted remote-sensing methods to monitor Texas natural resources; photographic and electronic data from aircraft, ground-truth measurements, and weather-station environmental data would supplement satellite data during early phases of the project. JSC and a TNRIS task force would design and implement the data system; NASA would provide technical expertise. (JSC Roundup, Oct 13/78, 1)
Launch of Cosmos 1000, reported FBIS, had led Soviet scientists to review highlights of the series. The research program using Cosmos satellites had used several types of unified apparatus, and the USSR had always referred to them as a “series” irrespective of their scientific missions. The virtually mass-produced output of satellites had greatly assisted the high turnover speed of the series, which had reached the 1000 mark within 16yr and 2wk, more than 500 launches having come in the past 6yr. The Cosmos series had begun Mar. 16, 1962, with the launch of an unnamed satellite (named Cosmos 1 only 3wk later, when Tass reported launch of Cosmos 2). The USSR had seldom announced the purpose of Cosmos launches, a ploy that permitted concealment of their purposes as well as of their failures. Observers had classified Cosmos 96, for instance, as a Venus probe left or stranded in orbit; Cosmos 146, which had arrived in orbit measuring about 14m long and by next day was only 9m long, after emitting 2 capsules, was probably a Soyuz precursor. Georgy Narimanov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Institute of Space Research said the USSR had used Cosmos satellites to test long-range communications systems, reentry installations, life-support systems, and assemblies for the Lunokhod moon-rover, as well as automatic-docking procedures. Lack of information had encouraged speculation about military applications, including hunter-killer tests. USSR comments had stressed the practical aspects of the Cosmos program, such as experience accumulated during geophysical experiments for use on the “Meteor” spacecraft; basic research by Cosmos 321 that had defined distribution of the magnetic field over 94% of the earth’s surface; and Cosmos investigations of the upper atmosphere, the aurora, and the magnetosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, April 4/78; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, April 1/78 [2 items])
NASA reported that the Natl. Business Aircraft Association at its annual convention in St. Louis Sept. 13 would present to Dr. Richard Whitcomb, aeronautical scientist at Langley Research Center, its Meritorious Service to Aviation Award for 1978. Whitcomb would be honored for “significant contributions to the field of aviation.” Among those contributions were the area-rule design (a “Coke bottle” airplane shape that reduced drag and increased aircraft speed without the need for additional power, incorporated in every U.S. supersonic airplane now flying); and the “supercritical” wing developed during the 1960s to increase the speed and range of subsonic aircraft without an increase in required power or fuel consumption. Whitcomb had begun his career in 1943 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor, and was head of LaRC’s Transonic Aerodynamics Branch. (NASA Release 78-119)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology reported that Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) had called for hearings on the current status of NASA programs. Convened by the subcommittee on space science and applications and chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), the hearings would review NASA projects, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle and the tracking and data relay satellite system. Fuqua said it had been subcommittee practice to hold hearings in the fall before considering NASA requests for new and continuing work in the next year’s budget. John Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems, and William Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would testify Sept. 25. Dr. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, and Dr. Noel Hin-ners, associate administrator for space science, would testify Sept. 26. Dr. James Kramer, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, and Raymond Kline, associate administrator for management operations, would both testify Sept. 27. (H Comm on Sci & Tech Release 95-114) The USSR had launched Venera 12 Sept. 14 with a design and purpose similar to those of Venera 11, Tass announced. Onboard systems were functioning normally, and trajectories of both stations were close to original calculations. Venera 12 would also reach the vicinity of Venus in Dec. 1978. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 14/78)
NASA announced award of a contract to Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, Seattle, Wash., for development and evaluation of selected advanced aerodynamics and active-control concepts for commercial transport aircraft. The contract, to be managed by LaRC, would be part of the second phase of energy-efficient transport (EET) work that had begun in early 1977 under two NASA contracts. The second phase would concentrate on ways to improve energy efficiency and operational economy for subsonic long-haul commercial transport aircraft, including wingtip extension or winglets, surface coatings for drag reduction, wingload alleviation systems, and active controls/guidance systems. Boeing estimated the contract value at $17 million. (LaRC Release 78-65) During October: NASA issued a press kit in observance of its 20th anniversary, having opened for business October 1, 1958. To commemorate the anniversary, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch wrote: “By the time a man or a woman has lived for 20 years, a new individuality has been established, physical maturity has been achieved, important experiences have been undergone and digested, there have been some triumphs and some tragedies, the outlines of the individual’s role in society are beginning to come into focus, and it becomes possible to do some sensible planning and make some educated guesses about the future. Most importantly, a unique new entity with largely undetermined potential has come to exist in the world. “On its 20th anniversary, NASA—composed of some 23,000 men and women—is just such an entity. We are a unique agency, mandated by the people of our country through their elected representatives to develop and utilize space technology both for immediate practical application and to expand our knowledge of the earth, its environment, the solar system and the universe. We are charged with assisting the Department of Defense in the use of space to maintain the security of our nation, and with the promotion of international cooperation in space for peaceful purposes. An important part of our charter calls for research and development to maintain U.S. leadership in aeronautics, and to improve civil and military aeronautical vehicles while minimizing their energy consumption and environmental degradation. We are further charged with the dissemination to all potential users of new knowledge and technology acquired in the course of all these activities, and, alone among Federal agencies, we are required by law to ‘provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning (our) activities and the results thereof.’. . . “We have, after all, in just two decades, for the first time ever, put life from the planet earth on another body of our solar system, and in our explorations of the moon learned more about the nature and origins of that system than humanity was able to determine in all the centuries that went before. “In those two eventful decades we have landed extensions of our intelligence on Mars, begun an automated investigation that will eventually extend to all the planets orbiting the sun, achieved significant increase in our knowledge of sun-earth interactions and relationships, and through remote sensing satellites made order of magnitude improvements in how we view the natural and manmade phenomena of the whole earth, as a first step on the way to better management of all our resources. And we have put astronomy observatories into orbit above the obscuring atmosphere, which are beginning to supply data that may well change our conception of the universe. “Closer to home we have initiated a communications revolution. Though barely begun, the communications satellite program has tied the nations and peoples of our planet together in a way never before possible, and it promises the benefits of intercommunity contact to the most remote and isolated areas. . . “In our 20th year, we are deeply involved in solving the primary problems of our time—through remote sensing, helping to locate new sources of fossil fuels while working with the Department of Energy to develop alternate energy resources. “With passenger cars alone burning almost a third of all petroleum products used in this country each year and causing most of the air pollution that blights our metropolitan areas, we are applying our scientific and engineering expertise to improving auto efficiency, economy, and environmental acceptability and to developing advanced auto propulsion systems. “Finally, exactly as is true of a man or a woman, the future from the perspective of 20 years is full of challenge, excitement, and opportunity. Consider, for example, that the 12 months following our 20th anniversary will see, among other events: —launch of the second HEAO to follow up the major astronomical discoveries of its predecessor; —arrival of the Pioneer orbiter and probes at Venus; —exploration of Jupiter and its moons by both Voyagers; and — first orbital test flight of the Shuttle. “Beyond our 21st year, we can see the Shuttle evolving as the major factor in all our operations in space, facilitating and accelerating progress toward nearly all our goals. . . “In short, on our 20th anniversary we at NASA can take pride in what we have already accomplished, satisfaction from the knowledge that we are doing useful work on the frontiers of science and technology for the benefit of our people and our country, and exhilaration at the prospects which lie ahead for the continued expansion of human knowledge and the improvement of the condition of mankind on the planet earth. “Truly a unique new entity has come to exist in the world, an entity of which each one of us can be proud to be a part.” Also included in the press kit was a chronology of major NASA milestones, descriptions of all NASA centers, and NASA’s major launch record. (NASA Release 78-133)
MSFC announced that its Boeing 747 modified for Shuttle-orbiter transport had arrived at Redstone Army Airfield in Fla. for a dry run in preparation for its March landing with an orbiter atop. Crews from MSFC, KSC, and Dryden Flight Research Center had checked out handling gear and procedures to be used at MSFC for receiving the orbiter and offloading it from its carrier. MSFC had installed a large lifting derrick at the airfield with lateral-restraint and other devices needed to lift the Enterprise clear of the 747 and position it on a trailer-like transporter. When the 747 had departed, handling crews at the airfield would continue verification of the mate-demate device, using the orbiter ground transporter and a full-size orbiter simulator. (Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 1)
President Carter at a press conference with editors and news directors was asked: “There was a big spread in the local (Cape Canaveral) newspapers yesterday that you were ordering cutbacks in the space program. And there are also rumors going around the Kennedy Space Center that as soon as the shuttle becomes operational, you will order even more cutbacks in an austerity program. So my question is this: What kind of space policy can we expect from your administration?” The President said: “I think a very aggressive space policy. Anyone who reads the documents that have been prepared very carefully, very thoroughly by the Defense Department, the CIA, NSC, all those who will use them, including Agriculture, Commerce, and finally approved by me, would say that it’s a very sound program based on scientific need and actually capitalizing now upon the great exploratory efforts that have been made in space. We look upon the Space Shuttle as a way to change dramatic, very costly initiatives into a sound, progressive, and innovative program to utilize the technology that we have available to us. “We’ll continue interplanetary space exploration. We’ll have a greatly expanded effort concerning astronomy assessments of the earth, weather, communications. We’ll expand our effort to bring into the space program now, both foreign countries and also private firms in our nation. And I think it is accurate to say that the Space Shuttle, which is approaching completion—we hope the first orbital flights will be less than a year from now—will open up a broad vista of new uses for our technology. “So, we’re not going to minimize or decrease our commitment to space at all. I think the spectacular efforts to send men to the moon and to make the first orbital flights, and so forth, have been just a precursor to now the more practical and consistent and effective use of our space technology. “So, it’s not a matter of playing down the importance of space; it’s a matter of using what we’ve already learned in the most effective way.” (Press Doc, Oct 20/78, 1976)
MSFC announced it had completed acoustic testing of NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-B, first in a series of environmental tests on the satellite before its launch scheduled for Nov. HEAO’s prime contractor, TRW Systems, Inc., Redondo Beach, Calif., performed the test that simulated sound pressure generated during launch. HEAO-B, second of 3 large unmanned orbital observatories designed to study x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays emitted by stars and star-like objects throughout the universe, had been moved into TRW’s thermal-vacuum chamber for further testing in June. {Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 2)
Flight testing of the Space Shuttle’s microwave scanning-beam landing system (MSBLS) had begun at KSC, Today reported, with pilots and technicians using a specially equipped Jetstar aircraft operated by Dryden Flight Research Center to conduct the tests. The system-verification tests would be the initial checkout of the airborne MSBLS/ Jetstar system and the ground stations with their laser systems to verify compatibility, and to check out the system processing test data. KSC had scheduled 5 test flights lasting a toted of about 12hr. {Today, Apr 7/78, 12A; DFRC X-Press, Apr 7/78, 2)
Administrator Robert Frosch said NASA would analyze any chemical samples of UFOs received from credible sources but would not initiate any research programs, Goddard News reported. Frosch outlined NASA’s position in a letter to the White House, in response to an inquiry from the director of science and technology policy. NASA was most often asked about the purported UFO sightings by astronauts and President Carter; NASA had satisfied itself that the astronauts had seen nothing abnormal in the space environment, and the bright object President Carter reported seeing in the sky when he was governor of Ga. had been classified as “unidentifiable” by the Natl. Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena. Some students of astronomy had suggested that what Carter saw was the planet Venus, at times much brighter than a first-magnitude star. Although the USAF had routinely investigated reports of all UFO sightings until 1969, when it terminated its “Project Blue Book,” it no^ limited its interest to sightings important to defense surveillance. The Air Force had concluded that never in almost 2 decades of investigating UFOs had it found “evidence of technological developments . . . beyond the range of present-day scientific knowledge.” (Goddard News, Mar 78, 3)
NASA announced it had flown its quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA) to Ames Research Center to begin a flight-research program on design and operation of future quiet short-haul transport. The QSRA [see July 27] had been the first to achieve truly quiet operation of jet aircraft, through high-performance special treatment of the engines and nacelles to restrict landing and takeoff noise to relatively small areas. Operating less noisily than most small private aircraft, the 4-jet QSRA had a 90-decibel noise-impact area, smaller than 1.3km2 (0.5mi2). Scaled up to the equivalent of a 150-passenger aircraft, the 90-decibel noise-impact area would be less than 2.6km2 (lmi2), compared to the approximately 78km2 (30mi2) noise impact of comparable-size aircraft. High performance of the QSRA resulted from a design concept in which four jet engines mounted on top of the wing directed fan air from the engines across the upper surface of the wing and flaps, significantly increasing lift, particularly at lower speeds. Compressed air from the engines, fed through an ejector system, provided boundary-layer control-blowing at the wing leading edges and ailerons, further enhancing lift and control. Future QSRA-derivative aircraft the size of the Boeing 727 transport could carry the same payload at the same speeds but could operate from small airports with short runways (about 1/2 to 1km [1500 to 3000ft], compared to current requirements for lengths of 1.6km [lmi] or more) and could operate without disturbing surrounding communities. (NASA Release 78-126; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 2; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 20)
NASA announced it would physically integrate ail Space Shuttle/ Spacelab experiments at Kennedy Space Center. Extensive analysis and cost studies had confirmed an earlier tentative decision to do the work at KSC rather than at centers managing the Spacelab mission. “Physical integration” consisted of installing experiments on Spacelab’s racks and pallets. After Spacelab operations became routine in the mid-1980s, physical integration should require about 100 civil service and contractor man-yrs per yr at KSC. The analyses required to integrate experiments for each mission would continue at assigned Spacelab management centers. (NASA Release 78-186)
Harold Berger of the Natl. Bureau of Standards would give the colloquium lecture Dec. 11 on “Nondestructive Testing—Its Growing Importance for the 1980s,” Langley Research Center announced. The aero. space and nuclear industries, which required unusually high reliability and quality in products and operations, had used nondestructive testing extensively since World War II. Berger would describe the early use of NDT, including radiographic, ultrasonic, magnetic, penetrant, and eddy-current techniques. Although early NDT had increased safety and extended product life, it had the potential for significantly improving industrial productivity and conserving energy and materials. NDT was now facing growing problems such as an aging fleet of military airplanes; demand for a deem environment with NDT implications for nuclear plants, pipelines, and offshore facilities; and needs associated with product liability. These challenges had stimulated new developments; as an example, Berger would discuss radiography, including real-time methods, image enhancement, and unusual radiation techniques using neutrons and protons. (LaRC Release 78-83)
NASA announced receipt of the first 2 HiMAT (highly maneuverable aircraft technology) prototypes from the builder, Rockwell Inti., which developed the 0.44-scale version during a joint NASA-USAF multiphase competitive program. Flights of the subscale models at Dryden Flight Research Center would use the remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) technique developed there to test advanced aerodynamic technology for enhanced aircraft maneuverability. The RPRV offered a highly cost-effective means of flight testing advanced, high-risk technology without associated risks to test pilots. A pilot in a ground cockpit using telemetry, television, and radar air-launched unmanned craft from a carrier aircraft to fly them through maneuvers. (DFRC X-Press, Mar 10/78, 2; AvWk, Mar 20/78, 17)
NASA announced Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. biotechnologists and engineers would use frogs on the Space Shuttle as research subjects to study inner-ear balance as the cause of space sickness that had afflicted some astronauts. Under a 6mo contract with Ames Research Center, Lockheed researchers would first study the behavior in space of the frog’s otolith nerve bundle, which closely resembled man’s. Microelectronic sensors inserted in the frogs would periodically feed data into recorders on the ground and in space. Preflight ground-based tests using a centrifuge would furnish baseline data to compare with information obtained in weightlessness. (JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 4; NASA Act, May 78, 10)
Dr. Frank Press, director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, had launched a campaign to reduce paperwork required by the government from university scientists receiving federal support, Nature reported. Press said money saved in this way might mean millions of dollars for every university, and wrote to NASA and NSF asking what steps they could take to reduce paperwork and to streamline grants regulations. Press added that, although there was little support in the administration for a Dept, of Science, interest was growing in establishing a Dept, of Technology and Industrial Development. {Nature, Feb 9/78, 497)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced its engineers had delivered the first hardware—a thermal-model tape recorder —for the earth-orbiting infrared astronomical satellite IRAS to their counterparts in the Netherlands for testing, before delivering the actual flight recorder in 1979	for installation in the IRAS satellite. A joint program by the U.S., the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands, IRAS had been scheduled for launch from Vandenberg AFB in Feb. 1981, carrying a single experiment: a liquid-helium-cooled telescope to map the sky in infrared frequencies from 1 to lOOmicrons. Infrared astronomers would use the data to construct an infrared sky map and a source catalog with roughly 1 million sources. IRAS would make about 14 orbits of earth daily, but only two daily data-transmitting passes over the U.K. ground station. The tape recorder would therefore store all data for transmission every 12hr. Odetics Corp. of Anaheim, Calif., had built the flight version of the tape recorder for shipment to the Netherlands, where the spacecraft was being built. After completing construction and installation of the telescope, IRAS would return to the U.S. for tests at JPL. (JPL Universe, June 23/78, 1)
A House subcommittee on space science and applications would hold panel discussions later in June on opportunities for international cooperation in space, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology announced. Moderated by Dr. Jerry Grey of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the discussions would follow subcommittee hearings scheduled May 16, 17, and 18 on international space programs. Panelists reviewing the hearings would make recommendations on international cooperation for publication with the hearings. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla), subcommittee chairman, said he favored use of the space environment “not only for our own nation but for the benefit of all mankind. All reasonable efforts should be made in the international community to assure that worldwide understanding and mutual commitments are developed to provide sound basis for these future efforts.” (U.S. House Committee on Sci and Tech Release, June 7/78)
NASA announced it had awarded Computer Sciences Corp., Falls Church, Va., a $40 million contract for 3yr of institutional computer systems engineering, development, and production operations work at Johnson Space Center. Under JSC management, the corporation would perform systems engineering and definition, applied software development, and computer systems and related facility planning and development for the central computing facility, as well as computer operations, equipment operations, job scheduling and processing, dispatch services, job quality control, maintenance of tape libraries, production coordination, and other related tasks for the facility and mission control center. (NASA Release 78-95; JSC Release 78-29)
Langley Research Center announced it would host Mar. 7-9 an advanced technology airfoil research conference offering the aviation community a comprehensive review of the latest technical developments in airfoil computational analysis and design methods, airfoil test facilities and techniques, and various applications of new airfoil technology. Presented by NASA, supporting contractors, and university grantees, the technical sessions would cover progress in mathematical codes for use in electronic digital computers for airfoil analysis and design, coupled with progress in analog computers through wind-tunnel test facilities and special techniques of investigation; general aviation aircraft; transports; rotorcraft; propellers; windmills; and agricultural aircraft. (LaRC Release 78-12)
NASA and ESA announced selection of experiments for the proposed 2-spacecraft solar-polar mission planned for launch in 1983 and designed for first-time observation of the sun from the unique perspective of its polar regions. The solar-polar mission would explore one of the remaining frontiers of the solar system: the third dimension of space, out of the plane of the orbits of the planets. All previous interplanetary space probes had flown in the orbits of the planets, essentially intersecting the sun’s equatorial regions. Congress had not yet approved the project, but early selection of scientific participants and investigations would allow a prompt start on approval. NASA and ESA would each provide one spacecraft, and the combined scientific payload would be divided between U.S. and European investigators. The Space Shuttle would launch both spacecraft simultaneously using an inertial upper-stage booster, directing them on a trajectory in the ecliptic plane (the plane containing all the planets) toward Jupiter. Swinging around Jupiter, the craft would use the gravity of that planet to move out of the ecliptic plane and back toward the sun in trajectories, one northbound and one southbound, essentially mirror images of each other. After passing over the north and south solar poles, the spacecrafts would swing through perihelion (the distance closest to the sun) in the ecliptic plane, pass respectively over the other solar poles, then fly back to the vicinity of Jupiter’s orbit. The period from launch until shortly after the second pair of polar passages would be approximately 5yr. The mission should provide important new knowledge about the solar wind, cosmic rays, and the 3-dimensional structure and evolution of the sun’s corona (the outermost solar atmosphere), and increase understanding of solar phenomena that shape and control earth’s space environment. In anticipation of a FY79 Congressional authorization of the mission, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of the mission for NASA, had undertaken studies of the U.S. spacecraft, payload, and mission design concepts. More than ISO American and European scientists would participate in solar-polar investigations. (NASA Release 78-39; ESA Release Mar 13/78; JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 1)
Johnson Space Center reported that 11 of 35 current astronaut candidates had undergone parasail training Aug. 28 at Vance AFB, Enid, Okla., learning how to land by parachute in the event of an emergency ejection from the T-38 aircraft over land. Other astronaut candidates had taken the course before entering the NASA program. The six female astronaut candidates along with five male counterparts had taken the 1-day training exercise. {JSC Roundup, Sept 1/78, 1)
The Inti. Council of Scientific Unions and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) announced that more than 140 nations would participate in the largest international scientific experiment ever held, beginning in January 1979. The Global Weather Experiment (GWE) would establish the practical limits of weather forecasting and design a global observation system to achieve them. During the 12mo experiment, a massive array of scientific personnel and observing equipment would monitor earth’s oceans and atmosphere to compile the most complete record of global weather data ever assembled. The experiment, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP), would be a joint effort of the 2 organizations and all 147 member nations of WMO; 5 other international organizations were also contributing. U.S. participants would include the Depts. of Commerce, Defense, Energy, Interior, Transportation, and State; NASA; the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research; the Natl. Science Foundation; the Defense Nuclear Agency; the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Coast Guard; and many academic institutions. NOAA would coordinate U.S. participation. The experiment would supplement the existing World Weather Watch (now generating more than 40 000 observations daily) with 10 satellites, about 50 research vessels, 110 aircraft (including 10 research planes), 300 high-altitude constant-level balloons, and 300 instrumented drifting buoys. One focus of attention would be the broad belt around the equator, an enormous heat sink absorbing much of the sun’s energy and generating much of the world’s weather, but so far comparatively unobserved. To obtain more data on this crucial region, GWE would operate observing systems during two special periods (Jan. 5 to March 5, and May 1 to June 30) to gather vital tropical-wind information. The combined systems would generate weather data for 85% of the earth’s area not covered by the World Weather Watch. At the end of the Global Weather Experiment Nov. 30, 1979, centers in a number of nations would process the data and forward the results to World Data Centers in Moscow and Washington, D.C., and to meteorological research laboratories in Bracknell, England, and Princeton, N.J. Scientists would use computers to refine the data and construct for the first time a complete 12-mo world-weather history. They would run computer experiments using this unique record to test their results, and to determine not only the practical limits of weather prediction but also the data needed to reach these limits and the kind of system needed to gather the data. The socioeconomic impact of improved weather forecasts could be dramatic; industries, for example, could benefit from knowing what the weather would be as far as 8 to 10 (or even 14) days in advance. (GWE Release 78-1)
NASA announced that 11 of its 16 launches scheduled for 1979 would be reimbursables (launched by NASA for other agencies or corporations). Paying customers included DOD, NOAA, the United Kingdom, Western Union Corp., ComSatCorp, and RCA. As in 1978, most of the 1979 launches would emphasize use of space for the direct benefit of people: communications, environmental, and meteorological information. Activities in 1979 would include the first launch and orbital flight of the Space Shuttle; Jupiter and Saturn encounters by two Voyager spacecraft; and the Pioneer 11 flyby of the rings of Saturn. NASA would launch the Space Shuttle from KSC into its first orbital flight Sept. 28 with astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen as crew. They would land 53hr later at DFRC. The 1979 schedule would begin with two launches Jan. 25: DOD’s spacecraft charging at high altitudes. (SCATHA) from Cape Canaveral, and a stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE-A) from Wallops Flight Center. In April NASA would launch NOAA-A for NOAA and Navy-20 for DOD from Vandenberg AFB. It would launch in May FltSatCom-B from Cape Canaveral, and UK-6 for the United Kingdom from WFC; Westar-C in July and Intelsat V-A in Aug., both from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp; in Sept., its third high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-C from Cape Canaveral, and its Magsat-A from Vandenberg; in Oct., the solar maximum mission (SMM-A) from Vandenberg. NASA would launch Intelsat V-B from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp in Nov.; in Dec., NOAA-B for NOAA from Vandenberg, and RCA-C for RCA from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-196)
NASA announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Corp. a $32 million contract to develop a teleoperator retrieval system (TRS), a reusable TV-equipped propulsive device for use by Space Shuttle crews to deliver, stabilize, and recover satellites in orbit. Managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the contract called for delivery of flight hardware by September 1979. The TRS, a low-thrust box-like spacecraft operated from the Space Shuttle by remote control, could be carried in the orbiter cargo bay or left in space after completion of a mission for retrieval by the next Space Shuttle. First mission for the TRS would be a docking with Skylab to boost it into higher orbit or to aid a controlled reentry; a camera on the forward end of the TRS would permit an astronaut to maneuver it for rendezvous and docking, or for other purposes. The TRS would return to the Space Shuttle using its own guidance and control system. (NASA Release 78-96; Marshall Star, July 5/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, July 14/78, 2; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1)
The Jan/Feb issue of Satellite Pathways reviewed COMSAT accomplishments, noting that satellite communications technology had advanced through research and development programs at COMSAT Laboratories, engineering support it had provided to current satellite systems, and its work on satellite systems of the future. COMSAT’s research and engineering programs had aimed primarily at more powerful and long-lived multiple-beam satellites operating with smaller earth stations in higher communications frequencies; these programs would lead to more efficient use of the frequency spectrum allocated to satellite communications by simultaneous multiple use of the same frequency bands and transmitting communications in high-speed digital rather than conventional analog modes. Among achievements in 1977, the article mentioned new nickel-hydrogen batteries developed by COMSAT under INTELSAT sponsorship; data collected from COMSAT-built 13- and 18-gigahertz transponders aboard the Ats 6 satellite and the 19- and 28-gigahertz beacons aboard the COMSTAR satellites; a simulator that could handle communications for the Intelsat V satellites that would form a global system in the 1980s; and new communications processing equipment to convert conventional analog signals into digital signals, and vice versa. (Satellite Pathways, Jan/Feb 78, 12)
LaRC announced award to Micro Craft, Inc., Tullahoma, Tenn., of a contract to design and build precision models for wind-tunnel tests at the center. The small-scale models of controlled shape and finish, designed specifically for research and development projects, would consist of metals, moldable or formable materials, fiberglass-reinforced resins, woods, or combinations. The contract might also require specialized model-support equipment and other unique items needed for model tests. Micro Craft estimated the value of the 3-yr, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract at $2.8 million. (LaRC Release 78-14)
NASA announced plans to launch TIROS-N from WTR Sept. 15 as part of a third generation of new meteorological satellites. First of a series of eight polar-orbiting environmental spacecraft, TIROS-N would carry new environmental monitors representing significant technological advances over those on the current NOAA-series spacecraft. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Services (NESS) would operate TIROS-N, intended to improve weather analysis for more accurate weather forecasts; to locate ocean currents and areas of upwell-ing, important to fishing and shipping interests; and to acquire more precise data on snow cover, snowmelt, and rainfall, essential to water-resource management and flood forecasting. Also possible would be more accurate alerts of high-energy solar-radiation levels above the atmosphere, important to space missions, high-altitude commercial airEAGE At l INTENTION ALLY BLANK craft flights, long-range communications, and electrical power-distribution networks. Its advanced data-collection and platform-location system meant that TIROS-N would have for the first time an operational capability to collect and transmit environmental data from platforms on land, at sea, and in the air; and to determine the geographic locations of those platforms in motion on the surface of the sea, land, or aloft. TIROS-N’s scanning radiometer, most versatile to be carried aboard an environmental satellite, could gather and store for later playback visible and infrared measurements and images in 4 channels for more precise evaluation of land, ice, surface-water, and cloud conditions, and sea-surface temperatures, transmitting them in real time to both automatic picture-transmission (APT) and high-resolution picture-transmission (HRPT) users in more than 100 countries around the world. The vertical-sounder subsystem, containing three instruments, could register temperatures to within 1°C and moisture data from earth’s surface up through the stratosphere. Even under obscuring cloud cover, TIROS-N could obtain some data because one of the three instruments would be able to record microwave radiation regardless of clouds. TIROS-N would be a primary data source for the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s first global experiment, an international cooperative project of 140 countries scheduled to begin Dec. 1, 1978. Its instruments would meet FGE requirements for collecting quantitative data on earth’s atmosphere and sea surface to construct numerical atmospheric models for improved long-range weather forecasts. Sensors were multinational: the stratospheric-sounding units were from Great Britain, the data-collection platform-location system from France, and other sensors from the U.S. Ground-support systems were also multinational: the U.S. would acquire and process most data through NOAA’s command and data-acquisition (CDA) stations near Fairbanks, Alaska; Wallops Island, Va.; and a central processing system at Suitland, Md. France’s Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales (CNES) would process and distribute data associated with collection and the platform-location system. TIROS-N instruments had drawn heavily on technology from NASA’s Nimbus-spacecraft program: TIROS-N’s bus was a modified USAF Block 5D spacecraft bus with a 25% growth allowance in payload-carrying capability. NASA had designed and funded TIROS-N; Goddard Space Flight Center would manage it during checkout (about 2mo) before turning it over to NOAA. Launch vehicle would be a standard reconditioned Atlas E/F. (NASA Release 78-132; NASA press conf. Sept 8/78; Spaceport News, Sept 15/78, 2)
NASA announced preparations to launch its second high energy astronomy observatory HEAO-B, continuing a three-mission program to study some of the most intriguing mysteries of the universe: pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes. Launch would be from KSC on an Atlas Centaur about Nov. 13. Carrying a focusing x-ray telescope and a variety of sensitive instruments, HEAO-B would maneuver and point for long periods of time at selected x-ray sources previously identified by Heao 1. Pictures returned by HEAO-B would be the first spacecraft-generated x-ray images of objects other than the sun. HEAO-B’s images, acquired by x-ray telescope, would be converted to telemetry received and taped by ground stations and eventually reconstructed as photographs showing size, structure, and detail of objects viewed by the spacecraft. HEAO-B, with a design lyr mission lifetime, would be placed in low circular orbit far enough above the atmosphere to detect radiation normally unable to reach earth’s surface. MSFC had managed HEAO for NASA’s Office of Space Science. KSC would manage launch operations including prelaunch checkout, launch, and flight through observatory separation in orbit. Lewis Research Center managed launch-vehicle procurement and related activities for the HEAO program. MSFC would control the in-orbit HEAO observatories, in conjunction with TRW flight-control engineers operating from Goddard Space Flight Center. Cost of the three-mission HEAO program was about $248 million, HEAO-B’s approximately $87 million. (NASA Release 78-165; MOR S-382-78-02 [prelaunch] Oct 30/78)
NASA reported that Cornell Univ. scientists had for the first time turned xenon, rarest of stable rare gases, into a metal by applying tremendous pressure on solid xenon. David Nelson, Jr., and Professor Arthur Ruloff of Cornell’s department of materials science and engineering, in work sponsored by LeRC, reported pressures of 320 000 atmospheres applied to a tiny amount of solid xenon at - 241 °C (- 402°F) ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978	.	NOVEMBER ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY NASA's second high-energy astronomy observatory, heaviest manned earthorbiting spacecraft, undergoing checkout before launch on a mission of general sky survey, mapping x-ray sources and measuring low-energy gamma-ray flux, (NASA photo 78-H-623) had produced the metal. Xenon frozen solid would not conduct electricity; however, at the pressures applied in the Cornell experiment, the electrical conductivity of the frozen xenon increased more than a hundred billion times—that is, it behaved like a metal. Because the xenon returned to the insulating (nonconductive) state when the pressure was removed, no engineering applications were apparent. However, Ruloff noted, “The production of metallic xenon is of considerable scientific interest. Furthermore, the development of these techniques is a step forward in high-pressure research.” Ruloff believed that his group could make oxygen and krypton metallic, and possibly nitrogen, argon, and even hydrogen. If frozen hydrogen could be made metallic and remain in that state when the pressure was removed, it might have practical use as an extremely powerful rocket propellant, a superconductor, or an improved source for fusion energy. NASA would explore the possibility of making metallic hydrogen. (NASA Release 78-174)
22pm EDT on the same date to produce an orbit with 35 469.1km perigee, 36 679.2km apogee, and 1.7° inclination. The drift had been too rapid, and an orbit-adjust maneuver June 20 had reduced it to 2 deg/day West. Goes 3 had been scheduled to arrive on station at 135°W July 16, 1978. All subsystems were on, except the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR); the main power bus was normal. The S-band and UHF equipment had functioned properly, but NASA was checking specifics of gain, margin, and sensitivity. Although the space-environment monitor (SEM) subsystem had appeared satisfactory, it needed further testing for possible interference from other subsystems. NASA expected to check out Goes 3 and turn it over to NOAA for operation when it arrived at 135°W. Goes 3 would be a key element of the Global Weather Experiment, a worldwide yearlong accumulation of meteorological and oceanographic data that had begun in Dec. 1977. Largest international scientific experiment in history, with 140 nations participating, GWE was collecting information from sources that included nine satellites and scores of ships and aircraft, plus thousands of daily surface arid upper-air observations by several hundred buoys distributed in the southern hemisphere and by conventional observation methods elsewhere. The experiment, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) sponsored by the UN’s World Meteorological Organization and the Inti. Council of Scientific Unions, would last through 1979 and provide scientists with millions of pieces of information from all over the world. Goes 3 would not only provide the major western-hemisphere coverage in the experiment, but would also determine how much important meteorological information could be gathered from a data-sparse area of the world centering on the Indian Ocean. Goes 3 was the last NOAA geostationary satellite NASA would launch on an expendable vehicle; three additional geostationary spacecraft planned for the next 8yr, beginning with GOES-D, would be launched on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 78-72; MOR E-612-78-01 [prelaunch summary] Apr 26/78, [postlaunch] June 26/78; NOAA Release 78-66)
NASA announced it had appointed Robert Allnutt associate deputy administrator. AUnutt, currently acting assistant general counsel for legislation at DOE, had been deputy assistant administrator for the Energy Research and Development Administration, responsible for program areas including procurement, personnel, labor relations, and construction. Following a career both inside and outside the executive branch, Allnutt in 1970 had been appointed associate general counsel to the congressionally-established Commission on Government Procurement to improve governmentwide policies, procedures, and legislation. In 1973 Allnutt had been appointed staff director and counsel of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, with jurisdiction over federal aerospace research and development activities including all NASA programs. NASA had named Isaac Gillam, IV, director of DFRC, where he had been acting director since the departure of David Scott in Nov. 1977; he had been deputy director there since Aug. 1977. Gillam, an associate fellow of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and a senior member of the American Astronautical Society, had joined NASA Hq in 1963 as a resource-management specialist and had gone to DFRC in 1976 as director of Space Shuttle operations. Before joining NASA, Gillam had served in the USAF. Lt. Gen. Duward Crow (USAF-ret.), assistant to the deputy administrator of NASA, had announced plans to leave NASA Sept. 1, 1978. Gen. Crow had begun NASA service in 1974 as assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs. In Oct. 1975 he had become associate deputy administrator of NASA, assuming his present duties following a reorganization in Nov. 1977. Crow had graduated in 1941 from the U.S. Military Academy and had served in the China-Burma-India theatre of operations. He had become comptroller of the USAF in 1969 and was assistant vice chief of staff from Oct. 1973 to July 1974 when he retired. He had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work on the NASA launch vehicles program. (NASA anno June 13/78)
The USAF reported that a wind-tunnel test at Arnold Engineering Development Center using a new type of model and new testing techniques had demonstrated selection of an optimum aircraft-wing shape. Previous efforts to determine the best wing shape for a particular aircraft had compared features of several (sometimes many) models representing educated guesses; even after selecting one shape, testers could not be certain there was not another more efficient. The latest test had used simulated flight conditions with a new computer-controlled wing model able to change shape automatically. Three-dimensional images made by a stereophotographic technique defined the actual wing shape during each flight change, making it possible to consider numerous shapes. The model, one of the most complex tested in AEDC’s 16-ft transonic wind tunnel, was a product of General Dynamic’s Convair Division, San Diego, that had been redesigned and reassembled by AEDC’s operating contractor ARO, Inc., after its arrival at AEDC. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 12)
NASA announced it had tentatively selected five scientific experiments for its gamma ray observatory, a planned 1984 mission to explore a variety of the most energetic forms of radiation known: very high-energy gamma rays from pulsars, nuclear gamma rays, and gamma-ray bursts. Observatory data should provide a much better understanding of the nature of supernovas, pulsars, quasars, radio galaxies, the character of the early universe, and the possible existence of antimatter in the universe. Scientists also hoped to learn more about incredibly dense matter composing objects such as neutron stars, matter so compressed that a teaspoonful would weigh millions of tons. Data from the GRO might also tell more about gamma-ray bursts, erratic gamma-ray pulses of unknown origin that flashed across the solar system every month or so. Although Congress had not yet approved GRO, early solicitation of scientific participants and investigations would allow for mission definition and a prompt start after approval. GSFC would manage the observatory to be carried by the Shuttle into a planned orbit of 400 to 500km (250 to 300mi). NASA had selected principal investigators and experiments: Dr. James Kurfess of NRL, broad line gamma-ray spectrometer; Dr. Laurence Peterson of the Univ. of Calif., San Diego, narrow line gamma-ray spectrometer; Dr. Carl Fichtel of GSFC, high-energy gamma-ray detector; Dr. V. Schoenfelder of the Max-Planck Inst., Garching, W. Germany, medium-energy double Compton telescope; and Dr. Gerald Fishman of Marshall Space Flight Center, transient gamma-ray monitor. (NASA Release 78-140)
NASA reported that the 200kw experimental wind turbine generator managed by Lewis Research Center had completed more than lOOOhr of operation for DOE in Clayton, N.M., and was ready for checks to verify design-life estimates. Twin rotor blades and other dynamic components that had rotated at 40rpm or more (making more than a million cycles) since the machine began operating in January had developed loose or missing rivets and three small 3-in cracks, and would undergo more detailed inspection. Although DOE had shipped the blades to LeRC for detailed inspection and analysis of their wear and life potential, the turbine had continued operation using rotor blades from the prototype wind turbine operated on an experimental basis near Sandusky, Ohio, since October 1975. The first U.S. federally sponsored wind system to produce electricity directly for a community power system, the turbine had supplied more than 100 OOOkw-hr of electrical power to the Clayton-owned utility system. (NASA Release 78-97)
The U.S. Navy had orbited two clusters of ocean-surveillance satellites to monitor radio communications and radar emissions from Soviet submarines and ships, and would add more spacecraft to expand coverage, Av Wk reported. The Navy had launched the first of the two clusters (each consisting of three small satellites in close proximity) in 1976, the second cluster in 1977, all from Vandenberg AFB into nearcircular 63“-inclination orbits at 700mi altitudes. At that altitude, the spacecraft could receive signals from surface vessels more than 2000mi away. The Naval Research Laboratory, which in Dec. 1971 had built and launched three spacecraft as a first demonstration of using multiple satellites to direction-find and eavesdrop on Soviet surface vessels and submarines, had designed and built the ocean-surveillance satellites (NOSS). Martin Marietta had begun production of additional satellites with E-Systems, Inc., as major subcontractor to provide the electronic intelligence (elint) receivers and antennas. For the future, the Navy had planned a more advanced spaceborne ocean-surveillance system using active radar to pinpoint the position of surface vessels, to be developed for launch by 1983 under a program called Clipper Bow. (AvWk, July 10/78, 22)
American Indians of the Far West had used the Communications Technology Satellite, world’s most powerful, in an unusual undertaking: tribes in Mont, and N.M. had linked up via the satellite with each other and federal officials in Washington, D.C., to exchange information and views on health, agriculture, education, and other tribal concerns. ARC said the Cts experimental satellite, operating on a new frequency and at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than current commercial comsats, had provided 2-way interactive video and audio communications between ground sites, allowing participants to view and confer with each other as though in the same room. Lewis Research Center had developed the transmitter (its key component) and would manage U.S. portions of the joint U.S.-Canadian satellite program, the Lewis News reported. Indian nations taking part in the broadcasts over 3days were the Crows and other tribes from the northwestern U.S., and the All-Indian Pueblo Council, Inc., and nearby tribes from the southwest. Government representatives included the assistant secretary of the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, senators, and representatives, the governor of Montana, and the assistant secretary for Indian affairs in the U.S. Dept, of Interior. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 7/78, 2; Lewis News, Apr 14/78, 1)
Scientists and marine biologists trying to preserve the Great Lakes from pollution would receive vast amounts of new and more accurate information from a Nimbus-G satellite scheduled for launch Oct. 23, Lewis Research Center announced. Among its seven sophisticated instruments to measure parameters ranging from stratospheric aerosols and ozone to polar sea ice extent would be a coastal zone color scanner (CZCS) to measure water color and temperature, two characteristics affected by amounts of pollution and algae in water. The scanner would operate exclusively over water, taking pictures of an area encompassing the entire Great Lakes system in 2min, or of any particular area every 4 out of 5da, and would transmit the Great Lakes data to GSFC for recording and processing. Information in the form of photographs and digital-computer tapes would be archived and disseminated to assigned study groups. A Great Lakes experiment team with scientists from LeRC, EPA, NOAA, the Canadian National Water Research Inst, and Center for Remote Sensing, the Environmental Research Inst, of Michigan, the Univ. of Minnesota, Case Western Reserve Univ., Ohio State Univ., and State Univ. of New York would assess the regional value of CZCS water-quality measurements. LeRC would be responsible for interpreting Great Lakes CZCS data and comparing it with coordinated ship measurements. (Lewis News, Oct 13/78, 1)
MSFC reported that 17 scientists had signed contracts to develop materials-processing experiments, first to be conducted in the weightless environment of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and partially based on results of investigations during the Apollo, Skylab, Apollo-Soyuz, and SPAR (space processing applications rocket) programs. Among the products of interest to the scientists were improved medicines; electrolyte materials for smaller, higher capacity batteries; and larger, more perfect crystals for electronic applications. The $12 million program, covering a 5yr initial period, should produce significant scientific results for developing specific useful materials and products in space. NASA had aimed the programs at science and technology in both research and manufacturing activities leading to privately funded materials-processing in space. Five of the 17 scientists would have a chance to fly their experiments on an early orbital test of the Shuttle in a materials-experiments assembly (MEA) package that would not only produce valuable scientific data but would also define further experiments and hardware needed before the first extended flight on Spacelab or Space Shuttle. A Shuttle satellite-deployment mission would fly four of the MEA experiments again, along with five others; the fifth would fly again on the third Spacelab mission devoted almost exclusively to materials processing. Four more of the scientists would have experiments on this mission. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 1)	'
NASA announced that 8 women volunteers aged 45 to 55 had emerged in November hale and hearty after nearly a month of tests at ARC’S Human Research Center during which they were isolated from friends and family. Like 40 other men and women aged 25 to 55 who had volunteered for space program tests since 1973, the ARC group had participated in a study of the effects of weightlessness on the human body. Researchers from ARC’S biomedical research division were interested in the tolerances and responses of a body reentering earth’s gravity after experiencing zero gravity in space. The long-term NASA experiment, the Bed Rest Program, would extend over the next 12mo with 2 more groups—8 men, then 8 women, all aged 55 to 65—undergoing the same tests. Prolonged horizontal bed rest (a physiological approximation on earth of zero-gravity) would cause bodily changes within 24 to 48hr and would maintain them throughout the program. Having approximated the effects of zero gravity, researchers could study human responses to the introduction of both normal and abnormal Shuttle-reentry gravity forces. Other tests in cooperation with Johnson Space Center had evaluated the protection offered by antigravity suits against reentry stresses. Those volunteering for the program in response to newspaper advertisements had undergone a series of exacting physical and psychological tests. The 3-phase study began with the 8 subjects moving into the 12-bed ARC research facility. After a 9-day control period came lOda of total bed rest, followed by a 5-day recovery period. During the bed rest experiment, participants had to remain flat except to raise their heads slightly to eat. The subjects even showered in a horizontal position, being moved on a wheeled gurney to a specially designed shower. They had no visitors, but could have incoming and outgoing telephone calls. The routine did not deviate from three meals a day, lights off at 11pm, on at 7pm. At times the lower body underwent negative-pressure tests in a box. Researchers took daily blood samples and deep body temperatures. Electrocardiograms constantly recorded heart rates, and a “biobelt” around the waist constantly sent data to recorders. Before and during bed rest, the subjects took centrifuge rides designed to measure reflexes and coordination as the body made adjustments. The researchers tried to keep the subjects cheerful and to relieve natural boredom with books and games; each bed had stereo and color television. Medical attendants (doctors, nurses, and technicians) were on hand at all times. (NASA Release 78-185)
NASA announced it had appointed Dr. John Klineberg deputy associate administrator in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST), where he would be responsible under the OAST associate administrator for general management and direction of OAST programs. Klineberg had come to Ames Research Center in 1970 from CalTech; while at ARC, he had done fundamental research on transonic flow, particularly on viscous effects and boundary-layer separation. After joining the OAST Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Division at Hq in 1974, Klineberg had managed aeronautics research on short- and reduced-takeoff-and-landing (STOL), vertical-takeoff-and-landing (VTOL), and rotorcraft vehicles. Appointed in 1976 to the OAST Aircraft Energy Efficiency Office, he had been responsible for aerodynamics and active-controls elements of that program. (NASA anno Feb 6/78)
The Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards AFB, Calif., was target site for a Navy Tomahawk cruise missile successfully launched from a submarine, the USS Barb, a major milestone in the cruise-missile development program, AFSC Newreview reported. The test off the coast of southern Calif, was the Tomahawk’s 24th, and its first launch from a submarine. The missile flew a fully guided land-attack test flight terminating at AFFTC. Objectives accomplished in the test included underwater ignition of Tomahawk’s solid-propellant boost motor, and a midair engine start of the missile’s turbofan engine for cruise flight. An onboard inertial-navigation set guided the missile to the Pacific coastline; once over land, the missile’s terrain-contour matching system guided it to a recovery area. The flight ended with deployment of the test missile’s parachute over a remote section of the test center; the missile, recovered by Navy personnel with AFFTC assistance, would be reused in future tests. (AFSC Newsreview, April 78, 11)
Under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the U.S. Navy, a Navy experimental plane would undergo in-place tethered-flight testing at LaRC’s Impact Dynamics Research Facility, the Langley Researcher reported. The Navy’s XFV-12A plane built by Rockwell Intl.’s Columbus Aircraft Div. was the only one of its kind, a prototype V/STOL aircraft designed to demonstrate the thrust-augmented wing concept in supersonic flight. The tests at LaRC had tethered the XFV-12A to the gantry by a single cable from a powerful winch mounted 210ft above ground. Static restraint tests kept the aircraft in place at various heights by ground cables attached to the nose and main landing gear, as its engines operated at full power. Using results of the static tests, LaRC had put the XFV-12A through dynamic tests, permitting greater freedom of motion, as the aircraft was not restrained by ground cables. The upper tether cable automatically reeled in as the aircraft maneuvered within the gantry, and a shock absorber on the winch cable guarded the airplane against loads greater than 2g. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 6)
A Senate operational remote-sensing bill introduced by Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and a House space industrialization bill introduced by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) had increased pending legislation to carry civilian space policy beyond that outlined by President Carter, AvWk reported. Both bills called for formation of government corporations to expand benefits of space exploration beyond the R&D stage. AU the legislation would be reintroduced in the next Congress where, as a bloc, they would constitute the largest recent push for an expanded federal space effort. Other bills included a Space Policy Act introduced by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.), for extensive design and application of large space structures in orbit over the next lOyr; National Space and Aeronautics Act introduced by Sen. Schmitt, for a 30-yr planning process in U.S. space and aeronautics research; Earth Data and Information Service Act introduced by Sen. Stevenson, for an operational Landsat remotesensing system as a new division of NASA; Solar-Power Satellite Research Development and Demonstration Program Act introduced by Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.), for $25 million in near-term funding to research technologies required for a solar-power satellite; NASA Solar-Power Satellite Program Act introduced by Sen. Schmitt, for greatly expanded work on solar-power satellite technology. (Av Wk, Oct 23/78,19; CR, Oct 13/78, S 19075; D/SBD, Oct 24/78, 234; Oct 27/78, 257)
NASA announced successful launch Apr. 26 from Vandenberg AFB on a Scout of the first spacecraft built to measure variations in the earth’s temperature, the heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM). The experimental satellite had assumed a circular sun-synchronous 620km (385mi) orbit to measure areas of the earth’s surface for maximum temperatures, then to measure minimum temperatures of those same areas about llhr later. A 2-channel scanning radiometer would acquire images in the visible and near-infrared spectrum during the day, and in the thermal-infrared spectrum both day and night. Data resolution of the 2 channels would be about 0.5 X 0.5km (1800ft) as the spacecraft covered a 700km (435mi)-wide swath. Project officials said the position of the 3001b satellite in orbit was “almost perfect. If all goes well, we could take a picture of the earth in the visible spectrum as early as tomorrow.” HCMM was first in a series of low-cost modular spacecraft built for the Applications Explorer Missions (AEM) — small, experimental spacecraft in special orbits to satisfy mission-unique experimental data-acquisition requirements. Scientists designed the mission to determine the feasibility of using day-night thermal-infrared remote sensor-derived data to detect various rock types and mineral resources; monitor surface soil-moisture changes; measure plant-canopy temperatures at frequent intervals to detect transpiration of water and plant stress; measure urban heat islands; map surface-temperature changes on land and water bodies; and analyze snow fields to predict water runoff. HCMM data, correlated with data from other satellites (especially Landsat) and from ground observations, could aid in detecting time variations of temperatures on the earth’s surface. Goddard Space Flight Center had been responsible for design, integration, and testing of the satellite and for data processing. Boeing Aerospace Co. had built the base module, International Telephone and Telegraph the instrument. (NASA Release 78-60; MOR E-651-78-01 [prelaunch] Apr 19/78; NYT, Apr 27/78)
Federal Aviation Administrator Langhorne Bond said the British Civil Aviation Authority and the British Plessey Corporation had been “using the press and other news media to deliberately mislead and confuse the world aviation community” about a U.S.-backed all-weather approach and landing system. The FAA administrator said the time reference scanning-beam/microwave landing system (TRSB/MLS) had been developed in a “goldfish bowl” from the outset with wide public participation; he labelled as “simply not true” British allegations that the U.S. had conducted a misleading test program or issued false data, and that the TRSB system was unsafe. Bond said the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), at its worldwide meeting in April, would probably select TRSB as the international system and that the campaign to discredit TRSB had been a last-minute effort by the British and Plessey to influence ICAO’s decision. (FAA Release 9-78; W Star, Jan 7/78, A-l) During January: NASA announced it had tentatively selected 18 scientists to participate in the design and early operational phases of the Space Telescope project. The 10-ton observatory to be launched by the Space Shuttle in 1983 would make astronomical observations deeper into space and in more detail than ever before. The scientists would head teams representing investigations definition (design and develop the focal plane instruments and carry out major scientific investigations); astrometry science (ensure that a fine guidance system could perform the required astrometric functions); faint-object camera science (U.S. members to assist ESA’s team); telescope science (interpret performance requirements in terms of telescope design specifications); data and operations (establish instrument specifications for control system, flight operation, and ground data handling); and interdisciplinary science (provide a broad scientific overview of ST development). A Space Telescope science working group to give scientific guidance to the project would consist of team leaders, 2 telescope scientists, interdisciplinary scientists, and appropriate project personnel. MSFC had management responsibility for the telescope; GSFC would manage operations and the development of scientific instruments. (NASA Activities, Jan 78, 9)
NASA announced signing of an agreement with the National Eye Institute (NEI), Bethesda, Md., for laboratory and clinical tests of a new surgical instrument to remove hard cataracts. Lewis Research Center had developed the instrument jointly with Cleveland ophthalmologist Dr. William McGannon. The NASA-NEI program would include refinement of surgical techniques using the cataract instrument, and design and implementation of clinical trials. The new instrument consisted of a surgical handpiece, a regulated flow system for infusing fluid, and a peristaltic outflow pump with necessary controls. The handpiece would use a high-speed air-turbine drive to power an auger-type cutter capable of both end and side cutting, rotating at speeds between 300 000 and 270 OOOrpm. The control system had a flow-sensing pressure regulator to maintain intraocular pressure under widely varying flow conditions. Use of the rotary cutting instrument would require only a small opening in the cornea, and should apply to the full range of cataract hardness. As part of the joint agreement, NASA and NEI announced that interested companies might apply for a nonexclusive patent license to manufacture and market the flow-sensing pressure regulator, which might be applicable to other types of eye surgery. (NASA Release 78-66; Lewis News, May 12/78, 1)
The Marshall Star reported that Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, had praised the performance of Heao 1 in a report to the subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Dr. Hinners noted that, before launch of Heao I, scientists knew of about 300 X-ray sources in the sky; Heao I was discovering about 3 new X-ray sources every day [see Oct. 9]. Another major result from Heao 1 was its observation of a hot plasma, apparently about a half billion degrees, extending beyond earth’s galaxy and possibly through the entire universe. A plasma of this temperature and density distributed uniformly throughout the universe would constitute about half the mass required to close the universe. “This concept is of such major importance for cosmologists that new Heao 1 data are being analyzed as they come from the spacecraft,” Hinners said. He also noted that Heao 1 data indicated a new black-hole candidate in the constellation Ara. Scientific results such as these had been “so significant that we made a decision to extend the operation of Heao I through March 1979,” Hinners concluded. (Marshall Star, Oct 11/78, 4)
The USAF reported it had mapped and measured on the most detailed Shuttle models tested so far at AEDC the air pressures and loads to be encountered by the Space Shuttle during launch. The 6wk program had been the first to use mockups of the complete Shuttle orbiter, external fuel tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters in AEDC’s 16-ft transonic wind tunnel. NASA would compare results of these comprehensive tests with data obtained at AEDC and elsewhere on smaller, less detailed models. NASA would follow up on the AEDC transonic tests with supersonic tests of the same models at Ames Research Center. AEDC had recorded surface pressures on a 3% scale model with 1646 measuring points scattered over its surface, one of the most comprehensive pressure models ever used there. It had tested a 2% scale model in the aerodynamic-force part of the study using 9 measuring instruments, the most ever installed on an AEDC model; and had measured air pressure at 25 points around the base of the Shuttle model. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 78, 4)
NASA announced plans to launch the geostationary operational environmental satellite GOES-C, third in a series of operational spacecraft funded by NOAA to meet DOC requirements, no earlier than May 25, 1978, from the ETR on a 3-stage Delta. In May 1974 and Feb. 1975, NASA had launched two operational prototype meteorological spacecraft, Sms 1 and Sms 2, developed with NASA funding and still in orbit; it had launched the first two operational spacecraft funded by NOAA, Goes 1 and Goes 2, in Oct. and June 1977, respectively. NASA had planned to use a 3-stage inertially-guided Delta launch vehicle to inject GOES-C into a transfer orbit where its apogee boost motor would put it in a synchronous orbit. A GOES-C on station at 135°W would augment existing satellite coverage of earth weather and become a part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP). (MOR E-612-78-01 [prelaunch] May 19/78)
FBIS reported that scientists and staff members of the Prague Institute of Geophysics were working around the clock as they received and processed data coming from the first Czechoslovak artificial satellite, Magion. Beginning Nov. 14, when Magion separated from Intercosmos 18 and went into an independent orbit, it had returned data on the earth’s ionosphere and magnetosphere four times a day to the Czechoslovakian Panska Ves Observatory, where incoming information was computer-processed and transmitted to the Flight Control Centre and to stations in the Soviet Union. P. Triska, in charge of the Magion experiment, said that onboard systems were working efficiently and that he and his staff were cooperating closely with their Soviet colleagues: “We draw up together working programs for Intercosmos 18 and Magion and exchange information.” (FBIS, Tass In English, Nov 21/78)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had agreed to participate during May in an experiment called Avefria (Spanish for lapwing) to perturb the atmosphere so that scientists could study ionospheric irregularities and their effects on radio communications. The experiment would create a high-altitude barium-ion cloud in the ionosphere (an atmospheric layer 25 to 250mi above earth in which radio signals typically travel for long distances) by rocket-borne release of barium-metal vapor. Optical-observation and radio-communications stations in Nev. would make scientific measurements of the cloud and its interaction with the ionosphere. Major observation point would be the Tonopah (Nev.) Test Range; JPL would operate a second observation station at its Table Mountain astronomy site near Wrightwood, Calif. (JPL Universe, May 12/78, 1)
GSFC reported that faint radio signals from 10 million billion miles away had given astronomers the first proof of the long suspected presence of methane (natural gas) outside the solar system. GSFC scientists had detected methane in three locations in deep space: in the Orion A gas cloud, and in gas clouds surrounding variable star RX Boo and carbon star IRC-plus-10216. “The discovery of methane outside our solar system could have an important role in determining the abundance of carbon in the universe,” noted Dr. Kenneth Fox. Methane previously had been detected only on earth, Jupiter, Saturn, and its moon Titan, Neptune, and Uranus. The discovery had confirmed that interstellar space was not devoid of complicated molecules; at least 40 types of molecules had been discovered suspended in space, and the findings were important to scientists attempting to construct models of the origin of the universe. Dr. Fox and Dr. Donald Jennings had searched for the emissions for 3yr using radiotelescopes at the Natl. Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green-bank, W. Va., Kitt Peak near Tucson, Ariz., and the Haystack observatory in Westford, Mass. “Methane now appears to be one of the most abundant molecules in Orion A, perhaps second only to hydrogen [the most abundant gas in the cosmos],” Fox said. Fox and Jennings planned to map the source of methane in Orion A for its precise location and any associations with stars or stellar objects. (Goddard News, Aug 2/78, 2)
NASA announced plans to launch Nimbus-G, first satellite designed to monitor manmade and natural pollutants in earth’s atmosphere and the last of seven Nimbus environmental-research spacecraft launched since Aug. 1964, from WTR no earlier than Sept. 18, 1978. A 2-stage Delta launch vehicle would put the 907-kg observatory toward a near-polar orbit. Nimbus-G would for the first time provide scientists throughout the world with continuous environmental data on physical conditions in the global atmosphere, the oceans, the dynamic atmosphere-ocean interface, and the earth’s heat balance—information vital to understanding climate, oceanography, atmospheric pollution, and regional and global weather patterns. NOAA and several U.S. university scientists would work with NASA scientists on the Nimbus-G project, along with scientists from the United Kingdom, Denmark, Switzerland, Canada, South Africa, West Germany, France, and Belgium. For the first time ESA would bring on line a Nimbus-G direct reception and data-processing capability at Lannion in France that would eventually receive, process, and distribute on a regular basis Nimbus-G data to approved European investigators. The 8 highly complex sensors on Nimbus-G (seven from the U.S. and one from the U.K.) were improved versions of instruments carried on six previous Nimbus flights to answer three questions: Was ozone in the earth’s upper atmosphere changing? Was the earth warming or cooling? What was the extent of pollution in the world’s oceans? Nimbus-G sensors would include four to measure atmospheric gases and pollutants and their interrelationships in the earth’s stratosphere and mesophere (the upper atmosphere from 10 to 90km [6.2 to 56mi] up). The coastal zone color scanner, sensing colors of the oceans, would enable oceanographers to map chlorophyll concentrations, sediment distribution, and salinity in large areas of coastal or ocean water, and to detect and track water pollution such as oil spills, sewage and industrial waste dumpings, and river sediment. GSFC would manage the spacecraft, Delta launch vehicle, and global network for tracking and 2-way communications. Kennedy Space Center’s unmanned-launch operations team would supervise the Delta launch. General Electric Co.’s Space Division, Nimbus prime contractor with more than 50 major subsystem contractors, would be responsible for sensors and components in the spacecraft, launch vehicle, and ground-reception equipment. More than 1000 subcontractors and vendors had participated in the program. Cost of Nimbus-G spacecraft and instruments had totaled $79 million, $2.6 million less than budgeted. (NASA Release 78-136 [press kit]; MOR E-604-78-08 [prelaunch] Sept 1/78, [prelaunch summary] Sept 1/78; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 4)
The USAF reported that the E-3A airborne warning and control system (AWACS), “leader” of the USAF command and control structure, had arrived at Wright-Patterson AFB for low-level flight tests conducted by the 6750th Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory to evaluate effects of aircraft noise. Tests with the E-3A would complete the 1978 measurement phase of NOISEMAP, a computer program to assess environmental impact of aircraft noise that had included the F-15, A-10, C-141, and KC-135. The assessments would serve in making alternative aircraft assignments and flight schedules, deciding on appropriate noise suppressors, and discovering potential noise problems for aircraft under design. Civil engineers had used the program in fixing sites for new buildings, determining requirements for adding noise-reduction materials to existing structures, and in orienting trim pads to minimize aircraft-noise impact on the community. AWACS was a modified Boeing 707 used as an airborne command post to coordinate fighters, close air-support aircraft, and strategic bombers in a combat arena. Its friend-or-foe antenna could identify enemy craft in a battlefield setting, allowing the 17-member AWACS crew to relay information to friendly aircraft. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 7)
A laser-heterodyne radiometer (LHR) developed by Dr. Robert Men-zies of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had obtained evidence of ozone destruction in the upper atmosphere, JPL reported. The unique instrument, carried on a gondola suspended from a helium-filled polyethylene balloon, had gathered extremely accurate data by “looking” at the sun through the stratosphere during sunset at an altitude of 25km (120 000ft) where ultraviolet light breaks apart carbon molecules, releasing chlorine. Atoms of chlorine normally existed in quantities so small that their presence was difficult to detect; however, scientists had determined the effect of chlorine in destroying ozone, through a chain reaction that would form chlorine monoxide molecules. Later flights would measure the effect of seasonal variations and would look for other molecules responsible for ozone destruction. The research would assist federal regulators investigating danger from fluorocarbons used in refrigeration and air-conditioning; regulators might decide to ban aerosol propellants by June of this yr. (JPL Universe, Feb 17/78, 1)
Langley Research Center announced it had awarded SDC Integrated Services, Inc., McLean, Va., a contract for support services to operate the digital-computer complex at the center. All segments of the center would use the computer complex in analytical studies, real-time simulations, and experimental data reductions. Services under the contract would include operation of the computing and data-handling equipment, operational and performance analysis, and keypunch and auxiliary equipment operation, in addition to research-data reduction such as programming, nrocessing preparation, and data management. SDC had estimated the cost of the 2-yr base period of the contract at $5.7 million and a 1-yr option at $3 million; the cost-plus-award-fee contract also had two 1-yr unpriced options. (LaRC Release 78-17)
NASA announced selection of 16 experiments in space technology for the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) mission, scheduled as payload for the first Space Shuttle operational flight in 1980. LDEF, managed by Langley Research Center, was a reusable unmanned free-flying structure carrying various technical and scientific experiments in special trays, providing an easy and economical means to conduct primarily passive experiments in earth orbit. NASA had selected the 16 experiments from 190 candidates that responded to an opportunity notice distributed in June 1976. Investigators selected to date represented 6 universities, 6 private organizations or research institutes, and 5 NASA centers. Seven experiments were from France, 2 from England, and 1 from Canada. R&D value, compatibility with LDEF and other experiments, and effort cost had been selection criteria. Technical areas included materials, thermal-control coatings, detectors, power, micrometeoroids, electronics, lubrication, optics, and space-debris detection. Eighty percent of LDEF’s experiment trays had been filled; the remaining space would contain micrometeoroid-detection panels. LDEF would remain in orbit 6 to 12mo for experiment exposure to space environment. The Space Shuttle orbiter would retrieve and return it to earth; experiments would go to their investigators for data analysis. (NASA Release 78-1)
MSFC announced it had successfully completed at the National Parachute Range May 23 an airdrop test of the parachute system designed to recover Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters after launch. This was the fourth drop test in which a dummy booster had been carried aloft beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft; the recovery system’s three main parachutes had all deployed, and all had functioned as expected. The dummy booster had landed virtually undamaged. NASA engineers planned two more airdrops before certifying the system for flight. (.Marshall Star, May 31/78, 2) During May: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that a 15-member U.S. aerobatic team would travel in Aug. to Ceske Budejovice, Czechoslovakia, to compete in the ninth World Aerobatic Championships sanctioned by the Inti. Aeronautic Federation (FAI). The 1978 U.S. team would be all male, as no woman had qualified in competitions to determine team members. Three-time U.S. national champion Leo Loudenslager, an American Airlines pilot, said, “We have high expectations. We have even better trained pilots and more sophisticated aircraft than we did in 1976, and we are more knowledgeable about what to expect.” The 1976 U.S. team had lost to the USSR the titles it had captured in France in 1972: top team, best male, and best female. Loudenslager would fly his experimental modified version of the 200hp Stephens Akro, the Laser 200. Henry Haigh might fly the modified Pitts Special biplane in which he had competed in 1976, basically the same design flown by the remainder of the team. The five aircraft for the competition, disassembled Aug. 8 at Kennedy Inti. Airport for transport to Frankfort, would be reassembled and flown to Peine near Braunschweig in West Germany for 2wk of intensive practice, then to Budejovice for the competition. The championship event would mark nearly two decades of U.S. participation in FAI-sanctioned precision aerobatic competitions, first held in 1960 in Czechoslovakia. The event also would commemorate two-thirds of a century since the first recorded aerobatic flight: Lt. Peter Nesterov of the Imperial Russian Air Service was credited with performing in 1913 the first inside loop in a Nieuport monoplane. NAA, the aero club representing the U.S., had sanctioned as the official team representing the U.S. at the world championships the group selected by the Aerobatic Club of America, which would also be the only team competing in Czechoslovakia without government financing. (NAA newsletter, May 78, 1)
Lewis Research Center and Dryden Flight Research Center would conduct flight tests of advanced models of propellers, some with 8 or 10 blades, intended for new high-speed fuel-conserving aircraft, DFRC announced. LeRC had already measured aerodynamic performance of the approximately 1/7 scale (2ft-diameter) models in its wind tunnel, at a simulated cruise speed of 855kph (530mph) and altitude of 10 668m (35 000ft). NASA estimated that, in those cruise conditions, an advanced turboprop engine with the new-design propeller could save 20 to 40% in fuel over current turbofan engines and 10 to 20% over advanced turbofan engines. (DFRC Release 23-78)
Despite the wealth of data on Mars provided by Mariner 9 and the Viking missions, some mysteries remained, including the “White Rock,” a unique topographic feature nestling inside a crater not far from the Martian equator, JPL Universe reported. White Rock’s discovery by Mariner 9 had intrigued scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory because of the reflectivity of its unknown basic material, and the fact that no other formation on Mars resembled it. At first glance White Rock looked like the paw-print of some manytoed animal, as it was rounded on two-thirds of its perimeter and on the remaining sides had great serrated formations like claws, referred to as “reentrants” and “dunes,” reaching into the floor of the surrounding Martian crater. Scientists believed the ridged area had been eroded by ORIGINAL PAGE IS ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978 Q£ POOR QUALITY NOVEMBER White Rock, strange topographic feature inside a crater on Mars whose composition had puzzled scientists: not snow or ice, because of its proximity to the equator, the formation exhibited high reflectivity first noticed by Mariner 9 in 1972. This photomosaic came from the Viking orbiter in Sept. 1978 (straight lines on the image resulted from assembly of the photographs into a mosaic). (NASA photo 78-H-634) ever-present Martian surface winds. The possibility of ice cover on its surface had been rejected early on because of its proximity to the equator. Speculation on its mineral composition had included salt and/or sand theories. Roughly 18km across, White Rock appeared to rise from the floor of an impact crater some 93km in diameter. Very small impact craters on the floor of the larger crater and on the feature itself might suggest the age of the formation in relation to its surroundings. Although labelled “white,” general opinion was that the feature had a very light orange or pink tint. After Mariner 9 discovered the unique feature, Viking had been programmed for a closer look; Viking's more sophisticated vidicon would offer five times better resolution at a similar altitude. Computer processing of Viking data could produce information to help solve the mystery of White Rock. {JPL Universe, Nov 10/78, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers reported completion of tests simulating checkout of a solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) using flight-type hardware interfaced with the launch-processing system (LPS) and tests run by computer. The tests would verify compatibility of SRB hardware and demonstrate use of the LPS to checkout the SRB system. Flight equipment removed from simulated SRB hardware had been relocated in equipment racks to simulate a left-hand SRB configuration; next use of the LPS would be to checkout the left-hand SRB. United Space Boosters, Inc., would perform the checkouts, then move the equipment to Kennedy Space Center for use in future SRB checkouts. (Marshall Star, Mar 1/78, 2)
Aerospace Daily reported that John Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had addressed the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Nov. 28 on the importance of Congress’s role in an aggressive space program, contrasting the cautious approach of the Carter Administration. He cited the 1978 introduction of national space-policy bills by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.) and Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.). On the House side, Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.) had introduced, and the House overwhelmingly passed, a bill authorizing an unrequested $25 million to broaden and accelerate R&D for a solar power satellite system, including a hardware flight-demonstration phase that the administration had opposed as “premature.”	. The staff of the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications, chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), had been working on ways for Congress to facilitate “the space industrial revolution,” Yardley noted. He added that “if Congress does all these things, it will be in their tradition,” including taking the lead in developing the nation’s railroad system and passing the Homestead Act in the 19th century. “The same kind of action will be needed soon for the space industrial revolution,” he said; the industrial activity required will “be brought to bear if the climate is correct. It’s up to the government to provide the environment to stimulate growth.” Whether this occurred, he concluded, “may be the difference in the next 50 years as to whether the United States continues to be world leader not only in space but economically—or becomes a second-class power.” (A/D, Dec 1/78, 137)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the USAF’s Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL) had successfully completed a rocket test flight of equipment to cope with lightning-like discharges that could affect earthorbiting satellites. These high-voltage discharges could interrupt transmissions of information to earth stations from geosynchronous satellites. A sudden rush of electrical current could confuse control circuits, causing a satellite to behave erratically or fail to function. Scientists were still analyzing information from the 160mi-high rocket flight, but preliminary results showed that the electrical buildup—which could reach thousands of volts—could be controlled by emitting negative or positive charges from the spacecraft. An Astrobee F sounding rocket carried equipment that released either negative charges (electrons) or positive charges (ions) as the electrical charge built up on the rocket body. This either kept the charging to a low voltage or provided an electrically conductive path around the rocket body so the charge could leak off slowly. The rocket payload contained instruments nearly identical to those scheduled for orbit in Jan. on a SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) satellite as part of a test program managed by SAMSO, Los Angeles. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78,9)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch had announced establishment of a $250 000 Center Director’s Discretionary Fund to support innovative ideas in research and technology at NASA centers, the Marshall Star reported. Funds would be used exclusively for pursuit of research and technology tasks, not for facility, personnel, travel, or R&D project problems. Priority would be given to support of in-house activities as opposed to studies or research by contractors. Dr. William Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he considered establishment of the fund a significant and favorable step, and he intended to be personally involved in all facets of the use of the fund and to retain direct control of all fund allocations. A small advisory panel of center personnel would assist the director in evaluating proposed fund uses and the progress of approved activities. (Marshall Star, Nov 1/78, 1)
NASA announced plans to launch from Cape Canaveral no earlier than Mar. 23 an experimental Japanese direct-broadcast communications satellite capable of sending television programs directly into an individual’s home. The satellite, technically named Medium-Scale Broadcasting Satellite for Experiment Purposes (BSE), had been a project of Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA). As agreed by the U.S. and Japan, NASA would launch BSE on a Delta rocket; NASDA would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs. NASA’s worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) would track BSE until it achieved final orbit, when NASDA would take over tracking. Present Japanese TV, though covering 97% of the main islands, had not been economical for remote islands and mountain regions; also, tall buildings had degraded TV reception in large cities. NASDA had designed BSE to transmit high-quality color television to the Japanese islands and Okinawa at lower cost; user antennas could be as small as 1 to 1.6 meters (3.3 to 5.2ft), with production costs estimated at $200 per unit. The high power of BSE could transmit directly to individual TV sets even in bad weather, making TV available to Japanese living on the offshore islands and in inaccessible mountain areas. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage the Delta vehicle for NASA’s Office of Space Transportation Systems, and KSC would manage launch operations. General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., had built the BSE under contract to Tokyo Shibaura Electric Co. The Japanese Broadcasting Corp., the Japanese Ministry of Post and Telecommunications, and the Radio Research Laboratories of Japan would sponsor or participate in the program. (NASA Release 78-33; MOR M-492-212-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb. 28/78; Spaceport News, Mar 17/78, 1)
NASA announced that Landsat 3, an earth-monitoring satellite equipped to measure earth’s emitted and reflected radiance, had suffered a failure in its fifth (or thermal infrared) band. Launched Mar. 5 into a near-circular 917km (570mi) high polar orbit, Landsat 3 had returned excellent imagery from its other four bands. NASA engineers believed the thermal-sensor problem had resulted from moisture buildup on a glass screen through which the instrument viewed earth. Efforts to correct the situation had been unsuccessful, and NASA had convened a special review board to examine the problem. Scientists had hoped to use Landsat 3’s thermal data to detect crop stress and to recognize “heat islands” associated with urban and industrial development. However, NASA’s heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM), launched in Apr. into an orbit more favorable to thermal-infrared data collection, had been returning excellent day-night data that could serve that purpose. (NASA Release 78-124; D/SD, Aug 14/78, 203; A/D, Aug 23/78, 236)
LaRC announced it had selected Mercury Co., Tustin, Calif., to negotiate a contract for a pressure systems certification/recertification and configuration management program, including engineering evaluation of ground-based pressure systems to ensure a safe environment and to facilitate operation of the center’s unique high-energy research facilities. The contractor would make in-service inspection and certification of these pressure systems in accordance with NASA guidelines and In a ceremony at KSC marking NASA's 20th anniversary Oct. 1, President Jimmy Carter awards the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts: Neil Armstrong (center), first man on the moon; Charles Conrad, Jr., commander of the second lunar landing and of the first crew to occupy the Sky lab space station, and Frank Borman, commander of the first manned spacecraft to orbit the moon (seated at left); also to Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; Virgil I. Grissom (posthumously), second American in space; and John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth. (NASA photo 78-H-610) OyRlGINAk PAGE IS, QE 0bR QUALITY would continue the existing configuration management program. LaRC would manage the approximately $1.15 million 2yr contract, which had a lyr option for extension valued at approximately $637 000. (LaRC Release 78-56) October 4\ Two U.S. payload specialists would join three Europeans at Porz-Wahn, W. Germany, Oct. 6 to begin training for Spacelab 1, first combined manned space mission of NASA and ESA, Marshall Space Flight Center reported. They would attend sessions in W. Germany and two other European countries conducted by the scientific investigators planning European-sponsored experiments to fly on Spacelab 1, the two NASA mission specialists assigned to the flight, with MSFC’s Charles Lewis and NASA training coordinator. Porz-Wahn was the site of ESA’s Spacelab payload integration and coordination in Europe (SPICE), which had coordinated European crew training. After the European trip, the group would begin a tour of U.S. scientific installations in Jan. 1979. (.Marshall Star, Oct 4/78, 1)
NASA announced that Heao 1, first of a series of observatories designed to study celestial x-rays and gamma rays, was officially a success. Primary objective of Heao 1 was to obtain highly detailed experimental data on astrophysical phenomena by measuring sizes and locations of x-ray sources and determining their intensity and time variation; according to Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, the objective had been accomplished. NASA had authorized an extension of Heao l’s mission to a second scan of the celestial sphere, and would broaden scientific participation through a guest-investigator program. NASA planned to launch in Nov. 1978 a second high-energy astronomy observatory designed for detailed study of interesting sources pinpointed by Heao 1; a third would be launched in 1979. (NASA Release 78-80)
MSFC announced it had awarded contracts totaling $42 751 900 for scientific investigations in support of the Space Telescope project to five educational institutions: Research Foundation of the State Univ. of New York, Albany, Dr. J. J. Caldwell, Space Telescope interdisciplinary scientist, $126 000; Beloit College, Beloit, Wis., Dr. D. J. Schroeder, telescope scientist, $69 000; Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J., Dr. J. N. Bahcall, interdisciplinary scientist, $257 700; Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, Md., Prof. W. G. Fastie, telescope scientist, $151 300; Univ. of Texas, Austin, Dr. William Jefferys, astrometry science team leader, $1 862 500; and Dr. K. L. Lambert, interdisciplinary scientist, $285 400. The Space Telescope, planned for launch into earth orbit in the early 1980s, would permit scientists to see 7 times farther into deep space than before. MSFC had been lead center for the Space Telescope; GSFC had been responsible for scientific instruments and for planning telescope operations. (Marshall Star, May 10/78, 2)
NASA announced that scientists from NASA’s Ames Research Center and NOAA’s Environmental Research Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., had begun flight tests of an instrument designed by NOAA scientist Dr. Peter Kuhn to warn pilots of impending turbulence (see A&A 1976, Nov. 11, 277). Dr. Kuhn, an experimenter on NASA’s Gerard P. Kuiper Observatory (a C-141 aircraft equipped with a large telescope for astronomy research), had noticed that variations in atmospheric water vapor as measured by an infrared (IR) water-vapor radiometer had often accompanied extreme turbulence encountered by the aircraft; he had succeeded in using IR radiometer to define atmospheric conditions in the telescope’s field of vision. Dr. Kuhn then suggested mounting an 1R radiometer aimed forward in an aircraft; this system had successfully predicted occurrences of turbulence in clear air from 2.5 to 5.5min before encounter. However, researchers needed more encounters from various directions and altitudes to test the instrument, and wanted to experiment with filters and to fine-tune the instrument for optimum results. The joint NASA-NOAA program would consist of exhaustive tests using a NASA Learjet research aircraft to develop a low-cost system that would enhance flight safety and comfort, be suitable for any aircraft, be able to operate unattended and require minimum maintenance, and produce a cockpit visual alert 4 to 5min before a turbulence encounter. (NASA Release 78-15)
LaRC announced that James Patton, Jr., head of the pilots’ office, would receive the Iven C. Kincheloe award at the annual symposium of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots in Los Angeles Sept. 30. The award would honor Patton’s professional accomplishment in initiation, formulation, and conduct of the NASA comprehensive general aviation stall/spin flight research program. John Reeder, chief of LaRC’s TCV program office and a Society fellow, had nominated Patton for the award. In his nomination Reeder noted, “During the (stall/spin) program formulation, Mr. Patton provided invaluable leadership and technical guidance to establish flight safety procedures and ensure a rational and productive flight research program. As a result of his efforts, Langley Research Center has established a stall/spin flight test facility, procedures, and equipment which provide the most sophisticated system to date for general aviation stall/spin research.” Patton had been -in his present position since 1968; he had started as a research pilot with NASA in Apr. 1966. (LaRC Release 78-46)
Langley Research Center announced it had presented to Thomas Blackstock its first major award for an energy-saving proposal. LaRC Director Donald Hearth had presented Blackstock with a check for $1245, largest monetary award ever given at the center for a suggestion. Blackstock’s idea was to upgrade the high-pressure air-supply system in the continuous-flow hypersonic tunnel so that it would run in an intermittent short-duration-flow blowdown test rather than in the longer duration continuous-flow mode. The tunnel, which represented LaRC’s only large-scale Mach 10 aerothermodynamic-test capability, had been important to the Space Shuttle testing and would aid in developing low-cost advanced space-transportation vehicles. Blackstock’s suggestion could save $30 000 the first yr without compromising the tunnel’s research capability; LaRC’s wind tunnels had consumed one-third of the electrical energy purchased by the center. (LaRC Release 78-24; LaRC Researcher, May 5/78, 1)
Dryden Flight Research Center commemorated the final flight lOyr ago of the X-15, piloted by Bill Dana, that reached in its 1 lmin free flight a top speed of 3716mph (5.38 times the speed of sound) and peak altitude of 255 000ft. This chapter in aeronautical history would be celebrated by the Edwards, Calif., AIAA section at a dinner meeting featuring Bill Dana. The article in DFRCX-Press concluded: “Recent press reports call the Space Shuttle engines the first reusable liquid rocket engines. How soon they forget.” {DFRC X-Press, Oct 20/78, 2)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported that NASA and DOE had selected 10 companies to begin contract negotiations for projects to improve current methods of manufacturing modules of photovoltaic cells. The $4 million effort would focus on improving production methods to reduce costs in 1979-1981, and would supplement current DOE efforts to make solar energy economically competitive with conventional power sources. Firms selected were Arco Solar, Inc., Chatsworth, Calif.; Energy Materials Corp., Ayer, Mass.; Kayex Corp., Rochester, N.Y.; Kluicke & Soffa Industries, Inc., Horsham, Pa.; MB Associates, San Ramon, Calif.; Motorola, Inc., Semiconductor Group, Phoenix, Ariz.; RCA Corp., David Sarnoff Research Center, Princeton, N.J.; Sensor Technology, Inc., Chatsworth, Calif.; Siltec Corp., Menlo Park, Calif.; and Sollos, Inc., Los Angeles, Calif. In the specified time period, the firms would develop techniques for mass-producing large modules of silicon-based photovoltaic cells for use by industries producing flat (nonconcentrating) photovoltaic modules. Techniques would include new ways to slice silicon solar-cell material and to assemble photovoltaic modules. JPL would manage the effort (designated Low-Cost Solar-Array Project) for DOE. (NASA Release 78-151)
