MSFC reported completion of a number of Shuttle tests precedent to qualifying the engine and combined elements of the configuration for flight later in 1979. Thiokol Corporation, prime contractor to MSFC for Shuttle motor development, completed static firing tests of the solid-fuel rocket motor February 17 at its Wasatch Division in Utah. During the two-minute firing, the motor thrust reached about 3 million pounds, and the system gimbaling the nozzle for guidance underwent the most severe duty cycle expected to occur during flight. This motor, more than 35 meters long and 3.5 meters in diameter, was the largest of its type ever developed for space flight and the first built for use on a manned craft. Qualification tests later this spring would check out production, assembly, and firing cycle to support a full flight schedule. Each launch would use two of the motors, separated at burnout and parachuted into the ocean for recovery and reuse. On February 23, MSFC also concluded ground vibration tests of the complete Shuttle configuration, assembled for the first time to provide data on liftoff and flight conditions. (MSFC Releases 79-18, 79-19, 79-21)
MSFC reported that a delegation from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) visiting the United States since November would arrive at MSFC January 5 to investigate peaceful uses of space technology. Following up a visit to the PRC last July by Presidential Science Advisor Dr. Frank Press, the Chinese delegation, accompanied by NASA representatives, had visited several NASA centers and U.S. aerospace industry establishments. Among items of interest to the visitors at MSFC would be the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, currently undergoing tests. The PRC representatives were to be in the United States until mid-January and had concluded an informal agreement on developing a civilian communications system for the PRC and on buying equipment to receive Earth resources data from Landsat remote-sensing satellites. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch headed the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Jen Xin-min, director of the PRC’s Academy of Space Technology, headed the PRC delegation. (MSFC Release 79-2)
NASA announced it would deploy seven laser satellite-tracking systems in the United States and the Pacific Ocean as part of a global network to extend conventional measurements of strain in the Earth’s crust and to seek the causes of earthquakes. The lasers, to be in full operation by October, would work with microwave devices using signals from satellites and radio stars to measure crustal movements and the buildup of strain. Laser systems using corner-cube reflectors put on the Moon by the United States and the Soviet Union were operating in Texas, Australia, and West Germany; satellite-laser systems were operating in France, Spain, Germany, Greece, Egypt, England, and the Netherlands. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had laser systems in Peru, Brazil, and eastern Australia. NASA had joined NOAA, the U.S. Geological Survey, NSF, and the Defense Mapping Agency in a program using space technology to reduce earthquake hazards and possibly to develop a capability of predicting them. (NASA Release
The Library of Congress Science and Technology Division’s NASA support project issued two news alerts, the first on a Soviet “space mini shuttle” like the French project Hermes, reportedly designed to carry five or six crew members (or the equivalent in cargo) to visit and replenish orbital stations. The vehicle would use a normal expendable Soviet rocket for launch and make a gliding reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. The translation pointed out that the Soviet concept differed from the United States reusable Shuttle, more closely resembling the CNES manned hypersonic glider. The second notice covered government and CNES decisions affecting the scope and timing of Hermes. The French Council of Ministers on March 7 had approved a Hermes launch capability of seven tons to carry a materials-processing program called Minos, using a space transport vehicle like a mini shuttle to bring back products made in the space factories. A Hermes would be launched by the last of five versions of the Ariane vehicle; development of the Hermes and the Ariane 5 would take from seven to eight years. (LC/S&T Alerts 5498, 5499)
ESA reported a fifth Japan/ESA meeting October 15-17 in Paris, with Roy Gibson, ESA director general, and N. Kozu, of Japan’s science and technology agency, leading the delegations. In several working-group sessions the parties reviewed continuing exchange of information on use of communications satellites; acquiring data from each other’s remote-sensing satellites; flying Japanese scientific instruments on Spacelab launches; mutual use of Japan and ESA tracking stations; and using Spacelab for research in materials and life science. A sixth meeting was set for Tokyo in 1980. (ESA Info Bltn 26) ESA reported a design review of the Marecs project October 9-10 with the prime contractor, British Aerospace, after which the agency approved a start on satellite assembly so that a flight unit would be ready for launch by the Ariane L04 vehicle. (ESA Info Bltn 27)
NASA reported that four organizations in the United States and Canada had formed a joint sounding-rocket program to study this month’s total solar eclipse and its effect on Earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. The February 26 event, visible in totality only in the northwestern United States and central Canada, would be the last one in this century observable from the North American continent. Working from two launch sites in western Ontario north of Minneapolis, Minn., NASA, the Army’s Atmospheric Sciences Laboratory, the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, and Canada’s National Research Council (NRC) would gather data or predicting atmospheric responses to such disturbances. NASA, through WFC, would be the U.S. lead agency for seven rocket launches during the operation. The NRC in Canada would provide construction, ground and flight safety, launch coordination, and other support. The Army lab would sponsor an experiment measuring electron densities, and the U.S. Air Force lab would operate a mobile observatory to measure infrared radiation from the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 79-18)
NASA launched for the U.S. Air Force a satellite called SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 4:42 p.m. EST on Delta into a transfer orbit pending its boost into operational orbit February 2. Later orbit elements were 43,297-kilometer apogee, 27,512-kilometer perigee, 1,416.6-minute period, 6.5° inclination. SCATHA carried twelve experiments, three provided by NASA, to collect data on high-energy solar-wind particles causing false signals from satellites by building up electrical charges on their surfaces. Military and commercial satellites in geostationary orbit over the Earth at 35,900 kilometers (22,300 miles) had been the major sufferers; the charges could effectively disable vital communications by causing equipment failure, false recording of unachieved events, or initiation of unplanned events. SCATHA would meet the greatest challenge of its planned 1-year lifetime during a solar eclipse period beginning in March, when electrical charging would reach its height; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had included an electric-field detector, a pair of 50-meter antennas to be extended in opposite directions in March to form a single instrument longer than a football field. Extension of the antennas might effect the spacecraft’s dynamics. The USAF’s Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) would reimburse NASA about $9 million for the launch. (NASA Release 79-3; NASA MOR M-492-303-79-01 [prelaunch] Jan 17/79, [postlaunch] Oct 25/789; O Sen Star Jan 31/79, 1; Today, Jan 20/79, 8A; Jan 22/79, 6A; Jan 30/79, 10A; W Star Jan 23/79, A-6) During January: The ESA announced that it planned to launch one of its Intelsat V communications satellites on Europe’s Ariane booster. The first four of this series of seven would be launched from mid-1979 to late 1980 on U.S. Atlas Centaurs; ESA’s board opted for a 1981 Ariane launch of its sixth Intelsat V and for Shuttle launches for the other two. (ESA Release Jan 1979, 1)
ESA announced the successful launch of its Ariane LOl at 17 hours, 14 minutes, 38 seconds GMT from Kourou; all three stages functioned normally and the fairing was jettisoned as planned. Achieved orbit was close to planned orbit. Space center facilities and all downrange stations functioned “faultlessly” and permitted continuous tracking of launcher telemetry. (ESA Info Bltn 41)
NASA reported that LeRC engineers had worked for six years on perfecting a new power transmission system: the Nasvytis multiroller traction drive, capable of transmitting high-power loads at high-speed ratios without using toothed gears. Between 1879 and 1971 about 34 patents had been issued on various fixed-ratio traction-drive concepts; 8 of these were issued to Dr. Algirdis L. Nasvytis. NASA engineers working with Nasvytis had made key design changes in traction-drive roller geometries to produce a test rig that could operate in a 15-to-l speed ratio. LeRC had developed for an automotive gas-turbine engine a similar drive that could transmit 7 horsepower per pound compared to conventional gears with about 4 horsepower per pound. Stuart H. Loewenthal, lead LeRC engineer on the project, said the “quiet, almost vibrationless means of transmitting power [could aid in] minimizing the noise pollution that now surrounds us.” The device would be cheaper to make because it needed no gear-tooth design or cutting; it was lighter and smaller than conventional gearboxes; it had performed at 95% efficiency for 15-to-l ratios at speeds to 73,000 rpm, and was more reliable, being less susceptible to wear and breakdown. (Lewis RC Release 79-104)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, sent committee members a report prepared by staff of a review of cost, performance, and schedule aspects of the Space Shuttle program, based on NASA’s request for a $220-million addition to the FY80 budget request. The staff director wrote that recommendations in the report would, if implemented, improve budget requirement estimating, program cost, and schedule control, as well as NASA communications with the committee. (Text, oversight rept Aug 79)
NASA reported that improved components and techniques could lower the “now prohibitive” cost of using turbine rather than piston engines in small general aviation aircraft. If turbines cost only half again instead of three times as much as piston engines, small plane users could reap the advantages of one-third the weight, proven reliability and safety, multifuel capability, and less maintenance, vibration, noise, or pollution. A study by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that an advance turbine aircraft would be 25% cheaper to operate, would use 10% less fuel, and would cost 15% less to purchase than an equivalent aircraft powered by a typical reciprocating engine. Although only 8% of general aviation aircraft flying in the United States, were turbine powered, the study said that the market for PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED | tut-MUON WAV ***** 2i an advanced turbine engine could reach 25,000 units per year by the late 1980s. The general aviation field included 98% of U.S. civilian aircraft. (NASA Release 79-29)
NASA reported results of a 22-month government-industry study of possible damage to electrical equipment from release of carbon fibers in fires after accidents to civil aircraft. R. R. Heldenfels, LaRC director for structure, told a conference at LaRC that public risk from use of carbon fibers on civil aircraft was so small as to be insignificant. The President in July 1977 had directed the Office of Science and Technology Policy to study potential problems of using carbon-composite materials and to provide a plan for federal action if needed. NASA got the assignment to assess risks of such use in civil aviation, with support from the National Bureau of Standards, some DOD laboratories, and private firms. Other federal agencies studying the problem were DOC, DOT, DOE, and EPA. The perceived risk was that breakdown of composite materials in burning would put into the atmosphere short lengths of carbon fiber thought to be hazardous to electrical equipment because of their high heat resistance and electrical conductivity; their extreme light weight would allow them to float for miles before touching electrical equipment, causing short circuits or malfunctions. (NASA Release 79-171; LaRC Release 79-85)
FBIS reported on the status of the Soyuz 32 crew in its continuing flight aboard Salyut 6. Since launch February 25, Vladimir Lyakhov and Valery Ryumin had done daily exercises and physical tests, noted by Soviet press services as “the cosmonauts are feeling well.” Their May 3 activity was experimenting on the Kristall equipment, making “semiconductor monocrystals” of indium arsenide. On May 4 they operated a “submillimeter telescope” gathering data to predict cyclones in tropical zones of Earth. A commentator noted that this equipment was complicated, requiring exact calibration each time it was used, and could be aimed only by turning the entire station. On May 6 they used a “gamma telescope” to measure gamma radiation and charged particles in near-Earth space. On May 8 they replaced their television transmitter with a new one brought by Progress 5. On May 9-10 they used the Kristall to experiment with cadmium sulfide. Tass reported May 13 the launch of Progress 6; a commentator said that the cargo ship contained “an unusual present” to the crew, a tulip scheduled to bloom in space. An ongoing task was to study the efforts of weightlessness and “other space flight factors” on plant growth; small hothouses aboard the Salyut could provide fresh food containing vitamins. The crew was growing green onions; they had reaped their first harvest and “ate it with the permission of biologists.” They also had fennel, parsley, and garlic; Tass noted that “Despite successes of chemistry.. .scientists have not yet managed to create the same vitamins as in nature.” The cosmonauts on Soyuz 29 had repeatedly described the mushrooms they were picking as “really strange.. .their form was unusual with curly stems...”. “Nevertheless,” Tass said, “[the crew had been] greatly pleased. All living things evoke their enhanced interest. . .a psychological backup in their difficult work.” The tulip in outer space, “merely an experiment to scientists,” was for the cosmonauts “a symbol of spring” and an expression of solicitude for the crew that had been working for a long time in isolation. Progress 6 docked May 15, and the crew was unloading cargo and reloading used equipment for the next fortnight. The major job was refueling, difficult and complex in space, but the crew had completed it by May 28. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Dom Svc in Russian, Inti Svc in Russian, May 3-28/79)
NASA adjudged the mission of Heao 2 successful. Launched November 13, 1978, the observatory had made more than 5,000 discrete observations and had worked well for more than 11 months, though design lifetime was only 9 months. On the basis of significant new findings (X-ray detection of more than 60 known quasars and discovery of more than a dozen previously unknown; the absence of hot neutron stars at the center of historic supernovas, calling for new theories to explain the remnant cores; X-ray emissions far more intense than predicted from main-sequence stars) and of “an active and enthusiastic guest observer program,” Dr. Thomas Mutch, associate administrator for space science, recommended extension of the mission. (NASA MOR [postlaunch] S-832-78-02)
The House Committee on Science and Technology announced that it would hold a joint hearing July 19-20 with the House Select Committee on Aging on space technology applications for the elderly and handicapped, to mark the 10th anniversary of the first Moon walk. Committee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said that the hearings would emphasize the importance of space program spinoffs in solving problems here on Earth. NASA would release a report “Technologies for the Handicapped and Aged” on innovations such as a lunar-gravity simulator to speed rehabilitation therapy; a voice-controlled vehicle for paraplegics that could pick up packages, open doors, and handle eating utensils; a human-tissue stimulator to reduce chronic pain; healthmonitoring systems; and fabrics to prevent bedsores. (H Rept Release 96-60)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with Rockwell International Corporation’s space systems group to build two Space Shuttle orbiters (OV-103 and OV-104), convert a ground-test orbiter (OV-99), and modify the first orbiter (OV-102); this would give NASA four orbiters for Shuttle operations. JSC would administer the $1.9-billion contract at Rockwell’s California facilities and at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. (NASA Release 79-15; JSC Release 79-07)
KSC reported another step toward Space Shuttle launch: mating of the first two segments of the solid-fuel rocket motors to aft skirt assemblies. The first major element of the system, the orbiter, was in the KSC processing facility being prepared for launch: the three main engines had been installed, and work was in progress on other items, especially installation of the thermal protection tiles. The second major element, the huge external tank, had been delivered to KSC for checkout before being mated to the rest of the system. The third major element, the two solid-fuel rocket motors that would fire in parallel with the orbiter engines at liftoff, had been built in sections to be assembled at KSC and were designed for reuse after cleaning, refurbishing, and reloading. Before the first test flight in 1980, the remaining tiles would be installed; orbiter systems checked out; remaining motor segments delivered and stacked; major elements mated on the mobile launch platform; assembly rolled out to the launch pad; and three main engines actually test-fired, in a final systems checkout. (KSC Release 174-79)
NASA set June 30, 1980, as the date of the first Shuttle launch, depending on several milestones: Columbia rollout from the orbiter-processing facility to the vertical-assembly building in late March 1980; rollout of the complete Shuttle stack (orbiter, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank) from the VAB to launch pad 39A in mid-April; and a flight-readiness (20-seeond) firing of the Shuttle’s main engine on the launch pad in mid-May. Also needed to make this schedule was certification of the Shuttle main engine by June 30, 1980. Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch said that “some time in August or September” would be a much more likely date as unforeseen problems could delay the launch. NASA planned nine unmanned launches in 1980, eight of them reimbursable by other organizations. (NASA Release 79-162) During November: NASA announced appointment effective immediately of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of JSC’s Shuttle payload and integration development program, as acting associate administrator for STS operations at Headquarters. Lunney would set up the new office that resulted from NASA’s decision to separate STS acquisition from operations, reporting to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. Lunney had been with NASA since 1959, serving at LeRC and LaRC and going to Houston when the MSFC was created. There, he was technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz test project 1972-1975 and was deputy associate administrator for space flight at Headquarters before taking the position at JSC in August 1977. (NASA Release 79-156; NASA anno Nov 16/79) —NASA announced’appointment of A. Thomas Young as director of GSFC, succeeding Dr. Robert Cooper, who left government service in June. Young, deputy director of ARC since February 1979, had been with NASA since 1961 and had worked at LaRC as mission director for the Viking mission to Mars and mission-definition manager for the lunar orbiter project. Before assignment to ARC, he had headed the Headquarters Office of Space Sciences planetary program. (NASA Release 79-164; NASA anno Nov 30/79) —NASA announced that John W. Boyd, on detail as deputy director of DFRC since January 1, would return January 1, 1980, to his post as associate director of ARC. He had begun working at ARC in 1949 as an aeronautical engineer, becoming research assistant to the director of ARC in 1966 and deputy director for aeronautics and flight systems in 1970, serving in that position until his detail to DFRC. He was named associate director of ARC in July 1979.	(NASA anno Nov 19/79) —DFRC announced that Robert R Johannes would become deputy director of DFRC, effective December 1, replacing John W. Boyd. Formerly with the U.S. Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Johannes joined NASA in 1979 and had been director of engineering at DFRC. (DFRC Release 79-40)
NASA announced it would join Soviet scientists for the first time in a study of physiological changes due to simulated weightlessness. Tests in each country on 10 subjects aged between 35 and 40 would comprise two weeks of control observations, one week of bed rest, and two weeks of postrest measurements, including stress tests and blood and urine samples. Half of each group would be horizontal during the total bed rest, the others would rest with heads lowered 6° for horizontal. U.S. tests had kept subjects horizontal only, and the identical studies would indicate the best procedure. The program would begin in mid-May at the Moscow Institute of Medico-Biological Problems and continue at Ames Research Center (ARC) in July. Both NASA and USSR scientists would take part in each experiment. (NASA Release 79-46; ARC Release 79-17)
NASA announced a short-term research program using the human-powered Gossamer Albatross 2, sister ship of the craft that flew over the English Channel this summer, powered by a pilot pedaling a bicycle-like system to drive the propeller. The study, funded jointly by DFRC and LaRC, would fly a lightweight data system on the aircraft to measure its stability, control, and performance characteristics in human-powered flight; under tow (in propeller-off flight); and under electric-motor in steady-state conditions. NASA would use results of the study in future low-speed lightweight aircraft flying at extreme altitudes. (NASA Release 79-141) During October: NASA reported personnel actions. —Dr. Lee R. Scherer, associate administrator for external relations at NASA Headquarters and former director of KSC, received for a second time the agency’s highest honor, the distinguished service medal, from Dr. Robert A. Frosch in a Headquarters ceremony October 4. Scherer previously received NASA’s exceptional service medal and exceptional scientific achievement medal. (KSC Release 169-79) —L. Michael Weeks, formerly with General Electric, would be deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems Acquisition under John Yardley at Headquarters effective November 5. (NASA Release 79-138; NASA anno Oct 29/79) —The AP reported the death October 22 of Dr. Hans Gruene, 69, KSC director of launch vehicles from 1964 to his retirement in 1973. Born in Germany, he entered the United States in 1945 with a group headed by Wernher von Braun assigned to launch V-2 rockets captured from the German army. He had come to Cape Canaveral in 1952 to set up a joint long-range proving ground that became the ETR. He had concluded his career with the four Skylab launches in 1973. (WStar, Oct 25/79, B-5; Spaceport News, Oct 26/79, 1)
MSFC announced that payload specialists selected for Spacelab 2 would begin training in April with an orientation tou r to visit most of the principal investigators whose experiments would ride on the 1982 mission. Each of the selectees had been a co-investigator on one of the Spacelab 2 experiments. The three men and one woman selected would visit six sites in the United States and three in the United Kingdom for a first look at many of the experiments and to allow them to decide with MSFC management how much training they would need before the flight. To be visited were Chicago, Iowa City, Palo Alto, Pasadena, Washington, D.C., and Cambridge, Mass., in the United States; and Abingdon, Dorking, and Birmingham in England. Those selected were Dr. Loren W. Acton, research scientist at Lockheed’s Palo Alto laboratory; Dr. John-David F. Bartoe and Dr. Dianne K. Prinz, research physicists at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C.; and Dr. George W. Simon, chief of the solar research branch at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, assigned to the Sacramento Peak observatory in New Mexico. Two of the specialists would actually fly on Spacelab 2 to operate the scientific experiments; the others would operate ground-based equipment and assist the two in orbit. Spacelab 2’s payload would consist mainly of experiments in astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar physics, plus plasma physics, botany, medicine, and space technology. (MSFC Release
NASA announced that it would launch the third applications explorer mission, AEM-C, from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Scout on or about October 29. Called Magsat (magnetic-field satellite), the craft would map Earth’s magnetic field and record distribution of crustal anomalies with a resolution of 350 kilometers, first global vector measurements of the nearEarth field. Magsat was a cooperative effort of NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey, which would use the data to update its magnetic charts. (NASA MOR E-662-79-01 [prelaunch] Sept 28/79) During September: The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy announced that the United States and Japan had formally agreed to extend their research and development cooperation into nonenergy fields. A meeting in Tokyo September 20-21 had issued a U.S.-Japan joint communique recalling summit talks in May between President Carter and Prime Minister Ohira on cooperative efforts in basic and applied research; working groups at the September meeting had looked at possible joint projects in areas such as environment, health, and outer space development. Further meetings would be held, the next in Washington. (Executive Office of the President release, no date)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that this week it would complete taking over all of its own managerial and operational activities, performed by the U.S. Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) since INTELSAT’s founding in 1964. ComSatCorp had been handing back responsibilities gradually since 1973 and would continue to provide technical and laboratory services under contract. Jobs done by ComSatCorp had included procuring spacecraft and launch services, operating and maintaining facilities, carrying out technical studies, and performing research and development. This would be the first time in INTELSAT history that it would incorporate all of its own executive functions, both administrative and technical. (INTELSAT Release
The Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reported Japan’s successful launch of an experimental communications satellite Ecs, also called Ayame, from Tanegashima Space Center on an N-l rocket at 5:46 p.m. local time. Early orbit elements were 34,411-kilometer apogee, 193-kilometer perigee, 604-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Designed for communications tests at very high frequencies, Ayame would later be maneuvered into stationary orbit, the National Space Development Agency said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 6/79)
NASA announced preparations for Voyager 7’s encounter with the planet Jupiter about March 5. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) would provide television coverage of the event; employees at Langley Research Center (LaRC) would have a special 7 a.m. colloquium in the center’s cafeteria, complete with breakfast service and television monitors throughout the area. After 18 months of space travel, the encounter would take place at 7:42 a.m. EST at a distance of 278,000 kilometers (172,750 miles) from the planet’s cloud tops. Real-time images and live programming through Comsat 1 would continue for about two hours. (NASA Release 79-26; LaRC anno, undated)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, its administrator, would head a 13-member delegation of U.S. officials to the People’s Republic of China May 19-June 3 to learn about PRC space activities and discuss areas of planned cooperation, including a PRC domestic communications satellite system and ground station for PRC reception of Landsat data. The U.S. group, including representatives of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, National Security Council, State Department, National Telecommunications and Information Administration, NOAA, and U.S. Geological Survey, would meet with PRC officials in Beijing and tour their space installations. Frosch would return to the United States, after the Beijing meetings. The group had been invited by Dr. Jen Xin-min, head of the PRC Academy of Space Technology and leader of a space delegation that visited NASA and space industry firms in 1978; President Carter and PRC vice premier Deng Xiaoping had signed an agreement on space cooperation January 31, 1979. Meanwhile, the press reported that ComSatCorp president Joseph Charyk had told the corporation’s annual meeting in Washington of talks with PRC representatives on providing ComSat technical assistance in building a network of satellites and ground stations estimated to cost “in the hundreds of millions of dollars,” most of the necessary equipment to be purchased in the United States (NASA Release 79-70; W Star May 16/79, F-l; W Post, May 16/79, D-7)
Photographs of Jupiter’s moon Io taken by Voyager 1 had revealed a strange “blue snow,” identified as volcanic gases released by continuous eruptions in the equatorial region, the New York Times reported. Dr. Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey told the American Geophysical Union spring meeting in Washington, D.C., that wisps of the gas appeared in Io’s south polar area along faults or fractures in the crust; this was the first finding of erupting volcanoes anywhere except on Earth, and the intense volcanic activity was “endlessly repaving [Io’s] surface with volcanic material.” Dr. Edward C. Stone of the California Institute of Technology (CalTech), chief Voyager mission scientist, said that a change in the Voyager 2 plan would include time-lapse photography of Io to pinpoint the nature of the volcanic activity. Dr. John C. Pearl of GSFC said Voyager 7’s infrared detectors showed that the main constituent of the gases was sulfur dioxide, also found in Earth’s volcanic eruptions. Dr. Norman F. Ness, also of GSFC, said Jupiter’s magnetic field extended far beyond Io’s orbit, creating a “big power station in the sky.” (NY Times, May 31/79, B-16) During May: NASA reported that the X-ray telescope on Heao 2 had photographed for the first time an X-ray “burster,” a “bizarre” phenomenon occurring when compact celestial objects less than 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter increase suddenly and intensely in X-ray brightness. Such a burst, releasing more X-ray energy in 10 seconds than the Sun does in a week, was first discovered by a Netherlands/U.S. cooperative satellite carrying Harvard-Smithsonian detectors in 1976. Scientists had not defined the nature of the bursts, which might result from explosions similar to a helium bomb on the surface of a neutron star or from violent instabilities in gas flow down a black hole. Heao 2’s picture, said Jonathan Grindlay of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, established the presence of a “steady” X-ray source in a “globular cluster” called Terzan 2, bringing the number of such clusters known to harbor X-ray sources to at least eight, six of these being bursters. The cores of globular clusters (oldest objects in the galaxy, consisting of round swarms of about 100,000	stars) were under study as possible precursors of black holes or of compact binary systems containing either neutron stars or black holes being formed to produce bursting X-ray sources. (NASA Release 79-65)
NASA announced that Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart had resigned to take a position with a State of California commission on energy resources that plans and regulates the state energy system. Schweikart flew the first lunar module on Apollo 9 in 1969 and was commander of the backup crew for the first Skylab mission. In May 1974 he became director of user affairs in the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters; in September 1976, he was named assistant for payload operations in Planning and Program Integration and was detailed in September 1977 to the State of California as assistant to the governor for science and technology. (NASA anno July 30/79)
The Washington Post reported that five states were vying for the Large Space Telescope “even though it will be 300 miles above everybody’s head.” The actual bone of contention was the science institute that would direct use of the unique orbiting observatory. One astronomer said the location of the institute would be “the astronomical capital of the world” for the next 30 years; it was “the biggest astronomical prize to come along since the 200-inch was built at Palomar for the Hale Observatory.” The five competing states were Maryland, New Jersey, Illinois, Colorado, and California (the University of Arizona and University of New Mexico, where numerous ground-based telescopes were already located, were considered “occasional” contenders). Competition for the institute was so serious that three of the competing groups represented 74 universities: the University Research Association (URA), with 53; Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI), with 7; and the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), with 14. URA backed the Fermilab outside Chicago; AUI wanted it at Princeton; AURA wanted it at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. Princeton boasted of Einstein’s work there for over 20 years. Hopkins said that it had been doing spaceborne astronomy for 20 years and was closer to Washington and to GSFC, which would track and control the Space Telescope. NASA said it would not decide for a year; the Washington Post said that nobody at the agency would talk about it. (W Post, Nov 18/79, A-4)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
The Washington Post reported that Pluto, known for some 40 years as the outermost planet of the Earth’s solar system, would no longer be furthest from the Sun as of this date, when it would edge inside the orbit of Neptune and remain there until March 1999. Discovered in 1930 by Clyde Tombaugh at the Lowell Observatory, Pluto had an elliptical orbit that would bring it inside that of Neptune every 248 years (that is, the crossing last happened in 1731, and before that in 1483) and keep it there for about 20 years. Scientists at the U.S. Naval Observatory said that elliptical orbits of the two planets were so inclined that Pluto and Neptune could never come closer than about 240 million miles to one another. Last year, photographs of Pluto revealed a large satellite visible from only one side of the planet; it was named Charon, for the ferryman on the river Styx in Pluto’s realm of Hades. (Washington Post, Jan 22/79, A-9)
NASA launched the high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 3 at 1:28 a.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station on an Atlas Centaur into an orbit with 492-kilometer apogee, 477-kilometer perigee, 94.3-minute period, 43.6° inclination. It was third of a series designed to survey the sky for X-ray sources, measure gamma-ray flux, and define the composition of cosmic-ray nuclei. The first Heao, launched in 1977 with a 6-month design lifetime, measured and mapped X-ray and gamma-ray sources for 17 months, reentering Earth’s atmosphere in March 1979. It had increased the number of known X-ray resources from 350 to 1,500 and had discovered a new black-hole candidate as well as a dust cloud enveloping a supercluster of galaxies. The second, called Einstein, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built, was launched November 1978 with a 1-year lifetime to examine in greater detail the findings of Heao 1. Heao 3 carried a gamma-ray spectrometer and experiments on a cosmic-ray isotopes and heavy cosmic-ray nuclei. Data from the three observations would cast light on the origins of high-energy radiation in space and the formation of elements and of the universe. (NASA Release 79-113; NASA MOR S-832-79-03 [prelaunch] Aug 10/79, [postlaunch] Sept 20/79; prelaunch summary, Sept 10/79)
DOT announced that Secretary Brock Adams had sent to Congress proposed legislation to provide $6.6 billion for improving U.S. airports and airway systems over 5 years, beginning October 1, 1980. The proposal emphasized aviation safety measures to meet expected 1980s growth in air transportation. Financed by a 10 year continuation of the airport/airway trust fund and related aviation user taxes, the bill would include airport development and planning; acquisition and upgrading of airway facilities and equipment; research to reduce congestion and delays at large U.S. airports; improvement of air traffic control, instrument landing systems and radars, and other navigation aids; reduction of aircraft noise; and funding for smaller airports to reduce the load on larger ones. (DOT Release 51-79) During April: NASA reported new data on Venus From the Pioneer mission and the radar at the Arecibo observatory in Puerto Rico. Radar had given best information on the surface of Venus, not visible through optical telescopes because of heavy cloud cover. Radar images covering an area 80 million square kilometers showed craters on Venus as large as 320 kilometers in diameter; like lunar craters, which they resembled, they apparently resulted from meteorite impacts. A circular area 1,120 kilometers in diameter called Alpha, first noticed because of high radar reflectivity, consisted of many parallel ridges identifiable for great distances. This area had no Earth counterpart except extensive dune systems in the Arabian peninsula; Alpha showed a central dark object, possibly a volcano. Another radar feature known as Beta, with long rays of rough material extending out as far as 48 kilometers, also had a central dark area like a volcano crater. The radar also detected parallel ridges about 2,100 miles high, extending more than 960 kilometers across the surface of Venus, forming a structure exceeding the Grand Canyon in scale. A report on Pioneer Venus orbiter and multiprobe mission findings included discovery of the largest canyon in the solar system, bigger than Mar’s Vallis Marineris, previously thought largest. Lightning activity detected by USSR Venera spacecraft was continuous from altitudes of 32 kilometers down to 2 kilometers, with discharges as frequent as 25 per second. Pioneer’s orbiter apparently saw this lightning also; experimenters Dr. Boris Ragent of ARC and Dr. Jacques Blamont of the University of Paris now theorized that a glow measured by Pioneer instruments was continuous indistinguishable lightning on Venus, rather than an occurrence on the spacecraft. The orbiter also found an 1,100-kilometer-wide hole containing few or no clouds in the North Pole cloud cover, suggesting a downflow of atmosphere there. (NASA Release 79-47; ARC Release 79-12)
NASA reported that arrangements for press coverage of the overland trek of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia from Rockwell’s plant at Palmdale, Calif., to Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and the flight from there to KSC, would begin March 7 for DFRC and March 5-9 at KSC. The trip by truck would precede the mating of Columbia to its Boeing 747 carrier, the brief flight test March 9 of ferry preparations and tile status, and the departure soon after for KSC. The Shuttle would be off-loaded and moved into the orbiter processing facility March 10-11. (NASA Release NE79-2)
NASA reported that its first high-energy astronomy observatory, Heao 1, had exhausted its attitude-control gas supply, ending a 17-month mapping of celestial X-ray sources. Launched August 12, 1977, and designed for a 6-month lifetime, Heao 1 had returned data of such quality that NASA had extended its mission. Its systems and experiments had functioned well throughout, though the primary mission ended in February 1978. Results included raising the number of X-ray sources from the 350 previously known to nearly 1,500; locating a new black-hole possibility near the constellation Scorpius, bringing the total to four; and discovering a universal hot plasma constituting a major part of the mass of the universe, as well as a dust and gas cloud with a mass probably sufficient to “close” the universe (prevent its perpetual expansion). The results had already engendered more than 160 technical papers and scientific presentations, and analysis of the Heao 1 data would require years of work by high-energy astrophysicists; the findings might change fundamental concepts of the universe, the NASA report said. Heao 1 would probably reenter Earth’s atmosphere in late March. (NASA Release 79-4; MSFC Release 79-3).
NASA announced that a special staff of consultants appointed in May 1979 to assess Shuttle management had submitted its report to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. The report contained eight major conclusions (and comments). 1) When the Shuttle program began, NASA managers took an economical approach to space transportation. Subsequent budgets challenged managers to bring in a difficult technical program with limited funds. —(NASA originally envisioned a S5.15 billion program, predicting first manned orbital flight in 1978.) 2)	Shuttle management had achieved “a commendable level of accomplishment. . .considering fiscal constraints placed upon the program since its inception.” (Though this report necessarily focused on deficiencies, it noted that Shuttle-program personnel had individually and collectively achieved a great deal in a large and very complex program,) 3)	Shuttle management, in an effort to proceed toward completion even under funding limitations, had set up work schedules demanding more performance than could be delivered. (This approach had resulted in deferment of some of the planned work each year, as funds required exceeded those available. When critical new work became necessary within a fiscal year, as technical problems came up, even more scheduled work had to be deferred. This resulted in continual planning adjustments that precluded establishment of a stable baseline and led to program inefficiency. (Example: subcontractor work increased or decreased repeatedly as funding changed in critical areas such as tile manufacturing. Program changes and associated up-and-down expenditure rates had led to termination of experienced contractor and subcontractor personnel, who became unavailable later because of aerospace industry demand. The subsequent employment of inexperienced personnel reduced overall efficiency. The report called this a major cause for concern, especially in the production phase of the program, also, costs due to delays in solving technical problems had increased.) 4)	Long-range planning and status reporting were lacking: emphasis was on the current fiscal year with only secondary attention to work remaining to be done. Near-term planning took so much attention that long-term impact of deferred work was not integrated into the budgets. (Effective long-range planning requires clear understanding of what has been accomplished, plus accurate prediction of remaining work. Shuttle management faced budgets showing unrealistic costs of its goals, with no effective status-reporting system. Most program planning consisted of constant near-term replanning to count up expenditures in a timely manner, although measuring the work achieved through these expenditures and estimating work still needed were weak. Management tools lacking in some major Shuttle contracts, such as cost reporting integrated with work measurement, were useful but did not provide an automatic solution. (The only available means of assessing even the partial funding requirements of the Shuttle was an agencywide budget plan called POP [program operating plan] inadequate for program control: it appeared only twice a year and contained little pertinent data between July and March. NASA needed a reliable way—lending itself to independent evaluation—to know program baseline and status, with realistic cost and schedule projections. Management must overcome the cumulative impact of previous constraints and pressures, while making allowance for the need to rely on contractor input.) 5)	The Shuttle organization functioned well from a technical standpoint but not in the areas of schedule and budget. Organization needed strengthening, and two-way communications needed improvement. (The original concept of Shuttle organization was a Level 1 program director at NASA Headquarters, a Level 2 [integration] program manager at JSC, and Level 3 separate program offices at the various centers: JSC for the orbiter; MSFC for the main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster; and KSC for checkout and launch. Prime contractor support to project offices would be Level 4. Time had altered the concept: the Headquarters Level 1 associate administrator had become the de facto program director, who required the directors of JSC, MSFC, and KSC to take more part in activities reporting to them; responsibility for funding shifted from Level 2 to Level 1. This seemed a feasible arrangement, but the report said “none of the management levels in Rockwell and NASA had a good grasp” of undone work and other items needing completion before shipping Columbia to KSC. Investigators said Level 1 “broad and detailed involvement” with technicalities meant less time for cost and schedule. NASA needed cost awareness “independent of contractor input” and sensitivity to “lower-level cost trends.”) 6)	Schedule changes were no longer a valid way to cope with reduced program or funds; fixed delivery schedules and milestones in the initial operating program not yet achieved required a new management approach. (Work schedules and budgets must allow for modifications required after the first few Shuttle flights. Users must recognize that initial operations would include development; NASA should make Shuttle users aware of realistic performance and schedule commitments, with priority to successful completion of development.) 7)	Transition to the operational phase remained to be worked out; management should ensure that current organization alignments for Shuttle operations are appropriate. The NASA/DOD interface needed clarification. (NASA Headquarters managed program operations, with operations offices at JSC, MSFC, and KSC; cooperation between the operations and program offices was evident, but transition from development to operations would need work. Since needs and plans of the DOD user community would affect NASA planning and budget, management to forestall problems should maintain “high-level near-term understanding” of DOD plans.) 8)	The potential was high for unexpected technical problems, schedule slips, and cost growth. All program planning should include appropriate reserves. (Although the report noted that some parts of a total management-control and information system were in place and functioning well, significant potential for problems would remain until deficiencies cited in the report were corrected.) (Shuttle Program Management Assessment rept, Sept 12/79 [issued to press Oct 18/79], HistOfc fls; NASA note to editors NE79-20; JSC Roundup, Sept 21/79, 1)
At a press conference on NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1980 (FY80), Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said the 1980 budget year would not “go down in history as my favorite.” The request NASA submitted to Congress was just over $4.7 billion, an increase of about $160 million over the FY79 budget, counting in the latter a $185 million supplemental NASA had asked for. The FY80 request would amount to slightly less than the rate of inflation, Dr. Frosch said; not counting the $185 million supplemental in the FY79 budget, the 1980 request would be “about equal to inflation.” Whereas funding sought for space science and applications was up about 20% and the total amount included support for all ongoing programs, it contained no money for “new flight project starts of any major kind” in space sciences or applications. The budget did contain “some increases in aeronautics, where it is more difficult to identity a major new start in any case.” “Current best estimate” for the first Space Shuttle flight was November 9, postponed from September 28, and NASA’s schedule had been adjusted accordingly. Money requested for space science had increased $100 million, about 20% over FY79; this covered major projects and research and development now under way, such as Space Telescope, Galileo (the Jupiter-orbiter probe), the high-energy astronomical observatory, Spacelab, the solar polar mission, infrared astronomy satellite, and solar maximum mission. Applications funding included money for joint multiagency research in crop monitoring and commodity projection by NASA, together with the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior and the Agency for International Development (AID). Funds for aeronautics would increase 14% to cover current research and technology and to continue the aircraft energy efficiency program, with research on reduction of noise and pollution. In manpower, NASA would lose 674 permanent Civil Service positions over FY79 and FY80, part of this the agency’s share of a government-wide 2 % cut in personnel. Frosch summarized the budget as one that “in key program areas continues momentum. . .while it’s tight, we think we can make a good transition to the Shuttle era and we can keep going on the science, the applications, and the aeronautics.. (Text; W Star, Jan 22/79, A-10)
ESA announced that it had scheduled the first test flight of its Ariane launcher for December 15 from Kourou, French Guiana. Firing of an Eridan sounding rocket November 14 had confirmed operational status of the launch base and downrange stations in Brazil and on Ascension Island. (ESA Info Bltn 32)
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that the five “payload specialists” selected last July to operate experiments on the first Spacelab mission in 1981 would begin training January 9 at seven cities in the United States and two in Canada. Selection and training of non-NASA scientists to fly in space was a “famous first” for NASA; the scientists chosen by their colleagues having experiments aboard the Spacelab would be the first noncareer astronauts and would include the first Western Europeans and the first non-U.S. citizens to fly on a U.S. space mission. Three payload specialists were Europeans: Ulf Merbold of West Germany, representing Max-Planck Institute of Stuttgart; Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, representing Europe’s Space Technology Center (ESTEC); and Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, representing Groenigen University. U.S. selectees were Michael L.	Lampton of the University of California at Berkeley and Byron K. Lichtenberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Since October 1978, the five had been in Europe learning to operate experiments designed by European scientists. Two of the selectees would actually fly on Spacelab 1, and the other three would operate the experiment equipment on earth. Spacelab 1 would carry 40 instruments, about equally divided between NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) experiments in terms of weight, volume, and power requirements; fields of investigation would include solar physics, space plasma physics, stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, earth observation, materials processing, and technology areas, such as thermodynamics and lubrication. After leaving MSFC, the trainees would visit Redondo Beach (Calif.), the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Philadelphia, Boston, and Montreal (Quebec) and Toronto (Ontario) in Canada; return to JSC in Houston; visit Palo Alto, Calif; and be back at MSFC in Huntsville on March 22. (MSFC Releases 79-1, 79-4)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel W. Hinners, associate administrator for space science, had accepted appointment as director of the National Air and Space Museum, effective in April. He had joined NASA in 1972 as chief scientist and deputy director of Apollo lunar exploration in the Headquarters Office of Manned Space Flight and had held his present job since June 1974. (NASA Release 79-32) The scheduled takeoff for Florida might be delayed because of bad weather, NASA spokesmen warned, to lessen chances of an accident during the crosscountry flight; adverse conditions had developed along the route. The 15-minute test flight Friday of the orbiter-747 combination resulted in extensive damage to the protective-tile surface of the orbiter, said former astronaut Deke Slayton, NASA’s manager for orbiter flight tests. As the 747 took off down the runway at Edwards, parts of the dummy tiles, some as long as 2.5 feet began to fall off the spaceship. When the flight ended, Columbia had lost not only some of the plastic-foam dummy tiles attached by tape to the areas around the windows, fuselage sides, wings, and midtail, but also some of the 26,000 actual protective tiles bonded to the spaceship at the plant. “When the dummies began to fall off, the tape which was attached to them started to swirl around and damage some of the real tiles,” said Slayton, who flew one of two chase planes to keep an eye on the orbiter-747 test flight. NASA had decided to send Columbia to KSC without about 8,000 tiles that could be installed there; dummies had been used to cover areas where in-flight problems might arise, but after seeing the test results, engineers decided that not all the dummies were needed. Slayton said that the orbiter-747 assembly was now scheduled to depart for Florida on Monday, March 12. The 3,000-mile ferry flight had originally been set for Friday, March 9, but a problem arose in mounting the orbiter on the 747, caused by misalignment of the orbiter to the three struts atop the 747, and the test flight was delayed until Friday afternoon, after which the tile problem occurred. Although NASA engineers said March 10 that the combination could still fly cross-country March 12, a later report said that 34 dummy tiles were lost and 39 damaged; 7 real tiles were destroyed or lost and 100 damaged. Replacement of missing tiles would delay the trip at least to Saturday, March 17; NASA planned to complete the fix without removing the orbiter from its carrier aircraft. (NY Times, Mar 9/79, A-20; W Post, Mar 9/79, A-3; Mar 12/79, A-7; W Star, Mar 10/79, A-5; Mar 11/79, A-6; Mar 12/79, A-4; Today,, Mar 9/79, 1A, 16A; Mar 10/79, 1A, 8A; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Mar 13/79)
The New York Times reported that a huge international scientific project supported by 147 nations would begin this week. The $500 million Global Weather Experiment (GWE), part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP), would be a joint effort of the World Meteorological Organization and the International Council of Scientific Unions, financed by the meteorological group. It would expand the existing World Weather Watch, now generating more than 40,000 daily observations, by using 10 satellites, 50 research vessels, 110 aircraft, 300 high-altitude constant-level balloons, and 300 instrumented ocean buoys, in addition to other measuring devices. The widely dispersed instruments and large numbers of scientists would study seasonal weather cycles in Earth’s atmosphere and would gauge the practical limits of present technology for weather forecasting, to compile what would be the most complete record of global weather data ever attempted. Twice daily, about 50 oceanographic research ships from 22 nations would release balloon-borne packages for atmosphere measurements; U.S. researchers would release 150 balloons in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans to monitor winds and temperatures at an altitude of 47,000 feet. Satellites would record wind forces and directions by photographing changes in cloud shapes and positions; they and other spacecraft would record atmospheric temperature and humidity as well as ocean rainfall and sea surface temperatures. The head of the U.S. team, Rex Fleming of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that the belt of tropical oceans around Earth’s equator was an enormous heat sink absorbing solar energy and creating much of the world’s weather and that observations there were meager. “This will be the first time that an annual record of weather data will have been taken over the whole world,” Fleming said. “The world can’t afford to do this every year, but we hope from all this to design a weather-observance system that the world can afford.” U.S. organizations besides NOAA taking part in the GWE would include the Departments of Commerce (DOC), Defense (DOD), Energy (DOE), Interior, State, and Transportation (DOT); the National Center for Atmospheric Research; NASA; the National Science Foundation (NSF); Defense Nuclear Agency; the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Coast Guard; and many academic institutions. (NY Times, Jan 7/79, 1)
