NASA noted the 20th anniversary of the first research of the X-15 rocket plane that opened up the realm of hypersonic flight and contributed significantly to the U.S. space program. The X-15 made 199 flights in a joint NASA-U.S. Air Force-Navy research program between 1960 and 1968, during which it set the standing records for altitude and speed of winged aircraft: altitude of 1,796 kilometers (354,200 feet, more than 67 miles), and on another flight 7,274 kilometers per hour (4,520 miles per hour), or 6.7 times the speed of sound. X-15 pilots included Scott Crossfield, the first; astronaut Joe Engle; and Neil Armstrong, first man on the Moon. In 1954, at the beginning of the X-15 program, hypersonic flight had many unknowns: effects of weightlessness, high heat rates, steep reentry angles, attitude control in space—questions that only actual flight could answer. The program would also explore capabilities and limitations of a human pilot in an aerospace vehicle; analysis of the first 44 flights showed that 13 would have failed without a human pilot. Positive result of the program was the finding that human capabilities of sensing, judging, coping with the unexpected, and using a variety of acquired skills remained undiminished in all key problems of aerospace flight. A significant X-15 contribution to the space program was to demonstrate that simulators could be used for crew training: no X-15s had two seats, so the pilots had to train in simulators. Success of this method led to all-out use of simulators for the space program. Total cost of the program, including construction of three X-15 aircraft, was about $300 million. (NASA Release 80-37; NASA Actv, May 80, 8)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA scientists and engineers were “concerned that political maneuvering, as opposed to thoughtful planning, was playing too strong a part” in FY81 budget cuts affecting NASA science and applications programs. Delay in bringing NASA’s program before a House appropriations subcommittee scheduled to meet March 25 could force the agency off the hearing schedule for weeks, further endangering approval of the $300 million Space Shuttle supplemental for FY80. NASA and congressional observers feared administration efforts to delay announcement of federal program cuts until after primary elections set for the coming week. {AvWk, Mar 24/80, 21)
INTELSAT announced that it had awarded Ohio State University a $150,000 contract for a rain measurement study that might improve satellite transmission quality in regions with heavy rain. Satellite signals above the 10-GHz frequency would be weakened when sent through rain; the study would help INTELSAT determine how much extra power a satellite would need to compensate for rain effects. Having two stations a few miles apart in heavy-rainfall areas would permit use of the station with better weather during stormy times. The study would send radar signals into rainclouds and measure the return signal to find the rain’s effect on signal strength. (INTELSAT Release 80-07-1)
The FCC called for public comment on ComSatCorp reorganization, to prevent its role as sole U.S. representative in the global communications satellite system from interfering with its growing competitive activities. An official said that this “could lead to changes” in ComSatCorp operations. An FCC staff study earlier in 1980 said that the potential for conflict was substantial enough for ComSatCorp to need two separate parts: one for its role in the global system, the other providing services like a long-distance telephone system or satellite-to-home subscription television. As a result, ComSatCorp had set up a World Systems Division to take charge of its congressionally mandated role in the global system, its competitive activities remaining with its subsidiary Comsat General [see September 23]. However, research and development by Comsat Laboratories would remain in the parent company. FCC noted that the subsidiary could obtain new technology developed by the laboratories either free or below cost, enabling it to undercut competitor prices. It was debating further action to ensure that ComSatCorp did not use the knowledge gained in its monopoly role to compete unfairly with other communications firms. (W Star Oct 14/80, D-7)
NASA reported that a final test firing of the Shuttle solid-fuel booster motor February 13 in the Utah desert was successful, and the motor would be ready for flight as soon as test-data results were available. Tests of this motor had begun in July 1977 with static firing of the first of four prototypes; three more development tests followed, the last Februaiy 17, 1979. A series of test firings of flight-type motors began June 13, 1979, to qualify them for manned flight; the test just concluded was the third and final firing of that series. Robert E. Lindstrom, manager of the Shuttle projects office of MSFC, said completion of the tests meant that the solid-fuel booster motors would perform successfully in flight. After propellant burnout, the boosters would separate and plunge into the ocean for retrieval and reuse. Two of the solid-fuel boosters were already on the launcher at KSC awaiting integration with other components (external tank and the orbiter itself) in preparation for the first Shuttle flight later this year. The assembled motor, major component of the booster, was more than 35 meters (115 feet) long and 3.5	meters (12 feet) in diameter, largest rocket motor of its type developed for space flight and the first built for manned spacecraft; it would generate 3 million pounds of thrust. (MSFC Release 80-18; NASA Release 80-25)
NASA reported that X-ray data from Heao 1, a high-energy astronomy observatory launched in August 1977 and terminated in 1979, had revealed a superhot superbubble of gas—a gigantic shell about 6,000 light years away from Earth and 1,200 light-years in diameter—in the constellation Cygnus, the Northern Cross. Dr. Webster Cash, of the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at Boulder, and coinvestigator, Dr. Philip Charles of the University of California at Berkeley, had analyzed the information from a cosmic X-ray instrument on the observatory that had been devised by Dr. Elihu Boldt of GSFC and Dr. Gordon Garmire of CalTech. In a speech for delivery to a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in San Francisco January 16, Cash explained that parts of the bubble had been seen before in brief X-ray glimpses, but no one realized what was being observed: one part was thought to be a supernova remnant, another part to be hot gas escaping from a galaxy. Because of its site, the bubble was not visible in its entirety until Heao 1 picked it up in an X-ray sweep. Cash said the huge halo was never spotted before because “it flows so energetically that it cools through emission of x-rays” instead of more normal emissions visible in the optical or infrared regions of the spectrum. A cool gas cloud known as the Great Rift of Cygnus, measuring 800 to 1,300 light-years, could be seen obscuring the Milky Way in Cygnus on a dark night; this cloud, containing “enough material to make 5 million stars,” lay beside the bubble and served to hide its central area from Earth view. Supernova explosions impacting this cloud over millions of years could compress and heat its interior, forming a shell of superheated hydrogen materials that became the superheated bubble visible in X-ray data today. Cash said that these explosions were a major mechanism for making new stars: Earth’s Sun might have formed at the edge of a similar bubble, he said. (NASA Release 80-3)
The Washington Star said that the FCC would call for restructuring of Com-SatCorp to differentiate between its regulated and its competitive activities. ComSatCorp, now sole U.S. representative in two global satellite communications systems, would have to put all its competitive operations, including research and development, into a separate subsidiary. Restructuring would answer complaints that ComSatCorp, a congressional creation, could use its unique monopoly status in global communications systems to is advantage in highly competitive ventures it is considering. With two other major companies, it was starting a long-distance telephone system to compete with AT&T; it also had considered a satellite-to-home subscription television service to compete with the three major television networks [see April 8]. ComSatCorp already had a subsidiary, Comsat General, that handled its competitive activities; the FCC said that a sharper separation was necessary between the two: Comsat Laboratories and other research and development, for instance, should be put into the subsidiary to avoid the possibility of cross subsidies. A newly purchased environmental monitoring firm, Environmental Research & Technologies Inc., would have to be in the subsidiary, FCC said. The parent company would include only those activities relating to INTELSAT and INMARSAT (International Maritime Satellite Organization), international systems in which ComSatCorp acts as U.S. representative. (WStar Apr 22/80, C-6; WPost, Apr 23/80, B-l; ComSatCorp Releases 80-22, 80-23, 80-24, 80-25)
NASA announced that it would extend the mission of Heao 2, nicknamed Einstein, beyond its projected lifetime of 11 monllis. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA associate administrator for space science, said Einstein, second of the three high-energy astronomy observatories, had not only produced significant results [see December ll, 1979] but had also lent itself to a guest-investigator program that had garnered about 400 proposals from 80 groups in the United States and other nations, including Great Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, the Soviet Union, India, and Japan. Heao 1, launched in 1977, had mapped about 1,500 X-ray sources and measured for the first time the uniform high-energy X-ray background of space. Heao 3, launched in September 1979, was making an all-sky survey of cosmic and gamma rays at higher energies and from a higher orbital inclination than the first observatory. (NASA Release 80-6)
NASA announced selection of Ford Aerospace to negotiate a contract for overall system-design engineering on preliminary operations requirements and test-support system for the Space Telescope. Work under the $9.2 million contract should be done by December 1983, to support the space-telescope mission. Ford Aerospace would run the system for six months before turning it over to NASA. The system located at GSFC would control telescope attitude, point it, and monitor the on-board systems 24 hours a day, 7 days per week. Besides engineering design, hardware and software, and support for facility construction, the contract covered design of the project operations-control center plus required software and hardware. Ford Aerospace would provide testing, integration, installation, maintenance, documentation, training, and operating services for the system, including launch on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 80-80)
MSFC reported successful test firing of the Shuttle main propulsion system May 30 at NSTL. Firing time, 9 minutes 38 seconds, exceeded the duration required to place a Shuttle in orbit. Total test time on the main propulsion system (three engines, external tank, and associated parts of the orbiter) was now 41.3 minutes, in addition to 19 hours of single-engine tests conducted in a separate program. The Shuttle engines were gimbaled (steered) during the test firing, throttled in stages from 100% of rated thrust down to 65%. The Shuttle would have the first human-rated engines capable of throttle control during flight. (MSFC Release 80-79) During May: GSFC reported discovery by a team of its scientists of the largest gamma-ray burst ever recorded and the first tracing of such a burst to a known astronomical object, providing for the first time evidence of the vibration of a neutron star. The burst, trillions of miles away, occurred March 5, 1979, and was recorded by a network of nine satellites. The uniqueness of the event and the time needed to coordinate data from the Soviet Union, France, and West Germany delayed completion of analysis until recently; a GSFC colloquium April 24 heard a report on the theoretical developments. The GSFC team was headed by Dr. Thomas L. Cline and Dr. Reuven Ramaty. Gamma rays, the most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation, exhibit energy from tens of thousands to tens of billions of volts. The amounts of energy required to produce gamma rays had to come from extremely high-energy processes such as explosion of an atomic bomb or a star. Until the explosion of March 5, 1979, astronomers could only speculate that neutron stars went through giant vibration episodes explosively propelling their substance outward, then being pushed just as explosively by external forces back to their original shape. The theory of relativity says that these vibrations should emit gravitational waves. The March 5 burst, said to radiate more energy than the Sun could produce in 1,000 years, was measured by devices on nine spacecraft including five launched by the United States (three Velas, the Pioneer Venus orbiter, and the international Sun-Earth explorer Isee 3; three by the Soviet Union (Prognoz 7, Venera 11, and Venera 12, carrying French instrumentation); and one launched jointly by the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany (Helios 2). The satellites were widely separated in space or in Earth orbit when they detected the burst. By timing and triangulation, scientists could trace the source of the March 5 event to a decaying star (supernova) in the Large Magellanic Cloud (one of two galaxies nearest the Milky Way) and specifically to a supernova remnant identified as N-49. A supernova would have blown its contents all over surrounding space, leaving a large compact body called a neutron star so dense that a spoonful of material from its center would weigh a billion tons. The unusually large output of energy and the fact that its release was very rapid led to the vibrating-source conclusion. Celestial gamma rays are detected only by aircraft above the atmosphere, or by spacecraft; detection of future bursts would require highly sensitive devices like the gamma-ray observatory scheduled for Shuttle launch in 1985. (GSFC Release G-80-23)
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, appeared before the House Committee on Science and Technology to present the agency’s budget request for 1981. After reviewing events of last year, Frosch said NASA would need by July 1 the extra $300 million requested as a supplement to stay within Shuttle cost estimates and maintain development and production schedules. Problem areas had been the Shuttle engines and the thermal protection system (TPS); recent tests had given NASA “increased confidence” in the main engines, but Frosch said that he was “not completely satisfied” with the tiles and their attachment to the Shuttle surface. He said the tiles might not be installed and fully tested before the end of summer, so that the first launch might not come until the end of 1980. The original date of launch was March 1979, and the last previous prediction was June of 1980. Frosch said he expected the first flight “between November and the end of March 1981. A year from now might be a more realistic date.” (Text, Jan 29/80; NY Times, Jan 30/80, A-17)
LaRC announced an award to Dynamic Engineering Inc., Newport News, Va., of a three-year cost-plus-fixed-fee contract valued at $4.3 million for design and fabrication of dynamic models for NASA research and development programs. It would include personnel, equipment, materials, and facilities for feasibility studies, engineering design, and assembly and calibration of models.	. Used primarily in wind-tunnel tests, the models would be of three kinds: general-performance, holding a fixed geometry through a range of angle-of-attack and dynamic pressure; free-flight and spin models, simulating mass properties of aircraft; and aeroelastic models simulating configuration changes .with load, for performance and flutter investigations. The models would consist of fiberglass-reinforced resin, wood, metal, moldable or for-mable materials, or combinations of these. (LaRC Release 80-73)
NASA announced selection of General Electric and TRW Systems, Inc., to negotiate contracts for $500,000 six-month design studies of the gamma-ray observatory mission. One of the contractors would be chosen to build and operate the satellite under a follow-on contract after Congress approved the mission. If approved, the observatory would carry five large gamma-ray instruments into space to observe gamma-ray sources and obtain fundamentally new information about stars, the galaxy, and the universe. It would be a Shuttle payload in the mid-1980s designed for retrieval after a two-year mission lifetime; GSFC would manage the project. (NASA Release 80-30) During February: Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, 59, the “legendary aerodynamicist” inventor of the area rule and the supercritical wing, retired February 29 after 37 years of service with NASA. Graduated in 1943 with honors in mechanical engineering from Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Whitcomb said an article in Fortune magazine impelled him to apply for a job at NACA’s Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory. His “brilliant career” there included three landmark ideas, all radical departures from conventional aerodynamic theory, all developed in Langley wind tunnels, and all successful. His honors included the Collier Trophy for applying his “area rule” to design of supersonic aircraft, and the U.S. Air Force exceptional service medal (highest civilian award) in 1954; NACA’s first distinguished service medal in 1956; NASA’s medal for exceptional scientific achievement and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautic’s Sylvanus Albert Reed award, 1969; the National Medal of Science, highest honorary scientific award of the U.S. government, 1973; in 1974, the National Aeronautic Association’s Wright Brothers memorial trophy, the AIAA aircraft design award, and a $25,000 cash award (largest ever given by NASA to an individual) for invention of the supercritical wing; in 1978, the National Business Aircraft Association award. (NASA Release 74-148, 80-38)
NASA announced that it had signed a memorandum of understanding with TVA on NASA support of TVA programs in energy research, development, and demonstration. The two agencies were currently negotiating an agreement for TVA reimbursement of NASA for MSFC support of TVA’s coal-gasification project. NASA for some time had supported DOE and other agencies’ programs on energy research and development (R&D) because its facilities were adaptable to such research. TVA had requested NASA assistance because of the NASA staffs experience in engineering and scientific disciplines applicable to energy research and technology, as well as in managing such programs. (NASA Release 80-172; MSFC Release 80-145)
ARC reported on a space-technology assessment workshop held at the University of Santa Clara in California on robotics, automation, remotely operated systems, and artificial intelligence vital to future missions such as an orbiting space factory, a self-directed deep-space robot explorer, a fully automated Earth-resources and Earth-environment monitor, or a lunar base able to expand through self-replication of its elements. The 10-week workshop would end August 29 with an oral report and submission of other reports for publication. Drawing on work by research institutions such as; Stanford University, MIT, and SRI International as developers of computer-based “intelligence,” the program participants included 18 professors of eng ineering, mathematics, and science, 15 NASA engineers and scientists, and several representatives of manufacturer groups. The workshop emphasized four areas: —A versatile “intelligent” satellite information system able to select and interpret the data from its sensors to give specific items to a specific user, unlike previous systems recording everything they saw to produce great masses of superfluous data. —A deep-space exploration system for reconnaissance, exploration, and intensive surface study of planetary bodies, specifically Saturn’s moon Titan, bigger than the planet Mercury and with its own atmosphere. Uniting functions of previously separate craft (orbiter, atmosphere probe, mobile surface explorer), the vehicle would observe an unknown environment and modify its “knowledge model” and exploration techniques according to its observations. Systems of this sort could explore distant bodies in the solar system such as outer planets and their satellites, comets, and asteroids; such systems would be required for exploring planetary systems of other stars when communications distances and flight time of many years would preclude manned involvement. —A permanent automated Earth-orbiting facility initially geared to process Earth-supplied raw materials in the space environment; later it would make progressively larger use of nonterrestrial materials from the asteroids and moons of Earth and other planets. The workshop considered a number of processing and manufacturing techniques adaptable to a space environment, starter facilities capable of producing a wide range of items, and the tools that would be needed to expand the facility’s capabilities. —A factory on the Moon to use lunar materials and replicate itself, its first major product being another lunar factory or factory segment. Such a self-replicating facility had been of theoretical interest for some time as a way of rapidly expanding space resources. The workshop had studied types of logical organization for such a factory, and requirements for an Earth-based demonstration of the concept. (ARC Releases 80-69, 80-70; NASA Release 80-134)
ARC would close the free world’s largest wind tunnel for an $85 million modification. The 40 x 80 foot (12 x 24 meter) tunnel, in continuous use since completed in 1944, would have a 600-foot (183-meter) addition to house a new test section 80 x 120 feet (24 x 37 meters) with an air intake 362 feet (110 meters) wide and 132 feet (40 meters) high. The six 6,000-hp electric motors used since 1944 would be replaced with 22,500-hp units, raising drive from 36,000	hp to 135,000 hp. (NASA Release 80-125)
Astronomer Robert Victor, a professor at Michigan State University, said that the Christmas season would be marked by a triple conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn “worth gazing at” that would not occur again until A.D. 2238 or 2239, The event had occurred in 7 B.C. and resembled a similar conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in 2 B.C., either of which could have appeared as the guiding light of the Magi or star of Bethlehem. (fV Star, Dec 1/80, A-2)
Press reports said NASA faced a $760 million (14%) cut in its FY81 funding as President Carter announced a $20 billion cut in the entire federal budget. The Washington Post said Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, had protested the size of the cut to the Office of Management and Budget. The White House had originally asked NASA to suggest reductions of $630 million. Defense/Space Business Daily said the cuts would eliminate two new NASA starts in FY81, the gamma-ray observatory and the national oceanic satellite system, as well as the Galileo mission to Jupiter. On March 5 the House subcommittee on space science and applications had unanimously passed NASA’s $300 million FY80 supplemental request for Shuttle-development funds; subcommittee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said NASA should share the FY81 cuts, but 18% was too high. (D/SBD, Mar 6/80, 25; W Post, Mar 7/80, A-2)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that his space science subcommittee would hold hearings at the Severe Storm Forecast Center in Kansas City, Mo., on the consolidated storm information system, a joint NASA-NOAA program. The committee heard about the project in July 1979 when it was merely a concept; “it will be a pleasure to see it coming to fruition.” When fully operational, the system would give a forecaster real-time atmospheric data such as temperature, air pressure, and wind forces, from around the globe, a substantial improvement on current systems requiring several hours to obtain the data. It would combine communications links with data sources, such as environmental satellites and atmosphere soundings, into a single computer system. (H Comm Sci Release 96-235)
NASA announced plans to join a university research team in first-time transcontinental laser-radar soundings of the volcanic veil still hanging in the upper atmosphere over the United States from the eruptions of Mt. St. Helens. Using NASA’s SAGE satellite with an aircraft “crammed with the latest in laser and electronic remote-sensing and near-sensing technologies,” scientists from LaRC and WFC and from Drexel University, the Universities of Maryland, Arizona, and Alaska, Dartmouth College, Michigan Technological University, and the Oregon Graduate Center would study volcanic aftermath. This joint effort scheduled for September 17-21 by teams for the SAGE program and the Research on Atmospheric Volcanic Emissions (RAVE) project funded by NASA and operated through the universities would measure quantities of gases ejected by Mt. St. Helens and atmospheric dispersion of aerosols. Launched in 1978, SAGE had used a four-channel solar radiometer to track volcano plumes and take profiles of ozone and aerosols in the stratosphere, site of most of the ozone preventing harmful solar radiation from damaging life on Earth. (NASA Release 80-143; LaRC Release 80-61)
ESA announced it would undertake a new scientific project called Hippar-cos, an astrometric satellite to measure positions, proper motions, and parallaxes of celestial bodies and define the position and displacement velocity of about 100,000 stars. The data would help solve fundamental problems in astronomy. The 376-kilogram advanced-design satellite with a 2.5-year lifetime would be launched into a geostationary orbit by Ariane in mid-1986. (ESA Info Bltn 7) March 7; Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) reported that test pilot John Manke had made test flights in the Gossamer Albatross, part of a joint DFRC-LaRC program using the humanpowered vehicle to collect data on large lightweight craft. Manke’s first flights were human powered, as he pedaled a bicycle-like arrangement to turn the propeller; for later flights, under the direction of veteran Albatross pilot Bryan Allen who had flown it over the English Channel, he used small battery-powered samarium cobalt motors providing about 0.7 horsepower. Manke reached an altitude of 15 to 20 feet, more than he “ felt comfortable with,” and reported that the Albatross was nothing like anything he had flown before, requiring concentration to keep it going straight. Short flights did not require an extra amount of legpower to keep it gomg, but longer flights would be “an exercise in exercise.” (FRC X-Press, Mar 7/80, 3)
FBIS carried Tass and other Soviet news reports on the flight of Salyut 6 and Soyuz 35 with cargo ship Progress 9. On May 2, cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, in their fourth week of flight, used “bilateral television communication” to visit with their families who had come to the mission control center. A May 6 report said that for the first time in manned space flight the crew had pumped water from the freight ship to containers on the station, using a system called Rodnik. The crew had completed unloading the food, regenerators, and fresh equipment from Progress 9 and refueled the joint propulsion unit; they would use the cargo ship to dispose of used material. On May 8, the chief of the aerogeology organization said Ryumin and Popov before the launch of Soyuz 35 had flown over certain linear and ring geological structures to acquire data for comparison with satellite observations; the Soyuz 26 crew (Romanenko and Grechko) had identified 25 such structures in the Soviet Union that proved to contain mineral deposits. By May 13 the crew repaired the on-board videotape recorder and replaced a motor in the biogravistat and a filter in the gas analyzer; some items would be returned to Earth for study. On May 16 they were putting plant sprouts in various stages of development into a special solution for study on Earth; they also used the Progress 9 propulsion unit for another orbit adjustment. The cargo ship separated from the orbital complex May 20 at 21:15 hours Moscow time; on May 22 ground command switched on its engine, and it “ceased to exist” upon entering the atmosphere. The next big event was launch at 21:21 hours Moscow time May 26 of Soyuz 36 carrying veteran Valery Kubasov and Bertalan Farkas, first Hungarian cosmonaut, to join Popov and Ryumin who had occupied Salyut 6 since April 9. Docking occurred at 22:56 hours Moscow time, and the visitors went aboard Salyut for a 7-day program of international research. Kubasov and Farkas would return to Earth in Soyuz 35, leaving Soyuz 36 for later use. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 2-27/80)
ARC said that it would test for the first time the ability of males aged 55 to 65 to withstand the physiological stress of weightlessness. Previous studies had tested males and females aged 35 to 45 and 45 to 55. Women aged 55 to 65 would be tested later in 1980 to complete the baseline data for use in establishing medical criteria for space flight. For the first briefing early in February, 46 volunteers reported and 20 were chosen for orientation March 24. The preliminary orientation and testing PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED would give researchers a chance to see how the subjects performed and allowed the subjects to decide whether they wanted to participate in the entire test. Two sets of four subjects would be selected: four would begin 9 days of controlled observation April 10 at ARC’s human research facility, followed by 10 days of bed rest and 5 days of recovery and tests of the cardiovascular system. Another group of four would begin the same series April 13. Dr. Harold Sandler, ARC project scientist, would supervise the tests. (ARC Release 80-7; NASA Release 80-43)
NASA announced that a joint government-industry team would design, fabricate, and test a solar-power 20-kilowatt generator for use by small communities, industries, farms, military bases, and similar users. Sponsored by the Department of Energy (DOE), the project would foster inexpensive ways to use solar energy to produce electric power and industrial heat. Under a $1.3 million Lewis Research Center (LeRC) contract, AiResearch Manufacturing Company would build the engine, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) would develop the solar power system including the solar mirror and receiver. (NASA Release 80-17)
The Washington Post said the mystery explosion detected by a U.S. Vela satellite September 22, 1979, was still a mystery, although additional data had come to light since the State Department announced a suspected nuclear explosion. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had told “a few select committees of the House and Senate” that the Union of South Africa was conducting a secret naval exercise in the area where Vela saw the explosion. A committee aide briefed by the CIA said the explosion might be “a rocket launched from one of those South African ships.” On the same night, scientists using the world’s largest radiotelescope had seen a ripple in the ionosphere over Puerto Rico a few hours after Vela saw a double flash 4,000 miles away; it had come “from the right direction and at the right velocity to have been caused by a nuclear explosion near South Africa.” Ever since the State Department announcement, the Carter administration had tried to discount the possibility of a nuclear explosion, convening a panel of scientists who first said Vela saw a freak lightning strike that coincided with a meteor burnout, then suggested the sighting was either a malfunction or a mistake. However, the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory said that Vela had picked up the “unmistakable” signature of an atomic explosion, a “double flash” caused by a fireball blacked out momentarily by a shockwave surrounding the explosion, then showing 99 times more intense as the shockwave dissipated. The Vela, it turned out, had carried not one but two optical detectors: one very sensitive instrument to spot fireballs from small nuclear explosions and a less sensitive one in case an atomic blast overloaded the first instrument. As both instruments saw the flash September 22, instrument mistake was unlikely. Also, the ripple arrived at the Arecibo observatory at the proper time to have been the shockwave of an explosion seen by Vela. No radioactive debris had appeared in southern-hemisphere rainwater to confirm an atomic explosion, but the United States had taken up to three weeks after last year’s explosion to sample rainwater in the area. (W Post, Jan 30/80, A-l)
Nature magazine described equipment problems on Heao 2, also called the Einstein observatory, that might end the mission prematurely. Launched in 1978, Heao 2 carried the first X-ray telescope “as sensitive as ground-based optical telescopes”; it had a planned lifetime of only one year. Its success in generating new scientific data had led to extension of its mission; until the recent setback, NASA scientists hoped that it would continue to return data well into 1981 when atmospheric drag would take it from orbit. The outcome would depend on the “behavior of the gyroscopes used to position it.” Data transmission was halted three weeks ago when two of the six gyroscopes failed after a temporary blackout. Heao 2 needed three functionPRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED S	lNTF.NIIONftLlY BUN* ing gyroscopes for positioning. One of the other four was already dead; another, running erratically, was on standy. NASA, was working on software for backup control using the two gyros still functioning, along with either a Sun sensor or star tracker on the satellite. (Nature, Oct 2/80, 379)
LaRC reported award of a 3-year $4.6 million contract to Sperry Support Services for development, operation, and maintenance of flight simulators, including real-time digital programs for solving research problems and for aerodynamics and space flight. Sperry would design and operate flight simulators and would develop, integrate, and test electronic subsystems to use with existing data systems. (LaRC Release 80-9)
NASA announced appointment of Roy S. Estess as deputy manager of NSTL, replacing Henry F. Auter, who retired in February 1979. Estess joined NSTL in 1966, working on the Saturn V acceptance tests and directing the advanced planning for Shuttle testing at NSTL. Since 1977 he had managed satellite remote-sensing research in NSTL’s Earth resources laboratory. (NASA anno Aug 29/80) —The New York Times reported the death from a heart attack at her home in California of Jacqueline Cochran, first woman to fly faster than the speed of sound and director during WWII of the Women’s Air-Force Service Pilots (WASPS), which trained more than 1,200 women to fly transport planes. Brought up in poverty and working in a cotton gin in Georgia at the age of 9, she took her first flying lesson when 22 and in 1935 was the first women to enter the Bendix transcontinential air race, winning the Bendix trophy in 1938. She had married Floyd Odium in 1936 and served as a captain in the British Air Force Auxiliary, returning to the United States after Pearl Harbor. She set more than 200 flying records, breaking the sound barrier in 1953 in an F-86 jet fighter plane. In 1961 she set a new altitude record of 55,253 feet and in 1964 a women’s world speed record of 1,429 mph in an F-104G SuperStar. She retired in 1970 as colonel in the Air Force Reserve. (NY Times, Aug 10/80, 40)
The Soviet Union launched a redesigned spacecraft, Soyuz 13, carrying three cosmonauts in what the New York Times called a possible bid to break the 185-day endurance record set in October. Launch at 5:18 p.m. Moscow time was from the cosmodrome at Baykonur in Soviet central Asia; Tass reported that all systems were working well. The pilot of the flight was Lt. Col. Leonid Kizim, 39, a first-time flyer in space; flight engineer Oleg Makarov, 47, had flown on Soyuz 12 in September 1973 and Soyuz 27 in January 1978, as well as the “anomaly” of April 1973. Research engineer Gennady Strekalov, 40, also a rookie, had worked for 20 years in spacecraft design. This was the first three-person flight launched by the Soviet Union in nine years, since the crew of Soyuz 11 died during reentry in June 1971 when their capsule sprang a leak and lost pressure. The cosmonauts had not worn their space suits because of crowded conditions on the capsule. Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said that Soyuz T3 had “all the latest accomplishments of science and technology” including a fast onboard computer to free the crew “to the maximum from . . . .routine operations.” The system was said to perform all calculations needed to dock with another craft such as Salyut 6. However, Radio Moscow did not say how long the flight would last, and Moscow media did not say whether Soyuz T3 would link with Salyut 6, which had been in orbit three years—only that the crew would test a new spacecraft. Soyuz T3 was first of that type to carry a three person crew, 39th in the Soyuz series, and sixth manned craft to be launched in 1980. Two tests of the new design had been successful: an unmanned Soyuz 7"had docked with space station Salyut 6 in December 1979, and Soyuz T2 carrying Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V. Aksyonov had joined the Soyuz 36 crew (record-holders Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov) there in June of this year. Salyut 6, designed to last only 18 months, had supported four expeditions over its three years in orbit. When Ryumin and Popov left it six weeks ago, after a thorough overhaul of its equipment, they said that it was fit for further use. (NY Times, Nov 27/80, A-3; W Post, Nov 28/80, A-28) During November: MSFC announced that Dr. William R. Lucas, center director, had appointed Thomas J. (Jack) Lee deputy director, effective December 1. Lee had worked at the center and its predecessor since 1958 and for the past six years had managed the Spacelab program, working with ESA on this Shuttle payload. John W. Thomas, Lee’s deputy, would succeed as manager of the Spacelab office. Lucas named John S. Potate, associate director for management, to a new position as associate director. Potate had come to MSFC in 1973 from the Apollo lunar-landing program at KSC and at Headquarters. (MSFC Release 80-149)
NASA announced that it would join the California council of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) and the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) in building an Advanced Technology Display House to open in 1982 at Ames Research Center (ARC), to demonstrate new materials and technology from aerospace and energy research. The sponsors signed on February 4 this first-of-a-kind partnership agreement under which AIA would contribute innovative architectural expertise; PG&E would share its research on energy conservation; and NASA in association with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) would translate aerospace technology into the “down-to-earth challenge” of home building. The design would include self-contained water and sewage-treatment systems and energy-saving lighting, plumbing, ventilation, electrical wiring, and appliances, with extensive use of solar energy, all managed and monitored by a centralized computer. Using advanced systems and materials instead of those now available to the building industry, the AIA would design the house to allow addition or deletion of components (office space, physical fitness areas) and to be dismantled for exhibition across the United States. Wider use of the innovations would lead to economies in mass production and put the new ideas within reach of average customers. (ARC anno Feb 12/80)
NASA launched at 10:57 a.m. February 14 the SMM observatory from Cape Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a circular orbit 360 miles above the equator. The 5,200-pound spacecraft carried instruments to study solar flares [see February 8] over a period of 2 years; the 11-year cycle of solar activity was entering its most turbulent phase, with flares erupting on the Sun once or twice a day and superflares causing atmospheric disturbances on Earth once a month. The SMM launch cost the United States $99 million, including $20 million for the Delta. (W Post, Feb 15/80, A-7; NASA Release
MSFC announced that NASA had signed a $183,960,000 contract with ESA for a second Spacelab to be delivered in 1984. Like the first, the new Spacelab would be built by ERNO of West Germany, prime ESA contractor, with at least 26 subcontractors in ESA nations as well as the United States to make components and subassemblies. MSFC was responsible for technical support; JSC would handle operations; Kennedy Space Center (KSC) would be responsible for integrating Spacelab with the Space Shuttle and for launch. (MSFC Release 80-11)
NASA announced that a sunspot hotline set up at GSFC would keep the public informed about solar flares during the 1980 peak cycle of activity. Daily recorded messages would contain information on sunspots, solar flares, geomagnetic storms, and the impact of solar activity on radio transmissions, for instance. The recordings provided jointly by NASA and NOAA through its space environment services center in Boulder, Colo., would originate in the SMM facility at GSFC. The “Solar Max” spacecraft launched February 14 was an orbiting solar observatory carrying seven instruments whose data, coordinated with data from scientists at ground-based observatories throughout the world, would permit the most comprehensive investigation of solar flares ever made. Information from these sources would be relayed to GSFC on a 24-hour basis so that NASA scientists could determine which active regions of the Sun to study during the next 24 hours. (NASA Release July 23:The Soviet Union launched Soyuz J7 at 9:33 p.m. Moscow time, carrying Col. Viktor Gorbatko and a 33-year-old Vietnamese air force pilot, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, first Asian space traveler and sixth citizen of an eastern-bloc country to be part of the USSR’s Intercosmos program. The Soyuz would link up within 24 hours with the orbiting Salyut 6 space station where Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin had been working for more than three months. The Salyut’s docking port had been cleared July 19 by jettisoning cargo ship Progress 10, which burned up reentry. (W Post, July 24/80, A-15; Today, July 24/80, 1A; W Star, July 20/80, 2; July 24/80, A-7)
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that NASA’s Heao 1 had detected “surprisingly intense” X-ray emission from a pair of common Sunlike stars in the constellation Cepheus. The pair formed a tight binary revolving around each other with a period of only six hours, in a rotary motion like “the twin blades of an eggbeater.” The gas in the intervening space would be stirred violently and the magnetic-field lines twisted, stretched, and tom in a furious turbulence, the resulting X-ray emission being “millions of times that expected from either star alone.” The Heao 1 discovery was recently confirmed by the large telescope aboard Heao 2 (Einstein), and other stars of that sort would be checked for X-ray emissions; two other binaries had been detected as X-ray sources. (NRL Release 3-1-80F)
LaRC said that NASA had awarded three major U.S. manufacturers contracts for 14.5-month studies of advanced supersonic transport aircraft. Boeing Company, Lockheed California, and McDonnell Douglas, each received a $1.15 million contract to work in the same discipline, but each on its own concept. Boeing’s was a 270-passenger delta-wing, cruise speed Mach 2.4; Douglas’s was an arrow-wing carrying 225-500 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.2; Lockheed’s was an arrow-wing carrying 290 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.5. Each firm would broaden its research in aerodynamics, lightweight titanium and composite-material structures, and variable-cycle engines for subsonic and supersonic operation. Past studies by these contractors on reducing fuel consumption and noise and on economic considerations needed updating. LaRC would manage the work at the contractors’ facilities. (LaRC Release 80-29; NASA Release 80-51)
The Wall Street Journal said that the Ariane rocket failure in its second test flight was a blow to western European development of a competitor for the U.S. Shuttle. ESA experts had not solved the mysterious engine shutdown that dropped the Ariane into the ocean after launch from Guyana [see May 23]. The difficulty seemed to be with the Ariane feature they valued most, the first-stage engine that had been fired 200 times on the ground and had worked flawlessly during test flights. The same engine had been highly reliable in the French rocket Diamant, now being phased out after years of successful use. ESA and France (which paid 64% of Ariane expenses and had done much of the development) hoped to put Ariane into service in mid-1981, ahead of the Shuttle, which was able to orbit six times the weight of an Ariane payload and return to Earth for reuse. Shuttle problems had put NASA behind, but the Wall Street Journal said prolonged delay in Ariane development would have “serious consequences” for ESA. The Europeans had bid vigorously for launching assignments for Ariane because it would be available earlier as well as less expensive, but engine problems could undermine the claim. (US/, May 28/80,20)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that it had awarded Computer Science Corporation a 3-year contract valued at $3 million for computational analysis and programming support services to basic and applied research at LaRC, including computer documentation, technical reports, program designs, training courses, and plans for follow-on work. (LaRC Release
DFRC announced plans for a ceremony at which ARC officials representing NASA and the Army’s Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft project would accept the first of two aircraft built under a joint program. One of the two planes built by Bell Helicopter Textron arrived at ARC in March 1978 for tests in its full-scale wind tunnel; the other arrived at DFRC August 13 for followup of tests by Bell. So far, two contractor pilots, two NASA pilots, one Army pilot, and one Marine pilot had tested and evaluated the aircraft. (DFRC Release 80-28)
NASA announced plans to launch NOAA-B on or about May 21 from WTR on an Atlas F. A third-generation environmental-monitoring spacecraft operated by NOAA for the National Operational Environmental Satellite System (NOESS), NOAA-B would join NOAA-A (Noaa 6) in acquiring quantitative data as input for GARP (the Global Atmospheric Research Program). Known as the “TIROS twins,” the NOAA satellites would be the only civilian operational spacecraft whose orbits cover the polar regions. (NASA MOR E-615-80-02 [prelaunch] May 13/80; DOC Release NOAA 80-67)
The House Committee on Science and Technology said that on June 11-12 its subcommittee on space science and applications would hold hearings on the Space Industrialization Act of 1980 (H.R. 7412) for private commercialization of space. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), committee and subcommittee chairman, said that the bill he sponsored would create a space industrialization corporation to develop new products, services, and industries using space technology and the properties of the space environment. NASA would continue to advance national capabilities in space, Fuqua said, but the corporation would be responsible for encouraging private development. (Committee Release 96-196)
The Washington Star said that Boeing Company had awarded Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., a multimillion-dollar contract to build forward-fuselage parts for a new-generation 757 jetliner. The award by Boeing Military Aircraft Company as subcontractor for Boeing Commercial Aircraft Company was the third given to Fairchild, which received in October a contract for fuselage above the wing and in November a contract for leading-edge wing slats. The twin-engine 757 would fly in 1982. (W Star, Jan 8/80, B-4) —The United States should develop a way to send nuclear wastes into outer space, Stanley G. Rosen told an American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in San Francisco. The Washington Star said Rosen, a test manager for the U.S. Air Force Defense Satellite Communications system, described the problem of ’’extremely toxic" residues from nuclear-power programs around the world. Extraterrestrial disposal of such wastes would have a “short-term risk” during launch and injection, but “zero risk” thereafter, he said. (W Star, Jan 8/80, A-5)
The Wall Street Journal reviewed the competition for locating the Large Space Telescope’s science institute at one of three sites, each the protege of a university consortium: Princeton University in New Jersey, the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, and the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory west of Chicago. NASA teams visiting the sites would make a decision in October.	, In November 1979, five sites were being promoted with two others as minor contenders: Princeton, Hopkins, Fermilab, the University of Colorado, and the University of California at San Diego (UCSD) plus the Universities of Arizona and New Mexico, where numerous ground telescopes were already located [see November 18, 1979]. Usually the site for an astronomical installation would require clear skies and steady air, but “any old kind of sky” would do for the Space Telescope, the Wall Street Journal said, as the images its computers received would originate above Earth’s atmosphere. The winning manager would provide his own building, either a new one or a remodeled existing one; a resident staff of 100 to 150 persons; and room for a constant flow of visiting astronomers. {WSJ, Aug 4/80, 15) MSFC reported that students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) had returned to the center to continue a study begun last January on in-space assembly of large structures in MSFC’s neutral-buoyancy simulator, this time with a manned maneuvering unit they had built themselves. The MSFC simulator, a 1.3 million-gallon water tank, closely approximated a zero-gravity environment. The students had spent three weeks on a NASA-MIT project, assembling in the tank a tetrahedral truss containing 48 parts: 36 tubular beams 11 feet long with 12 joints, largest in number of components ever tested in the simulator. Since their January stay, the students had modified the beams and joints (designed and made in MIT machine shops) on the basis of data derived from their work at MSFC and had been building an alternative crewed maneuvering unit. Testing it at MSFC would show whether it would be of use in assembling large space structures; like one previously built by MSFC engineers, it had instead of the gas jets needed to move it in space five small motor-driven propellers to move it in the tank. The motors were enclosed to prevent injury to other divers or damage to hoses and lines in the simulator. The unit would fit on the backpack worn over a pressurized space suit. (MSFC Release 80-103)
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that a team of its scientists was working on a solar-ultraviolet (UV) spectral irradiance monitor (SUSIM) for use on the Space Shuttle to study long-term variations in solar flux for more accurate monitoring of UV radiation from the solar chromosphere and corona. Solar radiation in the wavelengths under study control many photochemical processes in Earth’s atmosphere at altitudes below 100 kilometers; variations in the radiation may alter the composition of the lower atmosphere, affecting the lifetime of pollutants and ion density in the D region. The Navy also considered the D region of the atmosphere important because of its direct effect on communications systems. The principal investigator, Dr. Guenter E. Brueckner, said that measurements by conventional methods in the 120- to 400-nanometer wavelength range were not accurate enough for scientists to define values for solar-flux variations over time. The monitor would travel as a solar sensor on an early orbiter flight; the spacecraft pilot would use its real-time data to point directly at the Sun in order to monitor the entire solar disk and measure variation of its intensity with solar activity. Brueckneir’s team consisted of three scientists—Michael E. VanHoosier, Dr. Dianne K. Prinz, and Dr. John-David F.	Bartoe—developing and testing the SUSIM for Shuttle flight. Both Prinz and Bartoe had passed mental and physical tests for astronaut-scientists and had been chosen to make a Shuttle flight; one of them might obtain firsthand data on solar activity by actually using monitor on a Shuttle flight. (NRL Release 20-5-80C)
The U.S. Coast Guard signed an agreement with NASA April 29 for work leading to an operational lighter-than-air machine that might constitute a fleet of blimps by the early 1990s, according to the New York Times. Coordinating the two agencies’ research would reduce costs: NASA scientists had been studying use of lighter-than-air craft to lift heavy equipment and would now work on developing stronger synthetics and better adhesives for the blimp bag, more sophisticated electronics, and more automated procedures for ground handling to do away with the need for large ground crews. Lt. Cdr. Kenneth Williams, chief of the Coast Guard technology branch, said that they sought a vehicle for use in “search and rescue, law enforcement, and other patrol functions.’’ The Navy had abandoned its airship program in the early 1960s because fuel was cheap; it “costs a heck of a lot more today,” Williams said, and a Coast Guard-Navy study had found fuel-efficient airships operationally and technically feasible for maritime patrol work in combination with cutters and conventional aircraft. (NY Times, May 4/80, 56)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported that detailed evaluation of records from the Ariane’s first test flight December 24, 1979, confirmed that it was a complete success. Each of the three powered stages had performed better than predicted, and the results would allow integration of the second launcher to proceed without change except for a pogo-correction device not used on the first flight. The second flight was set for late May or early June 1980.	(ESA Info Bltn 1)
KSC reported on steps taken by NASA to ensure survival of an endangered species, the manatee or sea cow, whose entire U.S. population estimated at about 1,000 lived in Florida waters. Brevard County, site of KSC, had the highest incidence of manatee deaths in the state. KSC included the site of the Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge containing hundreds of species of plants, birds, mammals, and reptiles; 12 of the latter were endangered, more than in any other single site in the 48 states. About 20% of the nation’s manatees spent part of the year on the Space Center, and KSC activities had been arranged for minimum interference with the indigenous wildlife. Aerial surveys over KSC furnished information about group migratory habits, feeding grounds, and times for scheduling work in areas when the manatees would be elsewhere. Space technology provided tracking devices to monitor the routes traveled by individual animals. Ships that recovered spent Shuttle boosters docked in the Banana River, a prime manatee feeding ground. NASA had fitted its ships with a propulsion unit to maneuver them without use of large propellers found to be highly dangerous to the slow-moving and air-breathing manatee; the unit proved to be better at retrieving booster parachutes without tangling the lines. (KSC Release 95-80)
The House Committee on Science and Technology said that its subcommittees on space science and applications and on natural resources and environment would hold hearings June 24-25 on administration plans to develop a Landsat remote-sensing system with private-sector participation. (House anno 96-204)
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
Since Mt. St. Helens erupted May 18, NASA reported what it called the most complete observations to date of volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere. Large volcanic eruptions had previously changed Earth’s weather (short-term) and climate (long-term). ARC had collected Mt. St. Helen’s data for its aerosol climate effects (ACE) program, using the U-2 aircraft in sampling missions on May 19, 22, and 27, and June 14 and 17. A preliminary analysis of the volcanic plumes showed solid ash and sulfuric acid, the proportions varying in different samples. The acid in the stratosphere was several hundred times greater than before the eruptions. The first flight found ash particles as large as 30 microns, of composition similar to ash on the ground near the volcano. (Largest particles found on later flights were about 3 microns.) Gaseous sulfur dioxide also increased: levels on the first flight were 10 to 1,000 times ambient levels, and on the second flight were 100 times normal. The second flight found water vapor in the plume to be 10 times the normal amount, showing that volcanic water was injected into the stratosphere. A July 1979 ACE flight over Alaska gave baseline levels for comparison with conditions after the eruption. On the day of the eruption, one of NASA’s SAGE teams in Wyoming launched instruments on a balloon to enter and measure the dust plume; it detected dust concentrations 400 to 1,600 times normal in the stratosphere. The SAGE satellite launched in 1979 tracked the Mt. St. Helens’ clouds as it had those of two previous eruptions. WFC sent an Orion P-3 a plane on an “underflight” as the cloud went over North Carolina and the Atlantic Ocean, along with a Super Loki rocket; these flights gave scientists simultaneous data readings from above and below the atmosphere. By late June, LaRC scientists decided that, although Mt. St. Helens could have boosted stratospheric aerosols by 50%, there was as yet no sign of adverse climate change. (ARC Release 80-62; NASA Release 80-107) July 22.NASA unveiled the first scientific and applications payload for the STS (Shuttle) at GSFC’s clean room, where instruments were installed in the package planned as an alternate payload on orbital test flight 4, scheduled for April 1982. (Prime payload for this flight belonged to DOD.) Called OSS-1 for NASA’s Office of Space Science, the entire payload was designed, built, tested, and integrated by a team of GSFC engineers and scientists headed by Ken Kissin, OSS-1 mission manager, and Jon Busse, project manager for Shuttle payload integration and rocket experiment. Project scientists were Drs. Siegfried Bauer and Werner Neupert. The seven principal OSS-1 experiments were in the disciplines of space plasma physics, solar physics, astronomy, and life sciences, each represented by one or more instruments. (NASA Release 80-114, 80-117)
ESA said that the six groups investigating the malfunction at the Ariane L02 launch ended four weeks of study on one of the four first-stage engines. They reported that the suspect engine recovered from the sea [see June 17] had a foreign body at the injector level: an identification plate was found near the injection orifices, and they were trying to determine if it was there at launch or got there during the engine’s immersion in the sea. Analysis of engine noise showed differences from results recorded at ground tests in Europe; also, engine start-up parameters (combustion-pressure build-up time) showed abnormal dispersions, but researchers had not been able to link them to observed phenomena. ESA said that the L03 test flight originally set for November 1980 might not occur until February 1981, and the fourth test flight by midyear, to qualify the rocket for operational launch. (ESA Info Bltn 17)
NASA said that it would launch seven sounding rockets February 15 and 16 from the San Marco platform off the coast of Kenya to study a total solar eclipse visible in that area but not in North America, recording changes in the electrical structure of Earth’s middle atmosphere and temperature distribution in the solar corona during an eclipse. Two Astrobee D and three Super Areas rockets would carry payloads from Pennsylvania State University, and two Black Brant rockets would carry payloads from the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in New Mexico. Piggyback on one of the Black Brants would be a Johns Hopkins University experiment to measure ultraviolet zodiacal light from the solar corona. Instrument packages carried to 330 kilometer (205-mile) altitude would make measurements during parachute descent. GSFC would manage the eclipse study with support from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) in rocketry, instrumentation, and range support. The mobile launch platform in the Indian Ocean was operated by the University of Rome’s center for aerospace research. (NASA Release 80-24; WFC Release 80-1)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that it had extended for 18 months a cost-plus-award-fee contract with Boeing Company for safety, reliability, and quality-assurance engineering support. The extension, valued at $11,184,430, brought the total value of the JSC contract with Boeing to $36,712,703. The extension would cover current and future JSC programs for space vehicles and for ground-support equipment, facilities, and payloads. (JSC Release 80-001)
