Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported that Heao 2, NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory (Heao), had expended its control-gas supply and ended its mission. One of a family of three “highly successful” scientific satellites managed by MSFC, Heao 2 (like its predecessor, Heao I) had performed twice as long as its predicted design life; a third observatory was still operating. Launched November 13, 1978, Heao 2 carried the world’s largest focusing X-ray telescope and an array of astronomical instruments; it had provided data on X-ray output of normal stars, content of supernova remnants, distribution of mass in galaxies, and the origin of the extragalactic X-ray background. MSFC said that participating astronomers would need years to analyze all the data received. Unable to maintain attitude after exhausting its control fuel April 25, the spacecraft was powered down April 26. Reentry and burnup would probably occur early in 1982. (MSFC Release 81-52; NASA Release
MSFC said that NASA’s third high-energy astronomy observatory, Heao 3, used the last of its attitude-control thruster gas and was powered down, completing a mission begun in September 1979 to study pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes in space, whose high energy output could not be studied with Earth-based telescopes due to atmospheric interference. With 20 mqnths of operation in orbit, Heao 3 was the third of its type to perform for more than twice its design lifetime. It would reenter and burn up later this year. (MSFC Release 81-69; NASA Release 81-77)
The House of Representatives passed NASA’s authorization bill by a vote of 404-13. The amount, the same that appeared in the amended budget request, was $6,122 billion for research and development, construction of facilities, and research and program management. One amendment was adopted, reducing the authorization for aeronautical research and technology by $11.2 million. (CR, June 23/81, D773; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 24/81)
ARC announced that John A. Manke, famed test pilot, would head a new directorate of flight research after consolidation of ARC and DFRC, effective October 1. Manke, who made the first supersonic flight of a lifting body and the first landing of a lifting body on a hard-surface runway, had joined DFRC as a research engineer in 1962 and later became a research pilot, testing advanced designs like the wingless craft that were forerunners of the Shuttle. He was project pilot on the X-24B and also flew the M-2, HL-10, and X-24A lifting bodies. Most recently he had been director of flight operations and support at DFRC, where he would remain responsible for on-site management as well as for aircraft operations at both centers. (ARC Release 81-32)
NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications (OSTA) announced its selection of 9 experimental and 10 theoretical teams to participate in the upper-atmosphere research satellite (UARS) program designed to provide data on energy input, chemical composition, and dynamics of Earth’s stratosphere and mesosphere. Interest in this area had increased with the realization of potential damage to the ozone layer from high-flying aircraft and from chemicals in aerosol sprays, refrigeration, air-conditioning, and foam-blowing operations. The experimental teams would develop instruments for direct measurement of upper-atmosphere winds, solar-ultraviolet radiation, energetic-particle interaction with the upper atmosphere, and variation of chemical content with altitude. Theoretical teams would develop upper-atmosphere models to be used with new acquired data for assessing the impact of man’s activities on the delicate processes in the stratosphere and for improving understanding of upper-atmosphere chemistry and dynamics. (NASA Release 81-190)
NASA said that investigators at GSFC and the University of Maryland had discovered a natural infrared laser on Mars, a find that could help detect new planets in the universe and require rewrites of books on general physics of the planetary atmosphere. Members of the team were Dr. Michael J. Mumma, Dr. David Buhl, Dr. Gordon Chin, Dr. Drake Deming, Fred Espenak, and Dr. Theodore Kostiuk, all of GSFC, and Dr. David Zipoy of the University of Maryland. The discovery was reported in Science magazine. Optical lasers since their 50-year-ago invention had proved extremely useful not only in scientific laboratories but also in everyday life; for example, as price scanners in supermarkets. However, the investigators said, no naturally occurring laser had ever been reported, although “the extreme variety of physical and chemical environments of extraterrestrial objects.. .arguefd] that natural lasers must exist.” In theory, “natural” lasers would occur whenever atoms or molecules were stimulated to release photons in transition from higher to lower energy states. A Goddard-developed device (an infrared heterodyne spectrometer) used with the McMath solar telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona had detected such a process in the Mars atmosphere (made up almost entirely of cabon dioxide) between January and April 1980. The new device let the scientists confirm occurrence of a molecular-population inversion, necessary for lasing. The natural laser on Mars, identical in principle to man-made lasers with commercial, scientific, and military applications, had a total continuous power output of more than a million megawatts, equivalent to that generated by a thousand large hydroelectric-power projects; in fact, the Mars laser generated more than five times the total power output of the United States. The investigators said orbiting satellites might eventually be able to extract power from the natural laser and beam it wherever needed. (NASA Release 81-78)
MSFC reported the arrival from Europe of a jumbo jet carrying equipment to prepare Spacelab, the ESA reusable scientific research facility, for flight on the shuttle beginning in 1983. The gear for electrical ground support and mechanical servicing arrived at KSC after formal acceptance in early July by representatives of MSFC, which was responsible for monitoring Spacelab design and development and would manage the first three Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 81-92)
ARC reported the first NASA-piloted test flight of its “flying research facility,” a helicopter-type aircraft equipped with fixed wings and jet engines, over San Francisco Bay at speeds of up to 120 knots (138 mph) for 45 minutes. Warren Hall of ARC piloted the flight; copilot was Lt. Col. Bob Merrill, deputy director of U.S. Army flight tests at Edwards Air Force Base. Designed for studying advanced rotor systems in actual flight, the craft had the highly reliable type of rotor used on presidential helicopters. The wings and engines provided the lift needed in studying rotors too small to support the research aircraft alone. A second rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) had been flown at ARC in the basic-helicopter configuration. Located at ARC, the two aircraft constituted a national facility for in-flight verification of rotor-system technology; they could be flown as helicopters or equipped with the fixed wings and auxiliary jet engines to enhance test capability. The two craft, built by the Sikorsky Division of United Technologies for LaRC and the Army’s technology lab at Moffett Field, California, were transferred to ARC in 1979 for the joint NASA-Army research program. (ARC Release 81-67; NASA Release 81-194)
Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, marked the fourth anniversary of orbital laboratory Salyut 6 with a report of planned space activity. A “lull” was being used for an overhaul of the ground-control center in the Crimea. Employees were on long-awaited vacations, and a skeleton staff was monitoring Salyut 6, orbiting without a crew since May 26. After orbiting for nearly two months of unspecified tests, a Cosmos craft launched April 25 had linked with the Salyut in June to form a 34-ton complex. A flight-test manager said that the complex would help in designing future space stations and was being monitored to see how such a heavy system behaved in space. Since docking with the Salyut the Cosmos had used its engines twice to raise the orbit of the complex. (NY Times Oct 7/81, B—11) During September: William F. Lilly, named NASA comptroller in 1973 and the only person so far to hold that position, announced that he would retire in October after 37 years of service to the federal government, the last 21 with NASA. (NASA Release 81-148; Sp anno Sept 22/81) —Isaac T. Gillam IV, director of DFRC since June 1978, would become special assistant to the NASA administrator October 1, detailed to the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy to participate in a space-policy review. (NASA Release 81-151; DFRC Release 81-30; NASA anno Sept 15/81) —Abraham D. Spinak, acting director of Wallops Flight Facility, would leave government service in December after nearly 33 years with NASA and NACA, its predecessor, which he joined in 1948. He had actually retired September 1, 1980, but stayed on to help in the consolidation with GSFC. (WFC Release 81-14) —Edwin C. Kilgore, associate administrator for management operations at Headquarters, would retire in October after 37 years of service with NASA and NACA. After graduation from Virginia Polytechnic Institute in 1944, he went to work at Langley, joined Headquarters in 1970, and was named deputy associate administrator for center operationas in 1974. As head of management operations, he had been in charge of agencywide institutional management. (NASA Release 81-139; LaRC Release 81-67) —Ann P. Bradley, deputy associate administrator for management operations, who had been acting associate administrator and acting executive officer at NASA Headquarters pending the retirement of E.C. Kilgore, would return to her duties in management operations with the appointment of A.B. Virkler Legate to the office of the administrator as NASA's executive officer. Legate had been associate deputy undersecretary for intergovernmental relations at the Department of Labor since February 1971: he had previously been a congressional special assistant and executive secretary of DOT from 1969 to 1977. He had also been a congressional administrative assistant. (NASA Spl anno, Aug 28/81, Sept 21/81)
NASA announced the selection of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), a consortium of 14 universities, for final negotiation of a contract to establish, operate, and maintain a science institute for the 13.1-meters (43-foot) Space Telescope scheduled for launch on the Shuttle early in 1985. The space telescope science institute, making scientific investigations using the telescope for at least 15 years, would be located on the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The estimated contractor cost for an initial 5-year contract would be $24 million. Additional funding would be needed later for a guest-observer and archival-research program. The contract had options for three 5-year extensions. The institute would receive data sent from the telescope via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and NASA’s communications network through the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), where the institute would operate a space telescope support center. Investigations would be able to ask GSFC to point the spacecraft at any desired field-of-view. The 2.4-meter (96-inch, mirror in the telescope could image 350 times the volume of space now visible from Earth. (NASA Release 81-12; MSFC Release 81-11; Nature, Jan 29/81, 339)
NASA announced the selection of scientific instruments to be flown on the Gamma-Ray Observatory scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1988. Produced from the most energetic processes in the universe, gamma rays were the most direct source of knowledge about these processes. Gamma rays to be measured by the observatory would begin at 100,000 electron volts (100 Kev) and continue up to several hundred million electron volts (100 Mev or more). The instruments chosen were a transient-event monitor to detect short intense bursts of gamma rays of unknown origin and localize them to determine their distribution in the galaxy; a high-energy gamma-ray telescope that could measure the energy spectra and arrival directions of the highest-energy gamma rays it finds; an imaging Compton telescope to obtain gamma-ray maps of the celestial sphere at medium energies; and a low-energy gamma-ray spectrometer to look for evidence of nucleosynthesis in supernovas. The observatory, with a planned 2-year lifetime would be one of the largest every orbited, weighing 23,000 pounds (10,432-kilograms) and measuring 25 feet (7.6 meters) in length and 12.5 feet (3.8 meters) in diameter. (NASA Release 81-40)
Dr. Alan Lovelace, NASA’s acting administrator, held a briefing on the agency’s FY82 amended budget, which he said “eliminates or defers all FY81 and FY82 new program initiatives in space science, aeronautics, and applications.” At a press conference January 15, he had discussed the budget for NASA proposed by the previous administration, just over $6.7 billion for FY82. The revised budget would reduce NASA funds by $604 million to a new total of $6,122 billion. The revisions preserved Space Shuttle test-flight schedules and research and development; allowed continued production of a four-orbiter fleet on the present schedule, which “meets the critical needs for both civil and military missions”; and kept the option for a fifth orbiter. However, the funding would delete the solar-polar spacecraft; cut space and aeronautical technology development; delete construction-of-facilities projects; and eliminate 840 civil-service positions. It would defer the VOIR and the gamma-ray observatory launch from 1986 to 1988; cancel NOSS, a three-agency project; end the technology transfer program; and cancel funding for energy-technology activities, a geological applications program, and a search-and-rescue mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics. Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford. Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
NASA announced that Perkin-Elmer Corporation’s Danbury, Connecticut, facility had finished shaping and polishing the 94-inch (2.4-meter) diameter primary mirror for the space telescope, main optical component of the telescope assembly. Launched on the Shuttle early in 1985, the 12-ton unmanned telescope would orbit at 600 kilometers (370 miles) above the interfering haze of Earth’s atmosphere. It would be able to see objects 50 times fainter than observable from Earth telescopes, observing about 350 times more volume of space and 7 times further into space than now possible, up to 14 billion light-years. To make full use of this undistorted view of space, telescope parts had to be much more accurate than those in Earth telescopes. The mirror exhibited a deviation at any point on its surface of less than one millionth of an inch from an ideally perfect surface. Manufacture of the mirror blank began in October 1977 at Corning Glass Works, which delivered it to Perkin-Elmer in December 1978. The blank was made of a Corning product called ultra-low-expansion glass, which has extremely low thermal expansion properties. Optical fabrication began with rough grinding of front and back surfaces of the blank, followed in August 1980 by fine polishing of the front surface, using a computer-controlled polisher. The next stage of fabrication would be the application to the polished surface of two uniform extremely thin coatings, one a reflective layer of pure aluminum, the other a protective layer of magnesium fluoride to prevent oxidation of the aluminum. Coating would take place at Perkin-Elmer in the world’s largest vacuum chamber, which operates at a vacuum very near that of space. After coating, the mirror would be installed in the optical telescope and aligned to the secondary mirror, focal plane, scientific instruments, and guidance sensors. The completed optical telescope would then be integrated into a support-systems module, a major element of the space telescope, under construction by Lockheed. The space telescope project was managed by MSFC. (NASA Release 81-82)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Headquarters effective November 9 “to assure proper delegation of authority to all line managers, set forth a clear distinction between line and staff, and a simplification of field centers’ reporting lines.” The change would combine the Office of Space Science and Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications into an Office of Space Science and Applications. It would set up an Office of Management to handle some functions now under the NASA comptroller and some now under the Office of Management Operations and to support program offices in managing research and development and institutional resources. Associate administrators in the program offices would be NASA’s major line officers through whom center directors would report to Headquarters. JPL and GSFC would report to the associate administrator for Space Science and Applications. ARC, LaRC, and LeRC would report to associate administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; JSC, KSC, MSFC, and the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), to the associate administrator for STS. Remaining program offices would be Space Transportation Operations and Space Tracking and Data Systems. The administrator’s staff would include chief engineer, comptroller, procurement, equal opportunity, external relations, general counsel, inspector general, legislative affairs, associate deputy administrator, and assistants to the administrator. A reorganization working group led by NASA’s general counsel S. Neil Hosenball would work out functional and personnel changes; a reorganization steering committee led by Dr. Hans Mark, deputy administrator, would review the plans and recommend a complete reorganization package to the administrator. (NASA Release 81-156)
Johnson Space Center’s (JSC) Space News Roundup said that a conference sponsored by NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), attended by representatives of major U.S. industries, heard briefings on systems developed for the space program that were applicable to Earth-based activities. Representatives of Dow Chemical, Exxon, ITT, Johnson & Johnson, Teledyne, 3M, Xerox, and numerous other corporations learned about pharmaceutical production in Earth-orbiting laboratories, life-support systems designed for space suits, and an electromechanical alternative to conventional hydraulic actuators. Bryan Erb of JSC’s Earth-resources division described the use of satellite observations to predict crop growth or locate mineral deposits or oil sources. From 1974 to 1978 JSC had managed the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE), showing how sensors on an orbiting platform could read and relay to Earth the characteristic signatures of Earth features used by scientists and engineers to make mathematical models on a worldwide basis. The AgRISTARS (agricultural resources inventory survey through aerospace remote sensing) project was carrying the measurements further, reading out thermal conditions, predicting soil moisture, and analyzing crops in the visual (as compared to infrared) spectrum. Erb said a worldwide remote-sensing system should be available within the next 20 years for managing Earth resources. Another innovation would be to work in space with living cells and proteins to develop products for fighting disease. Products like beta cells, enzymes, and immunoglobulins produced by kidney cells were already available in hospitals, but at astronomical cost. JSC’s Dennis Morrison said that on the ground this kind of work was limited to a microbiological level; working in space with larger amounts would mean a 20 to 50% improvement. Pituitary, kidney, and pancreas cells would be among candidates for spaceflight, even though weight limitations would delay early commercial processing. (JSC Space News Roundup, Jan 30/81, 4) During January: NASA reported Orbiting Astronomical Observatory Oao 3 (Copernicus), the heaviest and most complex observatory ever launched by the agency and instrumental in discovery of the first black hole (Cyg X-l), had finished its career at the end of 1980 after 8.5 years of operation. Launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) August 21, 1972, with a life expectancy of 1 year, its performance was “astonishing,” said GSFC engineers and scientists. Orbiting at an altitude of 740 kilometers (460 miles), Oao 3 used its supersensitive ultraviolet telescope, largest ever put into orbit, to view the heavens “with a precision and clarity never before possible,” producing spectral readings invisible to ground-based observatories because of the obscuring effects of Earth’s atmosphere. The telescope was capable of pointing accuracy equivalent to seeing a volleyball from a distance of 400 miles. During its lifetime, Oao 3 served more than 160 investigators from the United States and 13 foreign countries in observing more than 450 unique objects. Formal scientific investigations using Oao 3 ended December 31, 1980, but a series of engineering tests would continue into mid-February, when NASA would terminate contact with the spacecraft. GSFC engineers were not sure whether it would orient itself permanently toward the Sun, begin a permanent orbital tumble, or combine the two. (NASA Release 81-10; Goddard News, Jan 5/81, 1)
DFRC reported on a dress rehearsal of Shuttle first-mission landing and postlanding activities on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. The crew that would act as recovery convoy used an orbiter mock-up, fitted with interfaces for ground connections, to practice postlanding safety and servicing procedures: simulated activities included testing for the presence of toxic or explosive vapors and gases and cooling the orbiter by circulating freon through its pipes and cool air through its ducts. To simulate the landing, a NASA .T-38 jet descended along the planned flight path from 40,000 feet up, while test manager Deke Slayton kept in touch with the recovery convoy and with the flight director, Don Puddy, at JSC. Meanwhile, astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen at JSC completed a full-scale flight rehearsal, going through the 54.5-hour mission in a computer-operated simulator. Flight directors monitored the mock mission as if it were the real thing. (DFRC Release 81-8; W Star, Feb 27/81, A-9) During February: Nature magazine reported that the Franco-Soviet mission to Halley’s comet in 1986 entailed “a substantial cutback” for a planned joint mission to Venus in 1984. Assignment of two of the original four Venus probes to Halley was a reminder that Soviet space-program resources, though vast, “are not infinite.” Pravda had published several articles aimed at putting the Soviet effort in a favorable light; the Communist party congress would be asked next week to approve another 5-year plan including space exploration. However, the Soviet Union had never revealed the costs of the program. Nature said hints of increasing financial constraints had appeared recently: no further Intercosmos flights were in view after those with Mongolia and Romania, and Bulgaria had been offered two unmanned probes instead of a manned flight to replace the failed trip of its cosmonaut to the orbiting Salyut 6. (Nature, Feb 26/81, 741)
The Washington Post said that NASA was faced with cutting so much money from its budgets for the next three years that it was considering abandoning the Voyager, now on its way from Saturn to a flyby of Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989. Turning off Voyager’s radios would save S222 million (the amount needed to keep NASA scientists and engineers on the job and to operate the Deep Space Network antennas in California, Australia, and Spain) over the next eight years. OMB had ordered NASA to cut $367 million from its FY82 budget and $1 billion each from FY83 and FY84. As NASA could not take money from the Space Shuttle, it would have to save money in other ways. It had already bowed out of an international mission to Halley’s comet and now must choose from among three other programs: the Galileo mission to Jupiter in 1987, the large Space Telescope to be orbited in 1985, or the Voyager trips to Uranus and Neptune. Killing both Voyager and Galileo would save about $520 million. The only other way for NASA to save a large amount of money would be an indefinite delay in building a fourth shuttle, the Discovery, estimated to cost $1.2 billion and due for delivery in 1985. (WPost, Oct 7/81, A-4)
MSFC reported a milestone in the development of the Space Telescope. Perkin-Elmer Corporation, contractor for design and production of the optical asembly, finished putting an aluminum coating 3 millionths of an inch thick on the 94-inch primary mirror, an 1,800-pound polished glass blank. Engineers from the firm and from MSFC verified that the coating adhered to the mirror and exhibited the proper reflectivity. The telescope would use two mirrors to focus light from stellar objects onto a group of instruments at the rear of the telescope assembly. Launched from the Shuttle into Earth orbit in the mid-1980s, the Space Telescope should allow astronomers to see seven times deeper into space than is now possible with ground-based telescopes. (MSFC Releae 81-148)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that it had awarded four contracts totaling more than $7 million for design and development of a modified Centaur launch vehicle and components to be used as a Shuttle upper stage. A $1,545 million contract with Teledyne Industries called for five digital computer units and nine remote multiplex units. A $1,593 million contract with Honeywell was for three inertial-measurement groups, part of an automatic navigation and guidance system. A $3,412 million contract with General Dynamics was for design and development of two modified Centaur vehicles. A $.933 million contract with United Technologies Corporation would cover building four RL10-3-3A rocket engines, two of which would provide primary thrust for one Centaur. Work under these contracts would con PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED tinue through September 1981; they were all to support the Galileo mission to Jupiter, scheduled for launch in 1985, and the international solar-polar mission in 1986. The Centaur for these missions would resemble the one used over the past 15 years as an upper stage for Atlas and Titan boosters on Mariner missions to Mars and Venus, Pioneer missions to Jupiter and Venus, Viking and Voyager missions, and the cooperative Helios missions with West Germany. It had carried low Earth-orbit missions for NASA, such as the Heao series and commercial and military geosynchronous satellites. (LeRC Release 81-26; NASA Release 81-75)
Ames Research Center (ARC) announced the completion of a flight program to evaluate the quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA). Twenty-two visiting pilots representing 16 organizations made 2 flights each in the modified deHavilland Buffalo (C-8A) with a new wing design and 4 Lycoming YF-102 engines mounted on the wing to provide propulsive lift. NASA offered the evaluation program to introduce QSRA technology to potential users, obtain feedback on the future of the program, and get an independent critique. Participating pilots and engineers represented ARC, Dryden Flight Research Center (DRFC), and Langley Research Center (LaRC), as well as the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and companies including Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed, deHavilland, Grumman, United Airlines, U.S. Air, Ran-some Airlines, and the Airline Pilots Association (APA). (ARC Release 81-01)
Press reports said that two the cosmonauts who occupied orbiting space station Salyut 6 for 75 days had returned safely at 4:38 p.m. Moscow time in Soyuz T-4 to a landing site in Kazakhstan. Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, flight commander, and flight engineer Viktor Savinykh had two sets of visitors during their mission: Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Mongolian cosmonaut Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha of Soyuz 39 in March and Leonid Popov and Romanian cosmonaut Dumitru Prunariu of Soyuz 40, just a week ago. The New York Times said that this was the final mission for Salyut 6, which would probably be abandoned. Launched in 1977, it had been the base for nearly four years of record-setting tests of human endurance. Last week, Popov said that the Soviet Union would also retire the old-model two-person Soyuz spacecraft used for the past 14 years in favor of the Soyuz-T, a three-man version more maneuverable and sophisticated, with four successful flights, including the one just ended. (NYTimes, May 27/81, A-l; W Post, May 27/81, A-14) During May: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported unofficial records set by Columbia’s first flight, pending review for world certification. As the official U.S. certification authority for aerospace records since 1905 and sole U.S. representative of the Federal Aeronautique International (FAI), NAA gave the following figures: duration, 54 hours, 20 minutes, 52 seconds; maximum altitude, 209 kilometers; distance, 1,144,709 kilometers; mass carried into orbit, 95,201 kilograms; payload mass to altitude, 4624 kilograms. NAA said that Columbia was “the world’s first and only aerospacecraft.. .capable of operating in space or in the atmosphere.” NAA had awarded the Voyager mission team represented by Dr. Edward C. Stone the Collier Trophy, oldest U.S. aviation award, for space exploration achievement peaking in the close examination of Saturn after a comparable visit to Jupiter the previous years. Established in 1911 and first presented to Glenn Curtiss for development of a seaplane, the Collier Trophy was awarded yearly for achievement demonstrated by actual use. (NAA newsletter, May 1981)
NASA postponed the second Shuttle launch to November 4 because of tile damage caused by an oxidizer spill September 22. Tile replacement was “proceeding well,” and measures had been taken to prevent further spillage. Science magazine described the “minor problems” causing previous postponements: tests that took longer than expected and various handling mishaps. The Shuttle’s complexity would “resist attempts to operate with aircraft-like efficiency,” the article said. NASA had already decided to trim its Shuttle flights by 30% over the next three years, from 44 missions to 28: it had less money to spend on flying its own satellites and science experiments, as it had to pay for Shuttle modifications and construction of more orbiters. The delicate instruments planned for the second flight had almost been delayed to a later mission by the discovery that pressures from the solid-fuel boosters against the KSC module launch pad could damage the experiments: the shock had been 2.4 pounds per square inch, not the expected 0.6, enough to buckle a strut supporting a fuel tank near the cabin. If the tank had been jarred enough to leak or malfunction, the first-flight crew would not have been able to orient the Shuttle properly for landing. NASA engineers devised a system of nylon water troughs to disperse the shock and redesigned the launch platform to allow jet watersprays to dissipate the pressure. (NASA Release 81-160; W Post, Oct 9/81, A-15; Science, Oct 9/81, 160)
