ARC said that it had developed, with the aid of General Electric, a portable remote-communications system: a terminal and a folding antenna sized to fit inside two suitcases and be carried aboard an airplane and powered by either an ordinary AC outlet or the cigarette lighter in an automobile. Working with experimental communications satellite ATS 3, operated by NASA since 1967, an operator anywhere in North or South America or most of the nearby Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could contact any of several ground stations at any time. The system would fit into two ordinary suitcases that could be carried as luggage in an automobile or on public transportation; one suitcases contained the collapsible antenna, the other an alphanumeric terminal to send or receive messages. The alphanumeric system would not disturb voice communications over the satellite, so that a NASA-authorized user could use it at any time without prior scheduling. ATS 3 had already served in many emergencies. When Mt. St. Helens erupted in May 1980, an Air Force jeep at the disaster site maintained voice communications through ATS 3 and a GE station near Schenectady, showing the need for rapidly deployable long-distance systems not dependant on land lines, often destroyed in emergencies. Organizations, including the state of California and the National Association for Search and Rescue, were working with NASA on further uses of the technology. (NASA Release 82-195; ARC Release 82-48) During December: George B. Kistiakowsky, 82, a developer of the first atomic bomb who later became a leading opponent of nuclear weapons, died of cancer at his home in Cambridge, Mass. In 1944 he headed the explosives division at Los Alamos Laboratory of the Manhattan project, where he designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to detonate the atom bomb, receiving the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work. After he saw the first nuclear bomb explode at Alamogordo July 16, 1945, he said “I am sure that at the end of the world—in the last millisecond of the earth’s existence—the last human will see what we saw” ( W Post, Dec 9/82, C-17) —Jack Swigert, the former astronaut elected to Congress by Colorado’s 6th district voters, who knew he was fighting cancer, died December 27 at the age of 51 a week before he was to be sworn into office. He had flown on the aborted Apollo 13 Moon mission in April 1970, substituting at the last minute for Thomas K. Mattingly who had been exposed to German measles and was not immune. Swigert left NASA in 1973 to become executive director of the House committee on science and technology and had worked for two energy firms in Denver before resigning to run for Congress. (MiHrld, Dec 29/82, 1A)
MSFC shipped the induced environment-contamination monitor back to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) after servicing it in preparation for the third Shuttle flight. The desk-sized detector consisted of 10 instruments to check the environment in and around the Shuttle cargo bay for contaminants that might damage or interfere with sensitive equipment. The monitor would play a dual role on the next mission: besides carrying out its normal functions, the PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED filAMB 32i 1,000-pound package would serve as a load to exercise the remote-manipulator arm. All instruments on the monitor operated successfully in its first flight on the second Shuttle mission; data collected then were still being analyzed. (MSFC Release 82-7) —A month-long analysis of the data produced by the monitor on the second Shuttle flight clearly identified every contamination-producing activity (such as thrust firings and water dumps). On future missions, the monitor could differentiate contamination from other sources. It recorded low humidity in, and successful sealing of, the cargo bay from engine byproducts during ascent and descent; few particles of matter larger than five micrometers, but a number of smaller particles well above expectations; a 90% reduction of water molecules and other early-mission contaminants after about 35 hours in orbit; and a temporary cloud of particles from using the attitude-control system or from dumping of water. Project scientist Edgar Miller of MSFC said that, when the orbiter flew with the cargo bay pointing ahead, molecular readout was high because orbiter-generated particles were deflected back into the bay; action would be taken to keep this from happening while using sensitive instruments. The third Shuttle flight, planned for seven-days, would test the monitor in high temperatures from the planned solar orientation of the cargo bay, compared to the mild levels produced by the Earth orientation of the second flight. The remote manipulator would move the monitor to selected points for readout during the flight. (MSFC Release 82-14; NASA Release 82-13)
NASA’s Solar Max satellite had detected an 18-month decrease in solar-energy output that might have caused an unusually harsh winter in 1981 and 1982, said JPL. In the first direct observation of cause-and-effect between solar output and changes in Earth’s climate, a solar telescope—Solar Max’s active-cavity radiometer irradiance monitor—recorded a steady decrease from February 1980 to August 1981 of a tenth of 1% in total solar energy reaching Earth. Systematic increases or decreases as small as 0.5% over a century had produced vast changes in Earth’s climate: the “Maunder minimum” in the 17th century, when sunspot activity almost vanished, had coincided with a period known as Europe’s little ice age. A 1% decrease could lower mean global temperature by more than 1,000 (2°F), and less than 10% decrease could freeze Earth’s entire surface. Earth lifeforms existed in the bioshell, an area 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) on either side of mean sea level, with temperatures fed by solar-energy input and interaction between atmosphere, ocean, and land masses. The time needed to cool down the atmosphere and ocean would allay short-term changes in solar input. JPL’s Dr. Richard C. Willson noted that “if you turned off the sun tomorrow, you wouldn’t see its full effects on earth for three years.” Solar activity peaked about every 11 years. The current cycle peaked about the time Solar Max was launched early in 1980; the decrease might represent the general decline since then but might also indicate a longer term lowering of solar input. (Telescope at the High-Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colo., had recorded images of what seemed to be a shrinking sun that might have grown as much as a tenth of 1% smaller every 100 years for the last four centuries.) Solar Max had lost pointing capability in December 1980, and only three of its seven instruments were still returning data. It had been designed for retrieval by the Shuttle, and NASA was seeking authorization for a Solar Max repair mission. (NASA Release 82-57; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-6) During April: Dr. Noel W. Hinners, director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, would become director of GSFC June 14, succeeding A. Thomas Young. Dr. Hinners was associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters from June 1974 to April 1979, when he took over at the museum; he had also been director of lunar programs in NASA’s Office of Space Sciences. He had joined NASA in 1972 as deputy director and chief scientist of Apollo lunar exploration. (NASA anno Apr 1/82; NASA Release —Col. Joe H. Engle, commander of STS-2 in November 1981, was temporarily assigned to the STS office at NASA Headquarters in conjunction with recent organization changes. As deputy associate administrator for manned space flight under Gen. James A. Abrahamson, his special experience would help simplify the integration process for Shuttle users and ensure maximum use of its manned capabilities. He would retain astronaut status and return to JSC to train for his next flight. (NASA Release 82-71)
NASA launched Canada’s Telesat-G, called Anik D-1 in orbit, from ESMC on a Delta at 7:10 p.m. EDT. Transfer-orbit parameters were 36,358-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, and 24.5° inclination. Firing of a booster motor at 5:29 p.m. EDT Augusl 29 put Anik D into synchronous orbit, and it was maneuvered to a station 104°W above the equator. Anik D, weighing 2,370 pounds at liftoff, was the heaviest payload launched into transfer orbit by a Delta from that site. Initial on-station weight was 1,454 pounds. This was a 30th consecutive success for the Delta, a new record. The 24-channel communications satellite would provide Canada with television, data, and voice communications. Anik D was Canada’s tenth satellite and fifth in a series of domestic commercial communications satellites owned and operated by Telesat Canada. It would be a backup in orbit for three aging Anik A satellites (launched 1972, 1973, and 1975) and Anik B (1978). (NASA MOR M-492-201-82-05 [prelaunch] Aug 24/82, [postlaunch] Jan 17/83; NASA Release 82-126; Spacewam SPX-346, Aug 31/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 1/82; SSR, Sept 2/82; A/D, Aug 31/82, 343; AvWk, Sept 6/82, 53) During August: Dr. Christopher C. Kraft announced his resignation as director of JSC. He had retired from federal service in March 1980 but had stayed on at the request of the NASA administrator to see the Shuttle program through the flight-test phase that ended July 4. Kraft had begun working for NASA’s predecessor organization, NACA, in 1945 and was appointed director at JSC in 1972. He would be succeeded by Gerald D. Griffin. (NASA Release —Pravda announced the death of Nikolai Pilyugin, 74, a key figure in development of the Soviet space program. An obituary signed by President Leonid Brezhnev said that Pilyugin, who had headed a large research institute for 20 years, was an outstanding designer in the field of space-rocket engineering. He was credited with designing the control system for Soviet launch vehicles, space ships, and interplanetary stations. (FBIS, Pravda in Russian, Aug 3/82)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached. The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean. Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hartsfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights. The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command. Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release 82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1) During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86) —NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful ApolloSoyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
NASA reported that its Kuiper airborne observatory (a Lockheed C-141 Starlifter aircraft carrying a 36-inch infrared reflector telescope) had captured an image of Columbia’s reentry heating pattern at the end of its third spaceflight. The procedure, known as IRIS (infrared imagery of Shuttle), was part of an orbiter experiment program using the Shuttle to collect data of value in advancing aerospace technology. The Kuiper plane, operated by ARC, had taken off for observation without knowing whether the Shuttle would land at White Sands or KSC; an update 15 minutes before landing ensured success. A similar attempt on the first flight had failed. (NASA Release 82-56; ARC Release 82-14)
MSFC reported Heao 2, second in a series of three high-energy astronomy observatories launched in the late 1970s and the last to reenter, fell from orbit at 1:27 a.m. CST and burned up in the atmosphere. John Stone, project manager a MSFC, said that tracking stations indicated that it broke up over the South Pacific east of Australia. Heao 1 had reentered in 1979; Heao 3, in December 1981. Heao 2 had not been operational for almost a year, as it had expended its control-gas supply in April 1981, so that it could not maintain attitude and had to be powered down. Launched in September 1979 and nicknamed Einstein, Heao 2 had operated for nearly 2 1/2 years, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built. It had made detailed imaging and spectroscopic observations of about 300 known X-ray sources and discovered thousands of faint new ones. It also made the first X-ray photographs of supernova remnants, pulsars, galactic X-ray sources, and diffuse emissions from galactic clusters. Scientists said it would take three years longer to analyze the data from the Heaos. (MSFC Release 82-31) During March: NASA said that Dr. John F. McCarthy, director of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) would return July 1 to MIT as professor of aeronautics and astronautics. Before becoming director at LeRC in October 1978, McCarthy directed MIT’s center for space research. From 1962 to 1971 he was with North American Rockwell. (NASA anno, Mar 2/82; NASA Release 82-35) —Daniel J. Fink, senior vice president at General Electric Company, was named chairman of the NASA advisory council by James M. Beggs, administrator. He assumed the chair March 11. As general manager of General Electric’s space division, Fink had received the Collier Trophy for his contributions to the Landsat program. (NASA Release 82-39) —Administrator Beggs changed the titles of officials in charge of three programs at NASA Headquarters: Harriett G. Jenkins would be assistant administrator for equal opportunity; Stuart J. Evans, assistant administrator for procurement; John F. Murphy, assistant administrator for legislative affairs. (NASA anno Mar 2/82) —A Thomas Young, director of GSFC, would leave NASA March 20 to become vice president of research and engineering at Martin Marietta Aerospace. He had joined the Langley laboratory in 1961 and in 1975 become Viking mission director. He was deputy director of ARC from February 1979 until taking over at GSFC in February 1980. Acting director at GSFC until the appointment of a successor would be Dr. Leslie H. Meredith, who had been director of applications there since 1976. (NASA annos Mar 1/82, Mar 23/82; NASA Releases 82-31, 82-48) —Andrew J. Stofan, who was acting associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over last month, would become director of LeRC, succeeding Dr. John McCarthy as of July 1. Before assignment to Headquarters in 1978 as deputy associate administrator for space science, Stofan was director of launch vehicles at LeRC, where he had begun as a research engineer in 1985. (NASA Release 82-47; LeRC Release 82-14)
NASA launched Intelsat 5E F-5 at 7:08 p.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,962-kilometer apogee, 165.7-kilometer perigee, and 24.4° inclination. This craft would carry for the first time a maritime communications package for ship and shore use by INMARSAT. ’An apogee kick motor fired October 1 would start it to geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 82-136; NASA MOR M-491-203-82-05 [prelaunch] Sept 22/82, [postlaunch] Oct 26/82) During September: NASA Headquarters announced the reorganization of its Office of Space Transportation Systems and Office of Space Transportation Operations into a new Office of Space Flight. L. Michael Weeks was named acting deputy associate administrator, with assistant associate administrators for policy, space transportation, and institutions. The new arrangement would stress integrated Shuttle operations planning and direction; STS orientation to customers; a manageable span of control for the associate administrator; maximum delegation of authority to subordinate officials and field organizations; and minimum disruption to existing lines of communication with centers and outside NASA. (SP anno, Sept 1/82) —John J. Quann was appointed deputy director of GSFC, effective September 8. He had been director of GSFC’s mission and data operations directorate since October 1980 and had worked at Goddard since 1963. (NASA anno Sept 1/82; NASA Release 82-131) —NASA named Dr. Frank B. McDonald, chief of GSFC’s laboratory for high-energy physics since 1970, as NASA chief scientist, effective September 20.	In this position he would be the principal adviser to the administrator and other senior officials on scientific aspects of NASA activities. Beginning at GSFC in 1959, McDonald had been project scientist on nine NASA satellite programs and principal investigator for many space experiments. He previously taught physics at the Iowa State University of Science and Technology. (NASA anno, Sept 9/82; NASA Release 82-133) —NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, not slated for flight, was still working for the U.S. space program, helping DFRF engineers to predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear and tear. All preShuttle spacecraft had been one-shot items, so that space fatigue was a new problem. As each Shuttle was meant to fly up to 100 missions, NASA needed a reliable way to foresee difficulties before they developed into problems and to detect potential weakness without damaging the structure. A method called modal analysis measuring structural response to shaker acceleration could track changes from baseline data. Piecemeal testing of parts would not give results valid for the entire structure: Enterprise, built to the same dimensions as the four actual orbiters, was “uniquely qualified for the job,” researchers said. (NASA Release 82-139; DFRF Release 82-13) —MSFC said that Lockheed’s contractor facility had successfully extended and retracted an experimental solar-array wing as tall as a 10-story building, scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in 1984. Unlike rigid metal structures used on current long-life spacecraft, the accordion-like array consisting of lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded directly to the array like a printed circuit. The wing, measuring 105 feet by 13.5 feet, could fold into a package less than four inches thick and expand in orbit to its full length on a coilable extension mast. It could provide 66 watts per kilogram compared to 20 watts in present systems. (MSFC Release 82-84)
An analysis of NASA’s 1983 budget for research and development, prepared for Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) by the General Accounting Office (GAO), said that more than 25 % of it was for military programs. The New York Times said that the report would lead to more criticism from Congress that NASA was becoming increasingly militarized, at the expense of civilian science and technology. Proxmire said that he asked for the report to “determine the extent to which NASA was merely acting as an agent” for DOD. As nearly half the Shuttle flights would take military payloads, more than $1 billion of the $3.5 billion requested for the Shuttle in FY83 was considered military: $1.1 billion of an R&D budget of $5.33 billion (20.5%) and $400 million support funds (7.77%) could therefore be military related. NASA’s total 1983 budget request was $6.6 PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED **J^LlNT£NTK)NAUr HO ML w billion; total Pentagon direct spending on space was not known but was probably as much as or more than NASA’s annual budget. Proxmire said that he did not object to use of the Shuttle for military purposes, but paying for DOD activities through the NASA budget was “not the way to ensure that dollars spent on national security are spent with maximum effect.” NASA said that it had been tasked with developing the Shuttle as a national endeavor, and reimbursement by other agencies for use of the Shuttle did not change the cost to the government. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-15)
NASA said that a team of astronomers led by Dr. Michael Werner of ARC had mapped the Orion nebula using infrared data from NASA’s Kuiper airborne observatory. The nebula, 1,500 light-years from Earth, was one of the closest known regions in the galaxy where stars were currently forming. Since its discovery 17 years ago, infrared images had shown the total power output of the group of new stars invisible to the naked eye to be more than 100,000	times the power output of Earth’s sun. (NASA Release 82-88; ARC Release 82-86)
NASA said that it was relocating the Applications Technology Satellite (ATS) ATS 1 from its station at 149 °W to a new position about 50 farther west, at 162 °E. Maintaining orbit position in its present location required maximum use of its thrusters; moving to the new station would put ATS 1 into a more stable position and substantially reduce the stationkeeping power requirement. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had considered several options to conserve on-board fuel supplies, which had been estimated adequate until mid-1982 .The new location should prolong stationkeeping through 1983 and reduce the need for center contract from biweekly to quarterly. (NASA Release 82-4)
NASA named Dr. Peter J. Denning head of a new Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS) to begin at ARC in June 1983. Denning, chairman of computer sciences at Purdue, would direct research in computer science and engineering with potential for use in NASA programs. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Association (USRA), RIACS would be an academic center for applications of the computer to solve scientific and engineering problems. {NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 3/82) On December 10 the crew returned to Earth at 10:03 p.m. Moscow time in the preset area 190 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan “not far from” the space center at Baykonur. Beijing’s Xinhua press service said that a special lighthouse equipped with a strong beam was installed at the site to guide helicopters with ground crews to assist the cosmonauts. Difficulties with the landing meant that journalists for the first time were not at the site. Berezovoy later reported that “Judging from previous crews, who hardly felt the shock of landing, this landing was quite severe: and was followed by a few more rolls, apparently because we were on a small incline, and we ended up on our side with one on top of the other—Valentin [Lebedev] was on the (?up-per) couch and I was on the lower. . . .We spent about 20 minutes in the descent module while an offroad vehicle was made ready but then spent 5 hours in this vehicle because of poor conditions. It was not bad, it was warm. We changed our clothes for clean and dry ones, replacing spacesuits with flight suits.” (Interview recorded for Moscow DomSvc in Russian, December 13) Later press reports said that the cosmonauts had “a harrowing reentry” in a craft rolling across a steppe swept by a blizzard and fog. Although initial USSR reports implied all had gone well, the New York Times said that the crew had “anxious moments” when unexpected bad weather landed them in darkness, near-zero temperatures, and blowing snow. One helicopter “force-landed” without injury, and another had to turn back. (NY Times, Dec 14/82, C-2; WPost, Dec 12/82, A-31)] Tass carried reports December 12 of the first meeting with the cosmonauts. Their doctors said that “the cosmonauts feel fine which is somewhat at variance with the real state of their organisms.” Good appetites indicated “energetic adaptation to terrestrial conditions. In 24 hours the cosmonauts gained about a kilogram in weight each. They particularly liked a bath with the air temperature of up to 70 Berezovoy said afterward “If we could have such a pleasure at the Salyut station I would have worked for more time in orbit.” On December 16 Ivan Skiba, chief physician of the space training center, said that the cosmonauts had been “put on a regime approximating their usual lifestyle.” He said that the doctors were “naturally worried over the decree to which the additional 26 days spent by [Berezovoy and Lebedev] in outer space over the 185-day space mission of [Popov and Ryumin] will affect the human organism. These 26 days constituted the “unknown path” both for the cosmonauts and for us physicians. Now we can say with certainty that the [additional] time in space.. .has not affected the cosmonauts’ organisms. Their cardiovascular activity, blood composition, and other characteristics are returning to preflight figures.” Skiba recalled that Boris Yegorov, “a representative of the medical profession,” was among the first cosmonauts and hoped he would not be the last medical man to fly in space. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov told a magazine December 17 Berezovoy and Lebedev had “made an important step in increasing the endurance of weightlessness.. .essential for activity in large orbital stations, space plants and factories, and interplanetary missions.” When the two returned from the 211-day mission, they “were sunken physically and had become thinner and paler... [wanted] regular human communication with friends. They eat with a good appetite.. .swim every day.. .to have some weightlessness in water and make their life easier. They still find it a bit difficult to be seated as the muscles that make the position comfortable are out of their elementary function.” U.S. space officials were watching the cosmonauts’ adaptation to gravity after 30 weeks of weightlessness. A television broadcast three days after their return showed them moving unaided to the edge of a whirlpool where they were assisted down a ladder. A commentator noted they were “like infants” and would have to relearn how to walk. The Soviet Union had announced plans for a station orbiting for a year and permanently manned, its crews remaining in space indefinitely to reduce ferrying costs. Soviet experts, like former cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, had talked of manned missions to destinations such as Titan, a satellite of Saturn. (Longest U.S. flight so far was the 84-day mission flown by Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue on Skylab in 1973 and 1974.) The Washington Times said that Soviet planners were “seriously divided about what to do next.” Valery Ryumin, who spent 175 and then 185 days on Salyut 6 and was now a senior program chief at the space center, talked of grave risks to crew health on long-term missions and said that “four months is about the optimal period.” Ignoring reports that Berezovoy and Lebedev were in fine health, Ryumin said that it would take “through medical tests on earth” to show how they had fared. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 9-17/82; Beijing Xinhua in English, Dec 11/82; NY Times, Dec 11/82, 12; Dec 14/82, C-2; W Post, Dec 11/82, A-23; Dec 12/82, A-31; W Times, Dec 15/82, 8A)
The Observatory for Geophysical Monitoring of Climatic Change at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, on March 3 said that scientists doing a routine weather scan had discovered a huge cloud orbiting the Earth and had tracked it for five weeks, but could not explain what it was. The cloud, about 10 to 12 miles high (just above the flight paths of most commercial jets), had probably circled the Earth four or five times. The best guess was that it resulted from an unnoticed volcanic eruption. On March 10 NASA said that the “mystery cloud” detected over Hawaii definitely came from a volcanic eruption. Chemical analysis of samples showed that it consisted entirely of sulfuric acid, ruling out nuclear explosion or a meteorite, either of which would have produced fragments of rocky material. The cloud had been measured from the equator to Germany, about 50-f8-N, with the heaviest concentration of particles found by a Langley Research Center (LaRC) research aircraft at 20 °N. No volcanic source for the cloud had been identified. Scientists from ARC were studying atmosphere-circulation patterns to see how gas from an equatorial source could spread over the northern half of the Earth. Sulfur gases injected into the stratosphere by volcanic eruptions tended to remain for months, as there would be no rain to remove them; changing gradually into drops of sulfuric acid, the volcanic cloud would increase over time in depth and density as more sulfur compounds arrived. Highly reflective clouds of the acid, like those on Venus, could prevent solar heat from reaching the ground, but the current cloud apparently had not produced any climate changes. A NASA research plane flying from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) to Costa Rica carried a remote-sensing laser radar that mapped the cloud content while doing previously scheduled data-gathering on local volcanoes. LaRC would continue taking radar data; also, an ARC U-2 aircraft would make follow-on flights beginning March 23. (ARC Release 82-11; LaRC Release 82-12; NASA Release 82-45; W Post, Mar 6/82, A-4; NY Times, Mar 7/82, P-24) Heavy rains all day March 17 left more than an inch of water on the “dry” lake beds at Edwards, where Columbia had landed after its first two flights. NASA said that it was cheaper to move landing equipment to White Sands than to postpone the flight until Edwards dried out: each day of delay in launching the Shuttle cost the agency $3 million. A special landing team immediately began loading support equipment on a 23-car train that would carry it the 1,000 miles from Edwards to White Sands. The equipment should be in place late on Sunday, March 21, ready for use should an emergency occur after liftoff. The upcoming flight, third of a series of four test flights before the Shuttle began carrying payloads into space later in 1982, would subject the spacecraft to temperature extremes to see how it endured long exposure to dark and light. It would also include further tests of the 50-foot robot arm designed to handle Shuttle payloads. Exposure of the Shuttle tail would test pumping of fuel and restarting rear engines under extremely high or low temperatures. Exposure of the 65-foot-long cargo bay carrying more than 21,000 pounds of instruments and experiments to the extreme heat encountered in space would show how materials carried into space over the next 10 years would survive. The open cargo bay aimed at the Sun would also seek exposure to solar flares, for which scientists were still seeking explanations. Lousma and Fullerton flew from JSC at Houston to Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., near KSC in T-38 jet trainers Saturday, March 20, and planned to spend most of Sunday in preflight briefings. KSC said that the countdown had been virtually trouble-free and ahead of schedule. Liftoff from pad A, launch complex 39, took place Monday, March 22, at 10:59 a.m.; EST after an hour’s delay caused by failure of a protection circuit in the controller, for the heated nitrogen purge of the main engines, required before introduction.of cryogenic fuel. Countdown stopped for reestablishment of heater'control. Initial orbit elements were 240-kilometer apogee and perigee, 89-minute period, and 38° inclination. Operations began in the fourth hours of flight with the opening of payload doors, removal of ejection suits, and activation of the Office of Space: Sciences experiment package (OSS-1). Later reports indicated that the crew suffered from motion sickness after the exertion of removing the space suits; incidence of motion sickness had been less on Mercury and Gemini when astronauts had less area to move in, and both Soviet and U.S. crews had taken time on longer flights to get used to weightlessness before active exertion. Scheduled for the second day was deployment of the robot arm; for the third was practiceiin grappling payload packages and extending a set of sensors over the edges of the cargo bay to measure plasma (electrically charged gases) in Earth orbit. The fourth and fifth days would see further tests of the arm, more thermal testing, and two brief ignitions of the maneuvering rockets to see how they performed after long periods of cold. The sixth day would have more thermal tests and experiments on solar radiation; the seventh day would be for shutdown and landing preparations. All activities planned for day one were accomplished; OSS-1 experimenters reported “excellent data.” Thermal attitude tail-to-sun prevailed throughout the sleep period. A survey with the remote manipulator system (RMS) camera showed several low-temperature white tiles missing or damaged on the nosecone. Also, three pieces of black tiles (about 1 1/2 tiles) had been found 700 feet south of the launch pad; others had been found on and near the beach. All had been sent to JSC for identification and analysis. On Tuesday, the first day in orbit, the “wrist” camera on the manipulator arm went dark, and flight directors postponed the critical grappling test to devise a way to do the test without it. That camera served as the crew’s eyes whenever the end of the arm took hold of an object in the cargo bay. Planned use was to raise an 82-pound package and move it around the bay; the instrument inside would measure electrical disturbances caused by the spacecraft and its motion through the electronically charged ionosphere. Instead, the crew extended the robot arm far over the cargo bay and used the “elbow” camera to transmit “the best television ever seen of the earth” from 150 miles up. The crew turned on the monodisperse latex reactor [see January 19] for 14 hours; the solution would be stirred every 30 minutes for the rest of the mission. Ground control changed the activity schedule to allow for crew rest and troubleshooting; day four activities would be done on day three and vice versa, a prelaunch-planned option. Problems were reported with the environmental control and life-support systems and with the waste-control “slinger”; NASA said it had initiated “backup procedures.” Besides suffering from motion sickness, Lousma had been kept awake by loud radio static, probably from a Soviet radar at Rostov on the Black Sea, said to be the most powerful in the world; it was called Woodpecker by radio ham operators because of its noise, heard from Spain to parts of China. STS-3 lost three main radio links to Earth Friday, March 25, through the Shuttle’s transponders that locked on and amplified ground signals and carried nearly all data on Shuttle condition and its speed and location. Two ultra-high-frequency (UHF) radio channels carried voice transmission, however, and the astronauts were using the remaining transponder, a backup UHF voice line, and the FM-radio line to relay information to Earth. Gene Kranz, deputy flight director at JSC, said that the mission would go full time unless the high-power transponder link was lost. A premature end to the mission would require a landing somewhere other than at White Sands, because of bad weather with overcast skies and high winds that blew dust across the runways and created haze thick enough to obscure the landing site. Two days away from the scheduled landing, the crew had completed all the thermal tests on Columbia: baking tail, nose, and top in unimpeded sunlight and chilling the same parts in the icy cold of space for hours. They had restarted the Shuttle engines hot and cold, opened and closed cargo-bay doors under both conditions, and repeatedly tested the mechanical arm under varying conditions with excellent results. In the last possible opportunity, less than a day before the end of the mission, the crew pointed their solar telescope directly at the Sun and got a solar flare (an event on the Sun’s surface they could not have predicted) “almost as if it were planned.” Dr. Robert Novick of Columbia University, where the X-ray polarimeter was built, said that this was the first time that an instrument in space with this sensitivity had witnessed a solar flare. On Sunday night, March 28, the crew went to sleep two hours earlier than usual in preparation for landing Monday. About 40 minutes before the time scheduled for touchdown, astronaut John Young in a Grumman Gulfstream jet tried a practice landing on the White Sands runway and found visibility completely obscured. The Columbia crewmen were about to fire rockets to begin descent. “That’s the first time I’ve seen it this bad,” Young told mission control in Houston. “I think we ought to knock this thing off.” Less than 15 minutes later, mission control ordered a day’s delay. The two astronauts unpacked to await word from mission control on where and when they would return. Landing finally occurred at 9:04 a.m. MST on Tuesday, March 30, on a dry lake bed at White Sands. Touchdown point was 1,092 feet past the runway threshold; rollout distance was 13,732 feet. The crew left the orbiter 45 minutes after landing, and postflight operations proceeded without incident. (NASA Release 82-29; NASA MOR M-989-82-03 [prelaunch] Mar 13/82, [postlaunch] May 5/82; NASA MOR E-835-03-82-01, OSS-1, [prelaunch] Mar 17/82, [postlaunch] Sept 20/82; Spacewam SPX-341; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 24, 25, 29/82; NY Times, Mar 18/82, A-18; Mar 20, 7; Mar 21, 1; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 30, A-l; WPost, Mar 19/82, A-7; Mar 21, A-l; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 25, A-2; Mar 27, A-2; Mar 29, A-l; Mar 30, A-l)
On the basis of data acquired in support of its mission objectives, NASA declared successful the Viking extended mission conducted from the end of its primary mission in 1976 until August 1980. Viking’s mission was to explore the planet Mars using two instrumented orbiters operating in conjunction with two instrumented landers on the surface. Identical spacecraft launched in 1975, each consisting of an orbiter and a lander, began operating at Mars in 1976. The design life of the spacecraft was 90 days following orbit insertion or landing on the Martian surface; however, the Viking flight team found “ingenious ways” to extend the operating lifespans and obtain the maximum possible science data. When the extended mission began November 15, 1976, Orbiter 2 operated until July 24, 1978 (another 20 months), when a small leak in its attitude-control system depleted its gas supply. Lander 2 operated on the planet’s surface for 41 months, until April 12, 1980; its transmitter was turned off when its batteries could no longer hold a charge. Orbiter 1 lasted even longer, a total of 45 months after orbital insertion, and completed is operations August 7, 1980, when its control gas was also exhausted. The end of Orbiter 1 operation was to be the official end of the Viking extended mission; however, Lander 1—designated the Mutch Memorial Station January 7, 1981—was still operating in a continuation automatic-mission mode and providing important science data. Extended-mission objectives were “to obtain seasonal variations, long-duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and to obtain data not possible during the primary mission due to time constraints or observational limitations.” Mission results were “far in excess of those expected.” The program now consisted of Lander l’s acquiring and storing imaging, meteorology, and engineering data in a seven-plus day cycle and transmitting to Earth on command. Data should continue until the end of 1994, when the radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) could no longer power the transmitters. (NASA MOR S-815-75-01/02 [postlaunch] Feb 3/82; NASA Release 82-36)
The Space and Earth Science Advisory Committee, z. group of more than 80 scientists, met for the first time in Washington to discuss its role in advising NASA on science activities. Associate Administrator Dr. Burt Edelson told the committee of two recent changes in NASA: a reorganization that moved science and applications into the same department and the appointment of Dr. Frank McDonald as chief scientist, a position that had been vacant for a long time. (A/D, Nov 19/82, 107)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
NASA said that it had selected eight companies to negotiate fixed-price contracts of less than $1 million each for space-station mission studies. The companies were Boeing Aerospace, General Dynamics, Grumman Aerospace, Lockheed, Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell, and TRW. The eight-month studies to be covered by the contracts would identify and analyze the scientific, commercial, national security, and space operations missions that could be conducted most efficiently by a space station. Contractors would use the studies to develop alternative concepts for the station, with specific mission requirements and architectural options to be incorporated in NASA’s Shuttle-tended permanent orbiting facility. (NASA Release 82-121; MSFC Release 82-75)
Space Services Inc. (SSI) of America launched the first U.S. privately funded rocket from a small concrete launch pad at a cattle ranch on Matagorda Island, 45 miles northeast of Corpus Christi on the south coast of Texas, at 11:15 a.m. Washington time. Conestoga I rose to 196 miles altitude, traveling 326 miles downrange before dropping into the Gulf of Mexico. The solid-fuel rocket, with a motor purchased from NASA for $365,000, was not designed for recovery. The booster successfully. separated from the upper stage of the rocket; a shroud covering a mock payload that weighed 1,097 pounds, including 40 gallons of water, ejected at peak altitude as a visual marker. After years of planning and one explosive failure in 1981, SSI’s launch PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FilMm would offer relatively inexpensive space transportation for firms wanting to put up private satellites without government help. SSI chairman David Hannah, a Houston real-estate man, said that the launch of Conestoga I was a “giant step forward” for his two-year-old company; the plan was to send up an orbital test flight within two years and start operating on a commercial basis shortly thereafter. Former astronaut Deke Slayton, who joined SSI after retirement from NASA and was in charge of the launch team, said that everything worked perfectly. Besides buying the booster from NASA, SSI also had help from subcontractors with considerable government experience and a variety of ex-NASA personnel. It was negotiating for a permanent launch site in Hawaii but was also looking into a lease of the Atlas Centaur launch site in Florida for the sort of launches that could send heavier spacecraft, such as communications satellites, into orbit. As SSI officials toasted the successful launch with champagne, former director of KSC Lee Scherer, now an SSI consultant, remarked “You can’t do this at a government launch site.” He said that a high-level administration statement that SSI was “in the national interest” would put the firm in competition for space business. (W Post, Sept 10/82, A-l; NY Times, Sept 10/82, A-l)
Dr. Stephen P. Synnott of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced evidence for the existence of four (possibly as many as six, new satellites of Saturn in data from Voyager 2’s Saturn encounter. This brought the number of known Saturnian satellites in between 21 and 23; the two “possible” satellites had only one observation each, and their orbits were not yet confirmed. In 1979, Synnott, a member of the Voyager navigation team, had found two new satellites of Jupiter in images studied after the Voyager encounters. Some of the new “moons” seemed to be influenced by the gravity of larger moons as well as by Saturn itself: while orbiting between the planet and its larger moons, they would move faster than the large ones because of the strong pull of Saturn’s gravity. But, while closing from behind on the larger moons, the gravity of those bodies would pull them into orbit outside the larger moons, where Saturn’s pull was weaker, and they would slow and drop back into inner orbit. Scientists called this type of track “horseshoe orbits.” (JPL Release Feb 1/82; W Post, Feb 3/82, A-6)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported testing the thermal performance of a helium cooling system to be used on the large infrared telescope experiment planned for flight on Spacelab 2 in 1984. For the MSFC-managed experiment to work, the cooling system must keep the infrared detectors at a supercold temperature. The liquid-helium coolant stored during the mission in a 250-liter container would vaporize as withdrawn to circulate through telescope channels and keep the instrument near absolute zero, coldest possible temperature, at which all molecular action stops. One objective of the tests was to see how long the system could store the cold liquid; the container would be filled one or two weeks before launch, then undergo a seven-day mission. Tests would continue until March. (MSFC Release 82-2)
NASA announced that Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, 58, last of the Mercury Seven astronauts selected in 1958, would leave after 23 years with the space agency. He had retired from NASA in February 1981 but had worked since that time on a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space Shuttle orbital flight tests at Johnson Space Center (JSC). He planned to work as a consultant to Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, Calif., and to Space Sciences Inc. of Houston, Tex. Slayton joined the U.S. Air Force in 1942, flying 56 combat missions in Europe and 7 over Japan as a B-25 bomber pilot; he was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base when selected as a Mercury astronaut. Grounded in August 1959 because of a suspected heart condition, he was later approved for flight and was part of the U.S. crew in the Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975. (NASA Release 82-23) —The New York Times said that friends and associates “wondered why matters were not handled better”: NASA never responded to a JSC request for another year’s extension of Slayton’s employment. His departure reduced the number of the astronaut corps to 79. Several were doctors or scientists without piloting skills; 6 were women. “Many,” the New York Times added, “are young enough to be Slayton’s children.” There had been 108 U.S. astronauts “but only one Original Seven.” (NY Times, Feb 2/82, A-14; Feb 28/82, 30; W Post, Feb 18/82, A-21)
Ames Research Center (ARC) released new findings about Venus from 30 experiments of the Pioneer Venus missions and reported that the orbiter was still returning daily information. The data were available only now because of the complexity of the missions and the large amounts of data returned, combined with the value of comparisons with Soviet data on Venus. The new data included evidence for two major currently active volcanic areas on Venus; findings that Venus had a thicker crust than Earth and was a “one-plate” planet with little plate-tectonic movement; and models of the Venus cloud system and greenhouse effect that were complete and consistent. The research also found strong new evidence of former Venus oceans on the scale of Earth’s. Data indicated that the Earth would become “a virtual Venus if you stopped its rotation, removed the moon, and moved [it] slightly closer to the sun.” Although Venus’s atmosphere and environment might have been Earthlike during the solar system’s early history, evidence of the lost oceans remained only in the ratio of deuterium to hydrogen (100 times as much deuterium relative to hydrogen on Venus as on Earth). Earlier, abundant water could have sustained life; the greenhouse effect “wiped out most existing phenomena” on Venus, replacing them with the current furnace-like environment. (ARC Release 82-1; NASA Release 82-9)
The Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President released budget figures showing funds for all federal research and development as $43 billion in FY83, $4.2 billion over FY82. NASA’s portion of the research and development (R&D) budget ($6.5 billion for FY83, $672 million over FY82) would “assure timely transition of the space shuttle to an operational system [and] continue the highest priority research and space exploration projects,” namely the Space Telescope, the gamma-ray observatory, and the Galileo mission to Jupiter. (NASA anno, Feb 8/82) —James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, said in a budget message that “given the tightly constrained fiscal environment. . .1 believe we did well.... [T]hough there are no new starts, we are continuing with most of our ongoing activity in what we consider to be a balanced way.” (Text, Feb 8/82)
