MSFC announced that it would begin drop tests in cooperation with Dryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF) to try out larger parachutes for Shuttle boosters. The current means of slowing booster descent after launch into the ocean for retrieval and later use consisted of small pilot chutes, a drogue, and three main chutes 115 feet in diameter. The new main chutes being tested would be 13 feet in diameter. Use of larger chutes would slow velocity at impact from 89 feet per second to about 75 feet per second, reducing loads on (and amount of damage to) boosters that had occurred during Shuttle flight tests, officials said. A modified B-52 aircraft from DFRF would fly the test article to about 20,000-feet altitude and release it. Both ground-based and airborne cameras would record the mock booster’s descent to evaluate design, deployment, and parachute performance. (MSFC Release 83-9; DFRF Release 83-1)
NASA published in the Federal Register a proposal on how it would select passengers to ride on the Space Shuttle, possibly as early as 1985. NASA emphasized in the proposal that it was not accepting applications. It had already received more than 2,000 written requests for rides since the 1960s, and it had received so many telephone calls about riding the Space Shuttle that it had to attach a recorded message to its telephone line to request that potential astronauts have patience. All requests that had been received by NASA would be disregarded, said NASA’s Sara Keegan. The proposed selection plan would use a multitiered process to choose Shuttle passengers. All requests would be screened by an outside review panel appointed separately by NASA for each flight and then reviewed by a panel of seven top space agency officials before NASA’s administrator made the final selection. Several months before liftoff of a flight, the agency would announce when it would accept applications and disclose specific requirements for the flight. Such requirements could change according to the Space Shuttle’s mission. There were, however, broad requirements for all passengers. Citizen observers/participants would have to be in good health and condition, pass a detailed background investigation, and be willing to undergo rigorous training. NASA was accepting comments from the public on its proposed selection process until mid-February. (NASA Release 83-190; Federal Register, Dec 23/83, Vol. 48 No. 248, pages 56770-71. Published in final form in Federal Register, Apr 25/84, Vol. 49 No. 81; NY Times, Dec 16/83, A-ll; WPost, Dec 23/83, A-3) During December: The large number of malfunctions that struck the Space Shuttle Columbia in its final hours of flight during STS-9 forced engineers to inaugurate the most extensive trouble-shooting operations since the Space Shuttles began flying in April 1981. They were not sure how long the undertaking would last, what they might find, or what effect their findings could have on future flight schedules. NASA officials did not rule out the possibility that the Columbia’s troubles could cause a delay in the next Space Shuttle mission scheduled for January 30, 1984. The malfunctions included two computer failures, a navigation instrument shutdown, and an explosive fire in the rear compartment. Early Space Shuttle flights had had troubles with computers and the heat-shielding tiles, but these were straight forward physical defects that were easily identified. The current problems were more perplexing and came when the Space Shuttle was assumed to be a fully tested, operational vehicle. NASA engineers and other aerospace observers had suggested that the Columbia’s problems stemmed from a phenomenon not uncommon in any new, complex technology : that is after the initial text phase, when extreme care and attention were given to every step in a project, it was human nature to relax a bit, and it was the nature of machines to misbehave occasionally in unexpected ways. International Business Machines (IBM), contractor for the computers, would examine the faulty computers; NASA engineers would closely examine data in search of clues to the cause of the two malfunctions, which did not seem to be related to any fundamental design flaw but could have been caused by loose circuitry resulting from vibrations. NASA would ship the inertial measurement unit to its manufacturer, the Singer Kearfott Company in Little Falls, N.J., for examination. (NY Times, Dec 15/83, A-l) —JPL announced that the IRAS had found a ring of planets being born around Fomalhaut, one of the most studied stars in the southern skies. Earlier in the year, the telescope had discovered a primitive solar system around the star Vega. The discovery that Vega and Fomalhaut appeared to have solar systems was the first evidence supporting the theory that Earth’s solar system was not the only such in existence. Vega and Fomalhaut might be undergoing the same kind of evolution that Earth’s solar system went through three to four billion years ago. “The discovery provides the second direct evidence that solid objects of substantial size exist around a star that is not our sun,” said Dr. Gerry Neugebhuer, IRAS program scientist at JPL. “These objects could be a solar system in a different stage of development and evolution than our own or the one that we found to be circling Vega,” he added. The IRAS detected the two extraterrestrial solar systems by measuring the temperature of the bodies circling the two stars. It found them much cooler than the stars but far too warm and far too large to be rings of interstellar dust. (JPL Release, Dec 16/83; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-3) —Lt. Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr., retired December 31 as deputy director, JPL. Following retirement from the Air Force in 1969, he joined JPL as deputy director, functioning as general manager responsible for the day-to-day management of the laboratory’s resources and the direction and coordination of its technical, administrative, and service activities. General Terhune received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in October 1982. He will be replaced as deputy director by Robert J. Parks, JPL associate director. (JPL Release, Dec 12/83)
The NY Times said that“computer enthusiasts” had invaded NASA’s electronic mail system, left cartoon images and “Kilroy was here” messages for agency employees, and played pranks on others. A NASA official said that the intruders had destroyed some information but had not “significantly disrupted” the electronic mail service. NASA first noticed the intrusions in mid-July, and they continued into mid-September. Besides reading unclassified NASA messages, the intruders had destroyed some messages and created personal passwords and new files for themselves and their computer friends. Some NASA employees who used Telemail had been inconvenienced, but the system had never been halted. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) said that it was investigating a number of youths in connection with the intrusions. To make Telemail easy to use, NASA had told employees to use their first initial and last names as part of an entry code; employee names were available from agency telephone directories sold by the Government Printing Office (GPO). The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) told a House subcommittee that it was trying to increase security for federal computers, and an FBI official asked Congress for a law prohibiting unauthorized entry into a computer. Without such a law, federal authorities were treating the cases as wire fraud, like use of telephone lines to obtain service without paying. (NY Times, Oct 19/83, A-16) Another report said that the FBI had seized computers and other equipment from 15 computer enthusiasts around the United States, mostly teenagers. The bureau said that there was “extensive” penetration into commercial and DOD computers and that intruders had tampered with the files of some corporations. (NY Times, Oct 17/83, A-12) During October: Kurt Debus, who helped develop Germany’s World War II V-2 rocket and worked on the Redstone ballistic missile for the U.S. Army in the 1950s, died after a heart attack at his home near Cocoa, Fla., at the age of 74. He had joined Wernher von Braun’s rocket team on the Baltic coast during the war and came to the United States afterwards. Von Braun said of him: “We develop the rockets and it’s up to Debus to see they do what they’re supposed to do.” In 1952, Debus became director of what would later be NASA’s Kennedy Space Center; his last official act before retirement was to break ground for a KSC landing strip for Shuttles returning from orbit. (W Post, Oct 11/83, B-6)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
NASA technicians at Cape Canaveral removed two of Challenger’s main engines for repairs; a third engine, on its way from Mississippi, would undergo similar maintenance. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space transportation systems, told a House subcommittee on science and technology that discovery of the flaws while the Shuttle was still on the ground showed the agency’s conservative approach to safety. He blamed tight budgets in the past for a lack of spare parts. Delay from the original January 20 launch date had already cost NASA about $1.5 million; costs would increase later when crews would have to work overtime to meet program commitments. Challenger’s ffl engine was removed February 4 when a crack in a coolant line allowed inflammable gas to leak into the aft compartment. Then, the replacement engine was found to have an oxygen leak in its heat exchanger, a system to pressurize the external fuel tank. An inspection of the #3 engine revealed the same flaw. As Challenger’s engines were intended to handle heavier payloads than Columbia’s, a design change had added a metal sleeve over the fuel-supply tubes to absorb greater vibrations. Soldering apparently overheated and embrittled the underlying metal tubing. Welding new tubing would make the configuration like the old Columbia engines, and Challenger would not be able to run at full thrust. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 2/83; NY Times, Mar 2/83, A-l; W Post, Mar 2/83, A-5)
Discovery of another hydrogen leak during a second test-firing of Shuttle Challenger’s main engines would delay the launch recently postponed to late February for at least several more weeks, said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, Shuttle program head, at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The leak meant delaying Challenger’s five-day mission for a month or more if one or more of the engines had to be removed from the Shuttle, test-fired, and replaced. The new leak was “on the same order of magnitude” as the first; as the source was never located, the leaks might be from the same or different areas. (W Post, Jan 26/83, A-5)
Japan launched its first “practical communications satellite, Cs2A, at 5:37 p.m. local time from its Tanegashima space center on a three-stage rocket toward a stationary orbit at 36,000 kilometers over New Guinea. It would be Japan’s sixth in stationary orbit, although it would be the first used for practical purposes. Cs2A carried eight transponders with communications capacity equal to 4,000	telephone circuits, to improve links between the mainland and outlying islands in the Pacific south of Tokyo. It would be used by government agencies and public transportation rather than by the public sector for research to develop new media such as television communications links, electronic mail, high-speed datafax, and color television. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 4/83)
NASA transferred operation and management of its Landsat system to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) during ceremonies at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Beginning in 1972 with the launch of Landsat 1 (Erts 1, the Earth-resources technology satellite), the Landsat program was a research and development effort to determine the usefulness of satellite multispectral data from synoptic views of the Earth’s surface for agricultural and urban planning, geologic exploration, land management, and snowmelt and flood-runoff analysis. Over the following 10 years NASA had operated four Landsats, including Landsat 4, launched in July 1982, and a ground system at GSFC. Landsat 1 and Landsat 2 were no longer operating; Landsat 3 would be retired later in 1983 because of degradation related to age. In 1979 the Reagan administration told NASA to transfer operation to NOAA so that the latter agency could work toward eventual commercialization of the system. NASA had relinquished operation of Landsat 4 (except for the thematic mapper, which NASA would continue to use), the control center at GSFC, and the multispectral-scanner data-processing facility, also at GSFC, and would hand over control of the thematic mapper early in 1985. NOAA would also take over the Landsat 4 backup spacecraft (the Landsat D now in final checkout by General Electric) that would replace Landsat 4, probably in mid-1985. NOAA would reimburse NASA for the use of buildings and utilities. (NASA Release 83-7) JPL would go ahead with efforts to reestablish contact, which would be unsuccessful if the lander had multiple problems. No telemetry dala were available to diagnose the situation. The 64-meter Deep Space Tracking Network antenna, near Canberra, had bombarded the lander on Mars with 80-to 100-kilowatt signals, said George Gianopulos, Viking team leader at JPL. Gianopulos said that commands from JPL through Australia could be up to 40° off the receiving line into the leader’s antenna dish and still be picked up. Getting into the lander to reset the switch “is going to be a neat trick,” he added. Launched August 20, 1975, and designed for a 90-day mission, Viking 1 had shown “incredible stamina” in the harsh environment of Mars. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) could provide power for years, but in 1982 its four nickel-cadmium batteries began to show their age. Viking could be instructed to charge or discharge batteries to keep them functioning longer. A command sent November 19 to repeat this exercise apparently got into the antenna-pointing subroutine and switched the crucial communications antenna to point away from Earth. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 28/83, 1)
NASA launched ESA’s X-ray observatory, Exosat, from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 3:18 p.m. GMT on a Delta. Designed to study cosmic X-ray sources from 0.04 to 80 Kev, the craft carried four instruments: two imaging telescopes, a large-area proportional counter array, and a gas-scintillation spectrometer. It reached a planned highly elliptical orbit with 192,000-kilometer apogee, 340-kilometer perigee, and 72.5° inclination. ESA’s operations control center (ESOC) took over shortly after liftoff. (NASA MOR M-492-304-83-01 [prelaunch] May 20/83; ESA Infos 18, 20)
The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum said that it would build an adjunct facility at Dulles International Airport to house an expanding collection of aircraft, including the Shuttle Enterprise. Estimated to cost $40 million, the facility would replace the restoration site now at Silver Hill, Md., but would not be completed for another 7 to 15 years. Possibilities for Dulles included a group of four buildings to accommodate a Boeing 707, a Boeing B17 bomber, Boeing 727, a Boeing 747, and others; the design and funding were not yet settled. The collection had outgrown the Mall area, said Walter Boyne, director of the museum: “We are going to get the space shuttle and the Concorde,” which it would be physically impossible to move to the Mall area. “They are so complex, you can’t simply take a wing off and move them.” The present museum now has 10 million visitors a year, and Boyne said that people would be as interested in the Shuttle 100 years from now as they were in the Wright Brothers’ plane today. (W Post, Oct 13/83, D-1) A three-inch layer of the carbon-epoxy material was intended to protect the metal nozzles from flaming exhaust by charring, to dissipate heat; about half the layer would normally burn away during the two-minute firing of the booster. On the last mission, one nozzle’s lining came within 0.2 inches of burning away completely. Damage to a metal nozzle could send the Shuttle off course; had the flame burned through part of the engine in flight, “it could have caused a catastrophe,” said the Washington Post. A test firing October 11 at Thiokol’s Utah plant, where the rockets were built, showed that the liner had begun to “delaminate,” which would make the Shuttle aerodynamically unstable after two minutes of flight. If NASA decided to replace one of Columbia’s motors, it would have to move the entire vehicle off the pad. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, head of the Shuttle program, said that chances of staying on schedule for a Spacelab launch between October 28 and November 5 were “diminishing rapidly”; however, he would not set a launch date “with this type of uncertainty.” The next possible launch date after November 5 would be November 27: astronomy experiments to be carried on Spacelab had to orbited while the moon was dark. [Students at Camden, N.J., high schools said that the carpenter ants flown on Challenger in June had died from lack of moisture before leaving Earth.] The New York Times said that NASA might have to delay the next Shuttle mission for one to four months, possibly to next February 6, because of concern about reliability of the nozzles in the Shuttle boosters. Positions of stellar targets would again be favorable for Spacelab observations by next February. ESA and scientists from the United States and Europe were asked to suggest rescheduling that would have the least impact on their experiments. A later report said that engineers who examined one of the engines recovered from the Atlantic after the mission in August found that the three-inch coating inside the rocket nozzle had burned down to 0.2 inches. Astronaut Daniel C. Brandenstein, pilot of that flight, told CBS News that the lowest part of the engine would have burned through if the engines had fired 2.7	seconds more, which would have “spelled curtains for the crew.” A NASA official said that was conjecture, though the agency admitted that a burn-through might have occurred after 20 more seconds. NASA decided October 14 to postpone the first flight of Spacelab for “at least a month” but would announce a new launch date. Gen. Abrahamson said October 16 that the probable date would be late next February, but the decision would be made jointly by NASA and ESA. He said that NASA engineers still did not know what caused the near-failure of the engine on the eighth shuttle flight in August. Two test firings in the last 10 days had produced confusing results: one engine lining had almost burned through, the other less than halfway, as it was meant to do. NASA had changed the manufacturing process not long ago, he noted, and the change might have trapped gases in the lining instead of baking them out. With Columbia waiting for Spacelab, the next Shuttle flight would take place in January as planned. Challenger would deploy two communications satellites, and astronaut Bruce McCandless would demonstrate in space a self-propelled manned maneuvering unit that could go 500 to 600 feet from the Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 13/83, A-15; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 15/83, A-20; Oct 17/83, A-3; NY Times, Oct 13/83, A-16)
Senior NASA managers, headed by Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space flight, had met with contractors and “cleared the way” for returning the tracking and data-relay satellite to KSC’s launch pad in preparation for the first launch of Challenger, the agency said. Results of the second flight-readiness firing led to a decision not to conduct a third firing before launching Challenger early in March. The #1 engine had been removed for exchange with the flight spare. The spare would have the high-pressure pump from the #1 engine installed before the change took place. (NASA Release 83-16)
NASA announced the establishment of a Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science at ARC, to begin operations in June. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Associations (USRA), the institute would be a place for the academic community to work in computer science, applied math, and computer applications to solution of scientific and engineering problems. Director of the institute would be Dr. Peter J. Denning, head of the computer sciences department at Purdue University. (NASA Release 83-38)
Efforts to push the $100-million TDRS communications satellite into its proper orbit were suspended when NASA engineers found that two of its maneuvering rockets were damaged and would not work. Firing the 16 small thrusters on the satellite was the obvious way to correct the orbit, but Ron Browning, TDRS project manager, said that engineers from NASA and TRW Inc., manufacturer of TDRS, would take four to six weeks to figure how to operate it with “less than a fully optimal control system.” {W Post, Apr 14/83, A-3)
India, for the third time since 1980, launched a satellite into orbit from its own soil. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi watched liftoff of the 17-ton four-stage rocket carrying the 91-lb Rohini satellite from Sriharikota island off India’s east coast. The launch, part of a series aimed at perfecting the launch vehicle, would be followed in the next 10 years by higher investment in the national space research program, Gandhi said. (If Post, Apr 18/83, A-17; FBIS, Apr 20/83; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 25/83)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
MFSC said that the Space Telescope, NASA’s future optical orbiting astronomical observatory, had been named the Edwin P. Hubble Space Telescope to honor a foremost U.S. astronomer who had died in 1953. Scientists had differed on the extent and dimensions of the universe: Earth’s solar system was considered part of a larger system of all stars visible to the naked eye. It was not known whether faint spiral nebulae were part of the Milky Way or distant universes, each composed of myriad stars. Hubble, working with the 100-inch telescope at Mt. Wilson, Calif., looked at individual stars in the Andromeda nebula and by the end of 1924 was able to show that Andromeda was many times farther away than any star in the Milky Way system. He later showed that the universe was expanding (evidence of the Big Bang theory), that external galaxies were moving away from earth, and that the more remote the galaxy the faster it was moving. This was called Hubble’s Law; the coefficient relating distance and velocity of the galaxy was called Hubble’s Constant. The newly named Space Telescope was scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1986. (MSFC Release 83-70)
Lewis Research Center’s (LeRC) basic organization was revised following a recent strategic planning session. The four research and technology (R&T) directorate (aeronautics, energy, science and technology, and space) were changed to aeronautics, spaceflight systems, space technology, and materials and structures. An office of comptroller was established to manage resources and budget. Other directorates affected were administration, engineering services, and technical services, (NASA anno Jan 14/83; LeRC Release 83-3)
NASA said that astronaut Jack R. Lousma would leave the agency and retire from the Marine Corps October 1. A NASA astronaut since April 1966, he was pilot on Skylab 3 in 1973 and commanded shuttle orbiter Columbia on its third test flight in March 1982. (NASA Release 83-151; WPost, Sept 30/83, A-4)
Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
NASA reported a number of differences between Shuttle orbiters Columbia and Challenger, most of them stemming from Columbia’s being a vessel for research and development, whereas Challenger came equipped as an operational craft. Control and display panels on Columbia had sensors configured for data collection and processing in the flight-test phase; those on Challenger had fewer of these arid more support equipment, such as a Ku-band antenna system for tracking future data-relay satellites. On the first four flights, Columbia had an ejection-seat system for the commander and pilot in case of accident in the launch or landing phase of flight-testing. Challenger had no ejection system; the space used for it on Columbia would serve on Challenger to seat the mission specialists. On its first flight in February, Challenger would seat all four of the flight crew on the orbiter’s flight deck; it would be able to seat three more crew members in the mid-deck on later flights. Challenger would weigh abot 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms) less than Columbia and could carry more payload and additional crew on operational flights. The orbiters differed in thermal-protection systems: heat-shielding tiles on Columbia were being replaced with densified tiles to eliminate porosity that made the original tiles vulnerable to loosening. All of Challenger’s tiles had been densified. Challenger also had an advanced thermal-protection blanket, a silica material sandwiched between an upper and lower quilt and bonded directly to the orbiter skin. Its identification marking also differed from Columbia’s, being located so the name would be visible during on-orbit operations. {NASA Actv, Jan 83, 4)
A report from the House Appropriations Committee said that the Space Telescope, called by NASA Administrator James M. Beggs “the most important scientific instrument” ever to be flown, would cost $200 million more and reach orbit a year later than expected because of difficulties in development. The report blamed delays and cost overruns on NASA for understaffing the program by 50% in its early development, and on Perkin-Elmer Corporation, one of two major contractors, for failing to “properly plan for a project of the technical and manufacturing difficulty of the Space Telescope.” Besides the glitches in tracking and alignment devices, possibly unremovable dust on the primary telescope mirror after 15 months in a Perkin-Elmer “clean room” had lowered its reflecting power by 20 to 30%. (IT Post, Mar 28/83, A-8)
A NASA board said that slippage of a mechanical adjustment caused a December 1982 accident at ARC during tests of the world’s largest and newest wind tunnel. The collapse of a structure smoothing airflow through the tunnel pulled debris through the power section and damaged the fan blades beyond repair. The damage cost more than $10 million and would delay completion by a year or more. No persons were injured. (NASA Release 83-96)
NASA signed with the California Institute of Technology (CalTech) an extension of its contract for performance of research and development at JPL. The contractual relationship had been in effect since 1962; JPL studies for NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA) had been principally in space science and unmanned exploration of the Moon and planets. Extension from October 1, 1983, through September 30, 1988, would cover space exploration and Eiarth observation. (NASA Release 83-122)
NASA announced crew selections for STS-11 and STS-12, both to be commanded by veterans of earlier shuttle missions. The crew for STS-11 in January 1984, led by Vance D. Brand, who commanded STS-5 in November 1982, would include pilot Robert L. Gibson and mission specialists Bruce McCandless II, Robert L. Stewart, and Dr. Ronald E. McNair. STS-11 would be the fifth flight of Challenger, and its seven-day mission would launch an Indonesian communications satellite. The crew for STS-12, led by Henry W. Hartsfield, who commanded STS-4 in June 1982, would include pilot Michael L. Coats and mission specialists Dr. Judith A. Resnik, Dr. Steven A. Hawley, and Richard M. Mullane. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) said that a sixth crewman might be added later under a new NASA policy permitting major customers to send a payload specialist along. To be launched in March 1984, STS-12 would be the first flight of a new orbiter, Discovery; its 5-day mission would include deployment of the third tracking and data-relay satellite. (NASA Release 83-15; MSFC Release 83-6)
NASA launched the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) at 6:17 p.m. PST from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Delta into polar orbit with 883.6-kilometer apogee, 856.6-kilometer perigee, 100.1-inclination, and 102.4-minute period. A joint endeavor of NASA, Netherlands Aerospace Agency, and U.K. Science and Engineering Research Council, IRAS, was a 2,360-pound spacecraft carrying a 22-inch Cassegrain telescope cryogenically cooled by a helium tank to measure infrared radiation in four bands between 8 and 119 microns. At low temperature the detectors would have the sensitivity needed for an all-sky survey of the “heat signatures” of stars. The $80 million mission might find up to a million infrared sources not previously detected, filling “a significant gap in the electromagnetic spectrum between visible light and radio waves.. .about which we have no or very little information,” according to Dr. Dale Compton, telescope manager at Ames Research Center (ARC). IRAS was designed to cover about 95% of the sky over the next sixth months and produce the first comprehensive catalog of infrared objects. The United States built the telescope and the rocket and was managing operations through the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The Netherlands built the spacecraft and three other scientific instruments. The United Kingdom would handle the tracking and collect the data. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 3/83; NASA wkly SSR, Jan 27/83; Spacewarn SPX-352; NY Times, Jan 27/83, A-7)
NASA announced that its scientists studying motion sickness were focusing on a chemical substance in the fluid core of the brain that might cause vomiting. The fact that there might be a chemical link in motion sickness was discovered through NASA’s research into the causes of space motion sickness. The research was being conducted at ARC in the Biomedical Research Division and at the new Biomedical Institute at JSC. Studies by Ames scientist Dr. Nancy Daunton and two colleagues at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio, showed that blocking the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain stopped motion-induced vomiting and that an incomplete block did not suppress vomiting. The scientists were attempting to isolate the responsible chemical from cerebrospinal fluid. When a person received sensory cues for motion, the brain responds with its normal, programmed responses to control eye, head, and body movements. But when the responses do not yield the expected results—especially when the visual image does not stabilize and posture control is not easily maintained— humans and animals often experience motion sickness. (NASA Release
President Reagan approved a joint resolution designating 1983 the “Bicentennial of Air and Space Flight.” His proclamation recalled the first manned flight in history, in a hot-air balloon that traveled 5 Vi miles after its launch on Novemeber 21, 1783, over Paris, France. He said that the commemoration would be “an opportunity to increase public awareness of our na-tioh’s achievements in aviation and space flight and to rededicate ourselves to the spirit of excellence which has brought us so far so fast.” (Text, Jan 3/83) The Soviet Union confirmed loss of its control over Cosmos 1402, launched to observe U.S. naval operations from an orbit of 64.9° inclination that covered most of North America and all of China, Africa, South America, and Australia, as well as part of the Soviet Union. The danger lay not in the possibility of an explosion but in the radioactivity of the nuclear fuel core if the craft should come down in a densely populated area. The foreign press had warned that Cosmos 1402 had “separated into individual fragments on a command from earth.” The nuclear power unit aboard it was a matter of concern to all other nations; the United States had “expressed its concern to Moscow” that the object and its TOO pounds of uranium would crash on" the Earth like the other. (FBIS, Xinhua in English, Jan 7/83; Pravda in Russian, Jan 8/83; Tass in English, Jan 15/83) Normally, said the United Press, when an ocean-surveillance satellite such as 1402 exhausted its 4-to-7-month life expectancy it would be raised and “parked” at a high orbit altitude “for centuries.” The Tass news agency said January 7 that Cosmos 1402 had been “divided into separate fragments by commands from earth in order to isolate the active part of the reactor, which ensured its Complete combustion in the atmosphere strata.” Department of Defense (DOD) sources said January 10 that one piece had burned up in the atmosphere, but two larger sections were still descending—those holding the reactor, biggest and heaviest part of the 6,000-pound satellite. At the current rate of descent, the parts could enter the atmosphere in the week beginning January 23, sources said. Tass reported January 24 that “the main part of the satellite structure” had reentered over the Indian Ocean at 1:10 a.m. Moscow time: the fuel core was NTKMHU m preceding page blank not filmed forecast to enter between February 3 and 8 [see Feb. 7]. (NY Times, Jan 6/83, A-l; Jan 22/83, 9; Jan 31/83, A-25; WPost, Jan 7/83, A-21; Jan 8/83, A-ll; Jan 11/83, A-9; Jan 20/83, A-2; Jan 24/83, A-l; Tass in English, Jan 7/83, Jan 24/83)
NASA reached agreement with the National Trust for Historic Preservation and five co-plaintiffs in a U.S. district court suit to preserve the last of the Apollo-program rocket gantries at KSC. NASA said that it would disassemble the gantry into 20-foot sections and store them until a place was found to display the tower and money could be raised to reassemble it. Michael Ainslie, president of the National Trust, said that the agreement recognized “the growing national imperative for the preservation of our physical history, even if that history was built less than 20 years ago.” NASA said that it would cost $1.8 million to take the tower apart and $8 million to reassemble it. (W Post, May 28/83, A-ll) During May: Dr. Jack Kerrebrock, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at Headquarters, announced that he would return to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) July 1 to resume the position as head of MIT’s department of aeronautics and astronautics that he held before coming to NASA in July 1981. Dr. Raymond S. Colladay would act as associate administrator until the position was filled (Hq anno May 27/83) —Robert C. Goetz, director of structures at Langley Research Center (LaRC), would become deputy director of Johnson Space Center (JSC), effective July 1, replacing Clifford E. Charlesworth who would become JSC director of space operations. (LaRC Release 83-32)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
