Reps. Les AuCoin (D-Ore.) and Norman Dicks (D-Wash.) sent a letter to Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger warning that "Congress would not excuse any attempt by the Department of Defense to circumvent" a congressional ban on antisatellite weapon testing, the Washington Post reported. The warning came after the Post reported that a DOD official discussed plans to continue development of a $4 billion U.S. antisatellite weapon despite a week-old law that banned tests against an object in space as long as the Soviets did not test such a system. The DOD official said a possibility under study was to fire a test weapon against "a point in space" rather than at two targets put into orbit December 12 [see U.S. Air Force/NASA and DOD, Dec. 12]. The Air Force "won't do anything in direct violation" of the congressional language attached to an omnibus spending bill signed into law by President Reagan, but "we will find a way to go ahead," the DOD official had said. Although the congressional action stopped testing, it did not halt the overall antisatellite program, for which Congress increased by $15 million a Pentagon request for $150 million in FY 86 to develop the system. The increase, a congressional aide said, was to show the Soviet Union that the U.S. program would be available for testing if Moscow broke its moratorium. The spending bill also had a special $5 million item for the Air Force "to carry out a research program to develop new and improved verification techniques to monitor compliance with any antisatellite weapon agreement that may be entered into by the U.S and the Soviet Union." Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said he hoped to bring arms-control supporters in the House together to discuss antisatellite weapons. The long-term goal of arms control, he said, was "to promote stability." In the antisatellite area, he added, that meant finding a way to make secure the superpowers' high-altitude satellites that monitored nuclear forces and provided early warning of an attack. (IV Post, Dec 28/85, A5, Dec 25/85, A1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that NASA's first experiments to construct large structures in space were a success [see Space Transportation System/Mission, Nov. 30 and Dec. 2]. EASE (Experimental Assembly of Structures in Extravehicular Activity) and ACCESS (Assembly Concept for Construction of Erectable Space Structures) carried out by astronauts Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring "went exactly as we had planned, and all experiment and Space Transportation System objectives were met," said Ed Valentine, mission manager for the EASE/ACCESS payload flown on Space Shuttle mission 61 -B. Those objectives included gathering data to compare assembly rates and techniques in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tests, evaluating potential space station assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques, and identifying ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. "Preliminary data obtained from live downlink TV looks very good," Valentine explained. "But we won't be able to make a complete analyses until we see the rest of the data," which was in the form of videotape and film shot while Ross and Spring performed the construction tasks. Once the data were analyzed and reported, Valentine said, it would give large space structure designers baseline data on the two construction approaches studied. "They can then determine which approach would be appropriate for a particular task," he explained. On December 11 Valentine said he would meet for a debriefing with the Space Shuttle crew and principal investigators. Then in about three weeks the principal investigators would receive the videotape and film shot during the experiments, and Valentine would publish a final report in about three months. (NASA Release 85-66)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-C would carry the first of two experiments to investigate effects of different diseases on red blood cell aggregation and blood viscosity. The experiment was originally scheduled for mission 51-A in November 1984 but withdrawn due to orbiter weight and center-of-gravity considerations. The Department of Defense (DOD) had agreed to add the experiment to 51-C, a dedicated DOD mission. Called aggregation of red blood cells (ARC), the experiment would determine rate of formation (kinetics) and internal structure and organization (morphology) of red cells and the thickness (viscosity) of whole blood at high- and low-flow rates. Healthy donors and donors with various medical conditions such as heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, and cancer would provide blood samples. Researchers would compare results obtained in microgravity with results from a simultaneous and identical ground-based experiment to determine what effects gravity had on the kinetics and morphology of the blood and, therefore, whether researchers could use information obtained in microgravity to formulate new diagnostic tests or improve existing tests for the benefit of clinical research and medical practice. Flight hardware, weighing about 165 lb. and installed in three mid-deck lockers in the crew cabin, would consist of a container housing a blood pump/storage subsystem, parallel plate slit capillary viscometer, photo/opti-cal subsystem, thermal control system, pressure transducer, and an electronics equipment package to provide automated control and data acquisition. A crew member would activate the experiment; the electronics package would automatically operate all other procedures. Running time would be about eight hours. Dr. Leopold Dintenfass of the Kanematsu Institute (Department of Medical Research), Sydney, Australia, had developed the experiment and experiment hardware. Marshall Space Flight Center had responsibility for the flight experiment. After landing, data from the flight experiments would be delivered to Dintenfass for analysis and comparison with ground-based experiment data. (NASA Release 85-6; NASA MOR E-420-51-C-21 [prelaunch] Jan 23/85)
National Space Transportation System manager Dr. Glynn Lunney, who was a member of the Space Task Group that inaugurated U.S. manned space flight, announced he would leave NASA in the near future, the Johnson Space Center Space News Roundup reported. Lunney, whose career almost exactly spanned the period of U.S. efforts in space, began his government service in 1958 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, NASA's predecessor, at Lewis Research Center. He then moved to the Space Task Group and with it to Houston when it became the Manned Spacecraft Center. Later he became head of the mission logic and computer hardware section, chief of the flight dynamics branch, flight director for the Gemini program, and, in July 1968, one year before the first manned landing on the moon, chief of the flight director's office. He then served as special assistant to the manager and then manager of the Apollo spacecraft program. With the advent of the Space Shuttle program, he became manager of the Space Shuttle payload integration and development program responsible for directing the planning and implementation for all payloads and payload carriers in that program. Since 1981 he served as manager of the National Space Transportation Systems Program with responsibility for overall systems management and integration of all elements of the program. Among the awards received by Lunney were the Lawrence Sperry Award, the Arthur S. Fleming Award, the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, the Allan D. Emil Memorial Award, the W. Randolph Lovelance II Award, three NASA Group Achievement Awards, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, an Outstanding Leadership Medal, Senior Executive Service designations, and an honorary doctorate of laws from the University of Scranton. Lunney was a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (JSC Space News Roundup, Apr 12/85, 1)
A computer failure 25 minutes before launch today forced postponement for at least two days of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the NY Times reported. Launch crews planned to replace the malfunctioning computer, inspect the Space Shuttle's fuel plumbing, and try to launch Discovery on August 27 at 7:02 a.m. EDT. At 7:15 the Space Shuttle crew and Johnson Space Center (JSC) flight controllers almost simultaneously noted warnings that a backup guidance and control computer was registering errors. This came as the backup computer was undergoing a final check to see that its programs agreed with those driving the Space Shuttle's four main computers. NASA halted the launch countdown while engineers at Kennedy Space Center and JSC examined data retrieved from the malfunctioning computer and compared it with data from one of the regular computers. They concluded that the trouble was an apparent failure in the computer, which could not be remedied in time for a launch. That the computer worked perfectly in tests before August 25 and worked in tests after the failure, although it showed signs of trouble, puzzled engineers. NASA was about 99% sure that it was a hardware failure, although only an inspection of the computer by JSC engineers would determine the exact nature of the problem. It was the second postponement in two days for the Discovery and its crew of five, and NASA officials were growing concerned that Discovery might not reach orbit in time for repair of the crippled Leasat 3 satellite. Any delay beyond August 29 would cancel the repair effort, and the crew would have to confine themselves to deploying three communications satellites in the first three days of the mission. The flight would thus fall short of the eight days then planned. Arnold Aldrich, manager of the Space Shuttle program at JSC, said NASA would not reschedule beyond August 29 any attempt to repair Leasat 3, as that would have too disruptive an effect on other flights scheduled in the next few months. If it had been only a matter of replacing the computer, the delay would have been a day. However, the need to inspect insulated ducts that carried liquid-hydrogen to the Space Shuttle's three main engines necessitated the twonday postponement. After NASA had pumped the super-cooled fuel into the Space Shuttle system two consecutive mornings and drained it again, there was a chance that the contractions and expansions caused by the alternating freezing cold and Florida heat might have damaged the engines, which in extreme cases could cause them to explode in flight. (NYT, Aug 26/85, All) November27: NASA announced that it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base until mid-July 1986. NASA originally scheduled this mission, STS 62-A, for no earlier than March 20, 1986. Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward "Pete" Aldridge, Jr. said, "There are no major problems at the Vandenberg site. We have repeatedly stated that safety and quality would not be sacrificed for schedule. Our decision reflects our continued commitment to this philosophy." Aldridge added that, "We have had to make some facility modifications because of what we learned from routine Air Force/NASA operational readiness inspections. We have also added time to the schedule to allow for better preparation and evaluation of the operational systems tests and we have extended the training period for the launch crew of this historic, first West Coast shuttle mission. "This revised schedule will permit us to complete ongoing modifications, inspections, rework and operational testing with higher confidence than could be permitted with the March 20 schedule," he added. "It also minimizes the potential for conflict with the NASA Ulysses and Galileo planetary missions scheduled in May." NASA Office of Space Flight associate administrator Jesse Moore concurred, adding, "NASA agrees completely with the Air Force regarding Vandenberg. Our first commitment is to the safety of the crew and the reliability of the vehicle and launch systems. The development of the Vandenberg site is proceeding very smoothly. This readjustment gives us all more time to carry out our commitment to safety and reliability." The decision to delay meant NASA would deliver the orbiter Discovery to Vandenberg around March 1, 1986, and NASA and Air Force officials would continue to evaluate the STS 62-A schedule in order to establish after January 1 a firm launch date. (NASA Release 85-158)
NASA announced that the American Flight Echocardiograph (AFE), sponsored by the life sciences division of NASA's space science and application office (OSSA) and developed by the medical sciences division at Johnson Space Center, would fly on STS 51-D, the first of three planned flights of the equipment with follow-on activity determined by data results. The objective of AFE was to obtain data on in-flight cardiovascular changes during space flight. Most changes seemed to result from the shift of body fluids out of the legs and into the chest and head in weightlessness. The brain apparently detected this shift and interpreted it as an increase in blood volume. Normal responses to this "overload" were an increase in urination and a decrease in thirst, reducing blood volume from an acceptable level. Other effects of weightlessness included changes in heart size, an increase in the amount of blood pumped by the heart, and a decrease in the resistance to the flow of blood through the arteries. Most of these latter changes were normal responses to weightlessness; however, when combined with the reduced blood volume, they made effective functioning on return to earth difficult. Determining the important cardiac and vascular changes during adaptation to weightlessness and during the readaptation to gravity after a flight would reveal how the cardiovascular system responded to unusual stresses. This would be valuable in the development of more effective countermeasures to the detrimental effects of spaceflight and in understanding the functioning of the circulation in general. The AFE equipment used very high frequency sound waves (echocardiography) to obtain in vivo cardiodynamic structural and functional data. A probe held next to the skin sent high-frequency sound waves (ultrasound) through the skin and into the body. It then detected their reflections, or echos, from organ surfaces. The electronic circuitry of the echocardiograph calculated the distance travelled by the ultrasound pulse from the delay between the transmission of the pulse and the detection of its echo. Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, a co-investigator on the project, had trained to use the AFE to image her own heart from several different angles. Every day in flight she would record her own echocardiogram and those of up to three other crew members as time and circumstances permitted. Dr. Seddon would obtain the first echocardiogram as soon as possible after orbital insertion and midway through and prior to sleep on the first flight day. During the three flights on AFE, NASA planned to acquire data on about 10 crew members, along with pre- and postflight data. (NASA MOR E-420-51-D-14 [prelaunch] Apr 12/85)
NASA announced that during 1985 it began a series of research flights under simulated airline conditions to evaluate the effects of an operational environment on new technology for smooth, or laminar, airflow over aircraft wings [see Aerospace R & D/Aeronautics, July 8]. Previous research had shown this technology could reduce aerodynamic drag from 25 to 40% under laboratory conditions and could provide significant fuel savings. However, insects, ice, and other obstructions could disturb laminar flow in actual flight service. To test the system in an operational environment, NASA's Ames/Dryden Flight Research Facility's business-sized Jet Star, equipped with two experimental laminar flow control devices, was based in Atlanta and flown in and out of commercial airports in the southeast and midwest, including those in St. Louis, Cleveland, and New Orleans, to test the devices in humid summer climates. While based in Pittsburgh to test the devices in early autumn east coast conditions, the plane flew in and out of airports in Boston; Chicago; Chattanooga; Cleveland; Charleston, W.Va.; Washington, D.C.; Detroit; Bangor, Maine; New York; Kalamazoo, Michigan; Oklahoma City; Albuquerque; and Denver among others. The flight tests would continue in 1986 with the plane based in Cleveland during January. (NASA Release 85-170)
NASA announced Lewis Research Center awarded a $58,291,440 contract to General Dynamics Corp. to modify three Centaur G vehicles, the nation's most powerful upper stage vehicles, to fit into the Space Shuttle's payload bay to launch various large spacecraft including the Galileo and Ulysses missions, both scheduled for spring 1986. The sole-source, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for fabrication, assembly, test, checkout, and delivery of the vehicles would begin April 1985 and continue through October 1987. (NASA Release 85-61)
USA Today reported that its debate for that day would explore the pros and cons of U.S. manned space missions. In its editorial, USA Today said, "Human brains can adapt to change. Machines cannot. Without men and women in space, there would be no one to even try to fix the Navy's stranded satellite" [Navy communications satellite carried on the Discovery 51-D mission], ". . . Space is our last frontier. Without humans aboard to ride rockets to the stars and beyond, man will never embrace what he has envisioned," the editorial concluded. USA Today guest columnist Geoffrey Keller, a professor of astronomy at Ohio State University, wrote that one of the values of the manned space program was that it would help to lengthen the useful life of expensive space telescopes (for example, the Hubble Space Telescope), by permitting astronauts to replace worn-out telescope parts and to make telescopes more powerful as new and more efficient cameras were invented and installed. In an opposing view, James Van Allen, a professor of physics at the University of Iowa, wrote that nearly all of what he considered the really important and durable products of space technology were "achieved by much-less-expensive unmanned spacecraft, operating automatically and under cornmand control from ground stations, often for many years in earth orbit or in the far reaches of the solar system. ". . . The public acclaim for the Apollo program has left a permanent imprint on NASA and has, in effect, committed it to an overriding emphasis on further development of manned space flight," Van Allen continued. "This emphasis is simultaneously NASA's greatest strength and its greatest weakness. Manned space flight, with all its mythological foundations, has assumed the aura of a religion. The space shuttle and the proposed permanently manned space station are primarily embodiments of this religion," he wrote. But, he added, "the relevant results to date are far too meager to justify such hyperbolic expectations and such enormous expenditures. Meanwhile, the proven applications of space technology are languishing for lack of resources." (USA Today, Apr 16/85, 8A)
In its postlaunch report dated July 23, 1986, NASA announced that it had launched on September 9, 1980, GOES-D (subsequently designated GOES-4) from KSC by a Delta 3914 launch vehicle. The GOES (Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite) satellites provided near-continuous high-quality day and night observations of earth and its environment, including cloud cover; weather; proton, electron, and solar X-ray fluxes; and magnetic fields. During placement of GOES-4 and its apogee boost motor (ABM) into transfer orbit, NASA observed lower than expected temperatures for the ABM and decided to fire the motor at second apogee in lieu of the nominal third apogee. Performance of the ABM was nominal and resulted in placement of the spacecraft in desired drift orbit. GOES-4 arrived September 20, 1980, on-station at the 98° west longitude checkout position. On February 26, 1981, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) moved GOES-4 to the GOES-west operational position at 135° west longitude, replacing the ailing GOES-3 spacecraft. NASA modified the ABM thermal design for follow-on spacecraft to avoid recurrence of the low temperature problem. On May 22, 1981, NASA launched GOES-E (subsequently designated GOES-5) from KSC on the Delta 3914. Spacecraft performance during transfer orbit maneuvers was nominal, and NASA fired the ABM on the third apogee of the transfer orbit. GOES-5 arrived on-station June 5, 1981, at the predetermined checkout position of 85° west longitude. On August 5, 1981, NOAA placed GOES-5 at 75° west longitude where it became the operational GOES-east satellite. An additional mission objective for both GOES-4 and 5 was demonstration and assessment of the temperature and moisture soundings from the VISSR Atmospheric Sounder (VAS); Goddard Space Flight Center initiated a VAS demonstration project to achieve this objective. In 1981 the VAS demonstration project conducted a ground truth field experiment that provided four days of simultaneous, high-density ground-based observations and satellite data. This data showed VAS to be a versatile and valuable instrument with potential applications beyond the severe local storm discipline. Some of these additional areas included hurricane and tropical cyclone research, cloud climatology, and diagnosis of moisture patterns and upper-air circulation. As a result of the VAS demonstration project, NOAA made provision for geosynchronous soundings a requirement for the next generation of GOES satellites. Under a 1973 basic agreement, NASA had the responsibility under NOAA reimbursable funding to design, engineer, procure, and launch polar and geosynchronous weather satellites to implement the U.S.'s operational meteorological satellite program. After on-orbit checkout, NASA handed over the spacecraft to NOAA for routine operations. (NASA MOR E-612-80-02 [postlaunch] July 23/85, E-612-81-03 [postlaunch] July 23/85)
The TOMS, or Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, aboard Nimbus-7 made measurements the previous week indicating that the gas cloud ejected from the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Columbia released twice as much sulfurous gas into the sky as the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens and five times as much as the 1982 eruption of Galung-gung in Indonesia, the NY Times reported. Dr. Arlin Krueger of the Goddard Space Flight Center said that within 14 hours of the November 13 eruption, the cloud spread over an area of 600,000 sq. km (230,000 sq. miles). NASA researchers designed TOMS to monitor changes in earth's protective ozone layer, and it scanned the stratosphere at a succession on ultraviolet wavelengths whose relative intensities provided an index of ozone abundance. But the TOMS readings could also identify sulfur dioxide. The sulfur cloud, 14 hours after the main eruption, spread chiefly to the east, covering most of Colombia and part of Venezuela. One arm of the cloud reached as far south as the equator in Colombia and as far north as Lake Maracaibo in Venezuela. Because TOMS was not used for day-to-day weather forecasting, it was not ordinarily subjected to a rapid-analysis process. As soon as the Colombian eruption occurred, however, Dr. Krueger and his colleagues began to study its readings. The sulfur dioxide, he said, "shows up very well." Although estimates of the cloud's volume were preliminary, Krueger said it appeared much smaller than that formed by the eruption in 1982 of El Chichon in southern Mexico. Visible and infrared data from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration satellites had traced El Chichon's dust, which formed a narrow plume, through one complete circuit of the globe from April 5 to April 15, 1982. Although Nevado del Ruiz's sulfur cloud was extensive, it did not appear sufficient, with its associated ash cloud, to have an effect on climate. Whereas El Chichon's sulfur cloud was traced around the world, researchers expected del Ruiz to dissipate within days without any severe environmental effects. (NYT, Nov 19/85, A14)
The testing of the AFTI/F—111 mission adaptive wing program at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center (DRFC) was an important milestone, the DRFC X-Press reported. It was the aircraft's first taxi under its own power in four-and-a-half years. In the test, the control room was fully staffed, the air crew was aboard the aircraft just as they would be for the first flight, and the airplane operated as if it were ready to fly. Engineers checked and verified all aircraft and control room displays, including the mission adaptive wing color panel that duplicated cockpit displays and featured a caution panel that identified discretes, a trouble-shooting tool. "Things went really well," said Ames DRFC AFTI/F—111 project manager Louis Steers. "There were some small problems on the aircraft, but no show stoppers." (DFRC X-Press, Aug 30/85, 2)
Wesley Hymer, a biochemist at Pennsylvania State University and one of 20 researchers who analyzed tissue samples from 24 rats flown aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in April, said today the rats suffered significant reductions in the release of growth hormones, the NY Times reported. The findings could signal a problem for astronauts, in that weightlessness could affect the ability of special cells in their pituitary glands to produce growth hormones that govern development and maintenance of muscle and bone tissue. Richard Grindeland, a researcher at NASA's Ames Reseach Center, reported the previous month that the same rats lost bone and muscle strength. Grindeland said that they "were limp, like dishrags," and that dissection revealed "very drastic changes" in bone and muscle strength. However, researchers would need more test results before they could link growth hormone reduction to muscle and bone atrophy, Hymer said. But he added, "I think there's probably a good chance that there is a relationship." After a battery of tests that included implanting normal rats with growth hormone cells from the space rats, Hymer noted a reduction of up to 50% in release of the hormone. "Something is radically changed in those pituitary glands as a result of the space flight," Hymer said. And he added, "I think the surprising thing was these changes occurred so quickly. They happened in seven days in flight." However, Hymer said researchers did not know if astronauts suffered the same kind of changes. "I can tell you that there are data that show that the blood levels of growth hormones in the astronauts from Skylab were reduced by a significant amount," Hymer said. Hymer planned to send growth hormone cells, some of which would contain inhibitory and stimulatory chemicals, on a Space Shuttle flight the following September. He said he also would like to see similar experiments on primates. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C8)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility had launched at 1:46 p.m. EDT June 24 and 1:46 p.m. EDT June 26 Nike-Orion sounding rockets for the University of Illinois to investigate the daytime mid-latitude ionosphere between 96 and 241 statute miles above earth. Specific mission objectives were to investigate differential absorption of radio waves; determine the electron density profile; and investigate the irregular structure of the electron density profile in terms of neutral turbulence, plasma instabilities in the mid-latitude region, and gravity wave effects. The 120-lb. payloads reached peak altitudes of 110 statute miles, and preliminary results indicated all instrumentation performed satisfactorily and obtained good data. The Nike-Orion was a two-stage, solid-propellant unguided sounding rocket about 30 feet long. Researchers would correlate scientific data from the missions with information from a similar study of the daytime equatorial ionosphere conducted March 1983 in Peru as part of Project CONDOR. Dr. L.G. Smith, University of Illinois project scientist, noted the studies were important "because turbulence is the major unsolved problem of the atmosphere and ionosphere." (GSFC Release 85-19)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)
before liftoff and delaying STS mission 61-C until early in 1986, the NY Times reported. The shutdown came four seconds before ignition of the three main engines. NASA had called for a delay of 54 minutes earlier in the morning when clouds moved over the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA aborted the countdown when a computer on the ground sensed that a pump on one of the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket boosters was spinning at 86,000 rpm, exceeding the turbine's "red line" limits by almost 7,000 rpm. The device, described as a hydraulic power unit, provided power so the nozzle of the solid-fuel rocket booster could pivot slightly in flight, helping to control the direction of the orbiter's ascent. NASA officials indicated there was a backup pump on the booster, but that, if a single pump failed before liftoff, safety precautions called for abort of the countdown. That particular hydraulic power unit had flown twice before on the resuable solid-fuel rocket boosters, NASA officials said, and similar devices had flown up to four times before requiring replacement. It was the first failure in the Space Shuttle program of that particular part. NASA would have to repair or replace the failed pump and said it had rescheduled the launching for January 4, 1986, so there would be no interference with the holidays. The delay until January would also allow NASA to avoid paying the Air Force to keep open its Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral and paying launch pad workers triple-time pay for working between Christmas and New Year's, the Washington Post reported. "The team is obviously disappointed," said Robert Sieck, director of Space Shuttle operations at KSC. "But we're going to isolate the problem and fix it and get on with the launch process." NASA said the delay would have no impact on the 16 Space Shuttle missions, including 61-C, that it had scheduled for 1986. (NY Times, Dec 20/85, B10; W Post, Dec 20/85, A2) Main Engines
Commander Robert Overmyer landed the Space Shuttle Challenger today on a lake-bed runway at Edwards Air Force Base, after it had caused two sonic booms that triggered burglar alarms and calls to police, the Washington Post reported. Of the 15 experiments flown on Spacelab 3, 12 apparently operated successfully and two at least partially so. Among the successful experiments was photography of the Northern and Southern lights, which sent streaks of brilliant flashes at the extreme latitudes near the north and south polar regions at that time of year. Challenger's crew photographed 18 auroras. Another successful device was a laser spectrometer that for the first time measured from orbit the ozone layer that protected the earth from the sun's ultraviolet light. Crew members were able to restore two experiments that had initially been inoperable. One was an experiment to study the dynamics of droplets of fluids in weightlessness, the other an instrument that counted and measured cosmic rays striking Challenger in orbit. They were unable to deploy the wide-field camera intended to study the ultraviolet light of hot stars. The afternoon of the landing NASA personnel removed the monkeys and rats in their cages for a flight to Kennedy Space Center, where researchers would kill and dissect the rats to examine their vital organs under a microscope for changes caused by weightlessness. Physician/astronaut William Thornton said they had brought back two monkeys that were even friendlier than they were before the flight—"Those primates are part of the crew right now," he commented. During the flight, one of the monkeys experienced motion sickness for several days, requiring Thornton to feed it by hand. On May 4 the Greensboro News & Record reported that Thornton said, "Our feeding crisis is over. I wouldn't have believed the effect of a caring human hand." However, on May 14 Overmyer told reporters at Johnson Space Center that, "NASA has a problem that NASA has to solve if we're going to fly those cages again," the W Post reported. "I never dreamed that all that stuff would come out of those cages and escape into our atmosphere" [see May 2], He added that the experience with the animals "never took away the luster" of spaceflight, a sentiment echoed by pilot Frederick Gregory, an Air Force colonel who became the first black astronaut to take the Space Shuttle's controls. (W Post, May 5/85, A4, May 6/85, A3, May 7/85, A1, May 14/85, A3; Greensboro News & Record, May 4/85, A4)
NASA announced it appointed Dr. Raymond Colladay associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology to be responsible for the overall management of the agency's aeronautics, space technology, and terrestrial energy programs including the institutional management of Ames Research Center (ARC), Langley Research Center (LaRC), and Lewis Research Center (LeRC). On April 18, 1982, NASA had named Colladay deputy associate administrator for the office of aeronautics and space technology; since April 17, 1985, he had served as acting associate administrator for that office. Colladay began his career with LeRC in 1969, where he conducted analytical and experimental research in advanced high-temperature gas turbine engines. In 1974 NASA named him head of the turbomachinery fundamentals section and then temporarily assigned him to NASA Headquarters as acting chief of the propulsion branch in the aircraft energy efficiency office. Later he served as assistant manager of the LeRC efficiency engine project, deputy manager of the advanced propulsion systems office, manager for propulsion research and technology, and beginning in 1982 director of the research and technology division. Colladay received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Michigan State University, East Lansing. He authored or co-authored more than 20 NASA technical reports and journal articles relating to aeronautical and space research. (NASA Release 85-93)
NASA announced that one of the satellites in the COSPAS/SARSAT system, an international program with the U.S., USSR, Canada, and France serving as major partners, made possible the rescue of a man 140 miles off Cape Henry, Virginia. On April 17 Jack Boye departed Miami to sail to New York Harbor for the dedication of a memorial to Vietnam veterans of Airborne 173, his wartime squadron. Three days into the sail his radio went out, and a storm caused the sloop's electrical and electronic equipment and engine to fail and the boat to capsize. When the boat rolled over and started filling with water, Boye activated an emergency position-indicating radio beacon that trailed at the stern of the boat. An orbiting Soviet sea and rescue satellite, one of three USSR and two U.S. satellites equipped with sea and rescue equipment in the COSPAS/SARSAT satellite system, first received the distress signal and beamed it to the Rescue and Command Center at Scott Air Force Base, Illinois, who alerted rescue forces. After an electronic search for the distress signal, a Coast Guard aircraft located the sloop and requested assistance from a navai ship in the vicinity. The USS Detroit sent a whaleboat with the ship's doctor to the sloop. To date, the COSPAS/SARSAT system had been instrumental in the rescue of more than 400 people. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the U.S. portion of the system; Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for system research and development. (NASA Release 85113)
NASA announced it honored at a KSC reception 200 NASA and NASA industrial Quality Circle employees for their volunteer efforts in improving quality, safety, and productivity. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, read a message from George Burns, president of the International Association of Quality Circles, congratulating the employees on their outstanding performance. NASA selected the honorees under an office of space flight program that recognized first-level supervisory and support personnel for their productivity efforts. The Manned Flight Awareness Panel, made up of NASA and industry personnel, managed the program. NASA had over 120 employee teams with over 1,000 employees voluntarily participating in Quality Circles. Through the program, NASA hoped to foster increased effectiveness through improved efficiency in the space and aeronautics research and development programs. (NASA Release 85-55)
Scientists at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory's (AFGL) Space Physics Div. developed a computer program that predicted the electrical effects of the highly charged polar space environment on spacecraft. These effects could range from the production of noise in circuits to system failure in extreme cases, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Called Potential of a Large Object in the Auroral Region (POLAR), the code simulated in three dimensions the electrical interaction of the Space Shuttle or any other space vehicle with the polar space environment in the region from 100 to 600 miles above earth. Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base would orbit through the polar region, and the polar charging code could provide important data for the design of large space structures such as space stations. Lockheed Corp. used POLAR to predict the effect of charging on the Space Shuttle in low-altitude polar orbits with payloads funded by the Air Force Space Test Program Directorate and other Air Force and NASA programs. RCA performed calculations with POLAR for the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program vehicles. NASA's Spacelab 2 mission scientists used POLAR to predict the electrified gaseous environment, or plasma, of the Space Shuttle when the Plasma Diagnostics Package, a free-flying satellite, deployed. And NASA's LAGEOS Satellite Project Office would use POLAR to study charged particle drag on this laser reflecting satellite. POLAR was a successor to NASCAP (NASA Charging Analyzer Program), the computer code AFGL developed with NASA to model charging of Air Force satellites at geosynchronous altitude. The European Space Agency (ESA) had used that code to design weather and TV relay spacecraft, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used it to design the Galileo satellite. POLAR would incorporate data derived from future spacecraft flights and would become a computer-aided design tool for the construction of the advanced extravehicular mobility unit, the manned maneuvering unit, the NASA-proposed space station, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 7) Transatmospheric Vehicle
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
NASA announced that pilots flew the NASA/Army XV-15 tilt-rotor research aircraft with its stability control augmentation system (SCAS) both operative and inoperative. The SCAS reduced pilot workload, allowing the pilot to devote attention to other tasks; however, if the SCAS failed, the pilot had to provide stability and control commands. A primary question answered by the NASA research was whether a pilot could fly a tilt-rotor aircraft with a sidestick controller when the SCAS failed. The objective of the XV-15 tilt-rotor research aircraft program was to develop and evaluate tilt-rotor technology for civil and military applications. A tilt-rotor aircraft could lift off vertically like a helicopter and then, by rotating its rotor thrust from vertical to horizontal, fly like a conventional airplane at speeds up to 345 miles per hour. The sidestick control system evaluation provided data for the V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor aircraft NASA was developing for the Department of Defense (DOD). DOD would consider the flight test when deciding whether to use a sidestick controller in the V-22. Results of the flight evaluation indicated the sidestick controller provided a reasonable means of controlling the aircraft with or without the SCAS. However, when the third axis (yaw) was added to the sidestick controller, pilots noted a significant increase in workload, indicating that additional studies were necessary in this area. The sidestick controller system used onboard digital computers and electronics, which replaced mechanical linkages that normally transmitted pilot signals to the aircraft's control surfaces. Ames Research Center developed the system and would refine and reevaluate it during future control system studies. (NASA Release 85-124)
NASA announced today the selection of Dr. Samuel Durrance, associate research scientist in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Johns Hopkins University, and Dr. Ronald Parise, manager of Advanced Astronomy Programs at Computer Sciences Corp., to serve as payload specialists on Space Shuttle mission 61—E, for an ultraviolet astronomy mission known as Astro-1 scheduled for launch March 6, 1986. Dr. Kenneth Nord-sieck, associate professor at Washburn Observatory, University of Wisconsin, would serve as the backup. The Astro-1 mission would study Halley's Comet and other celestial objects through three ultraviolet astronomical instruments. In addition, a special visible-light, wide-field camera was incorporated into the payload to augment the Halley's Comet studies. The payload specialists, all experienced astronomers, would make decisions during the mission to ensure the best possible scientific return. The payload specialists were each members of one of three science teams that developed the ultraviolet instruments. Durrance and Parise would operate the ultraviolet instruments; astronaut mission specialists would operate the instrument pointing system (IPS), developed by the European Space Agency (ESA) for precise aiming at celestial targets and first flown in early August 1985 on Spacelab 2, on which the three instruments were mounted. NASA scheduled the Astro-1 flight to coincide with the Halley encounter missions by ESA, the USSR, and Japan. Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator for space science and applications, said, "The opportunities for science synergism between Astro-1 and the armada of Halley encounter spacecraft are significant. The scientific study of Halley's Comet will be an internationally coordinated effort." In addition to the Halley's observations, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope on Astro-1 would study faint astronomical objects such as quasars, active galactic nuclei, and normal galaxies in the far ultraviolet range; the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope would record image-intensified photos of faint objects such as hot stars and galaxies in broad ultraviolet wavelengths and with a wide field of view; and the Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photopolarimetry Experiment would study the polarization of hot stars, galactic nuclei, and quasars. The instruments would make a total of 200 to 300 observations during the mission, the first of three in a series scheduled for launch within the next two years. (NASA Release 85-137)
NASA announced that a panel of scientists at its Ames Research Center (ARC) said today that, although Mars presently was a frigid desert planet, it once had enough water to cover its entire surface with an ocean more than 300 feet deep. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey said at the meeting, which grew out of research discussed the previous winter at ARC's Water on Mars Workshop, that "The pictures taken by the two Viking spacecraft in orbit around Mars tell us that Mars had as much water in geologic history as earth did." Carr said the 20,000 close-up pictures taken since 1976 by the two Viking spacecraft revealed canyons that were deeper, wider, and longer than the Grand Canyon and could be made only by rushing rivers. The photos also showed thousands of gullies formed only by water or snow and ice slicing into the surface or forcing their way up to the surface. "If all the water that existed on Mars to form these channels covered its surface today," commented ARC's Dr. James Pollack, "it would be enough to form a global Martian ocean tens of hundreds of meters deep." Carr pointed out that the Viking photos also suggested that water was below the surface at latitudes near the Martian equator where the planet's interior heat could keep it from freezing just as do underground rivers in most temperate latitudes on earth. "There is a softening of the terrain, a rounding off of the edges . . . that is evidence of underground water flow and the creep of ice near the surface," he said. "This terrain is also located where most of the Martian gullies are today, where snow, ice, and water burst out of the ground to cause the colossal floods that formed the channels we see today," Carr said. And Pollack added that Mars long ago lost most of its carbon dioxide, which helped trap the sun's heat, causing in effect a permanent Martian ice age. (NASA Release 85-140)
The Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President, reported that the President's proposed FY 86 budget requested $60 billion for research and development (R&D), of which $40 billion would support non-DOD projects and nearly $8 billion, basic research. Although obligations for non-DOD R&D would decrease slightly from 1985 to 1986, reflecting determination to reduce the federal deficit, obligations for basic research in the physical sciences and engineering would increase by 7%, and those for all basic research would increase 1%. Actual outlays during 1986 would grow by 5%, permitting some modest real growth. In testimony before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, Dr. G.A. Keyworth, Science Advisor to the President, said he strongly supported the necessity of slowing the growth of science and technology funding in the short term, but wouldn't hide his concern over the vitality of U.S. science over the long run. "Our real challenges will come in fiscal years 1987 and 1988, when we simply will have to find ways to ensure our ability to pursue—and pursue vigorously—new avenues of research. . . . We have to be prepared to make hard choices to fund new starts for high-priority research facilities under whatever fiscal scenario we face in coming years. What will be at stake will be the scientific leadership that we can't afford to compromise." (Office of Science and Technology Policy release Feb 4/85; U.S. House Comm, on Science and Technology testimony, Feb 5/85) During February. In its Federal Scientific and Technical Workers: Numbers and Characteristics, 1973 and 1983, the National Science Foundation reported that the federal government was the largest single employer of scientific and technical personnel in the U.S. Government employment of scientists grew by 20% between 1973 and 1983, from 74,000 to 89,000, although such employment declined during that period at NASA and the Department of Defense. The variation by government agency in the proportion of scientists, engineers, and computer (SEC) specialists with at least a bachelor's degree was not great, ranging from 95% at the Department of Transportation (DOT) to 99% at NASA. The proportion of NASA SEC personnel with advanced degrees increased from 29% to 36% between 1973 and 83, reflecting the higher separation rates of bachelor's degree holders and those without degrees during the long-term cutbacks in SEC employees at NASA. The number of SEC staff at NASA declined 8% between 1973 and 83. The decline of 1,800 electronics technicians during the period reflected primarily a fall in total white-collar employment levels of 10% at DOT and NASA; DOT's electronics technicians went from 8,800 to 7,800, NASA's from 900 to 600. (NSF 85-312 [final report], Feb 85)
The U.S. Navy implemented a plan announced earlier by Navy Secretary John Lehman to abolish the Naval Material Command and to restructure the Naval Electronics Systems Command to integrate space systems, force ships, and aircraft systems into a Space and Warfare Systems Command, Defense Daily reported. The actions were part of a two-year-old plan to decentralize acquisition management in the Navy and streamline the decision making process. Defense Daily reported the Navy as saying a major impact of the reorganization of Navy acquisition management would be improved accountability by eliminating a reporting layer. Adm. James Watkins, chief of Naval Operations, said the space aspect of the reorganization was part of a total package intended to bring the Navy "up to speed" in addressing space needs. "We are trying now to put our act together. We have established the Navy Space Command. . .putting in my office the Space and C3 Directorate, rather than just C3," Watkins said. "The Space and Warfare Systems Command will be our technical depository, working with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and other laboratories to work our projects in space, of which there are many. . .This is a nice stepping stone on the route to a unified space command," Watkins added. He also pointed out that the Navy and the Air Force, and perhaps the Army, would rotate into the unified space command that President Reagan would establish on October 1,1985. Therefore, Watkins said, he saw the reorganization as important not only within the Navy, but also within the unified command system to achieve a higher level of command decision. (D/D, Apr 10/85, 225)
NASA announced it would transfer on December 6, 1985, the title to the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. The NASA Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, on November 16 would deliver Enterprise to Washington Dulles International Airport, where cranes would remove Enterprise from the top of the 747 and lower it to Dulles's tarmac. Rockwell Internatl., NASA's Space Shuttle prime contractor, constructed Enterprise, which was the first orbiter built. NASA used Enterprise, Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle 101 (OV 101), to test airframe loads, flight dynamics characteristics, and other aspects of the orbiter as it flew through earth's atmosphere. NASA also used Enterprise as a test bed for manufacturing techniques, aerodynamics, and flight control tests, and mating and fit checks for the remainder of the Space Shuttle components—the external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and mobile launch platforms at both Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base. On September 17, 1976, Enterprise rolled out from Rockwell's assembly facility at Palmdale, California, and was first flown on February 15, 1977, aboard the modified 747 in taxi tests at Edwards Air Force Base. There were then five approach and landing tests, commanded and piloted alternately by astronaut teams of Fred Haise, Jr. (commander) and C. Gordon Fullerton (pilot) and Joe Engie (commander) and Richard Truly (pilot). After ground vibration tests, engineers at Kennedy Space Center used Enterprise for fit checks with the other Space Shuttle components and the mobile launch systems. More recently, engineers used Enterprise for fit checks at the Space Shuttle launch complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 85-150)
NASA earmarked about $3.2 million in FY 86 funding for continuing work on the proposed space station at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to define processing requirements, evaluate maintenance and resupply activities, and assess facility needs, the Spaceport News reported. The funding, an increase over the previous year, would pay for studies to further the Phase B definition and preliminary design effort expected to continue through early 1987. NASA planned for the early 1990s the first launch of a space station element. KSC studies were intended to identify ground processing options and launch preparation concepts. In addition, KSC contractors were evaluating what facilities were needed for processing the station elements and payloads. KSC was also studying how NASA should approach the ongoing maintenance and resupply activities that would support continuous on-orbit operations. KSC space station activity in FY 86 was expected to require the equivalent of about 180 NASA and contractor workers. (Spaceport News, Oct 25/85, 2)
NASA announced a demonstration at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) of a convertible gas turbine engine, which could operate in turboshaft or turbofan modes or both simultaneously, that would enable future rotorcraft to operate either as rotary or fixed-wing aircraft capable of speeds equivalent to commercial transports. The demonstration was part of a joint NASA/Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) program using a TF-34 engine modified under a General Electric Co. contract. Such an engine would provide future X-wing (4-bladed) rotorcraft with the necessary shaft power to take off vertically. After reaching the conversion speed, near 200 knots, the pilot would disengage the transmission of the rotorcraft and lock the rotor blades in an "X" configuration for operation as a fixed-wing aircraft. The engine would convert from shaft to fan mode in 15 to 20 seconds to power the craft at speeds near .8 Mach. Landing would require reversing the conversion process. During the past year, designers had evaluated performance characteristics of the engine and in Dec 1984 accomplished successfully the first transient operation simulating the conversion to and from rotary-wing to fixed-wing flight. The conversion had required 18 seconds, with the engine responding as predicted throughout. These tests had represented the first successful operation of a 5,000 hp-class convertible engine in both fan and shaft modes and the first dual mode operation for an engine. The new engine would make possible a class of civil and military highspeed rotorcraft that could operate efficiently from hover to transonic speeds. (NASA Release 85-30)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
NASA announced the appointment effective November 25 of Joseph Alexander to deputy chief scientist with responsibility for providing assistance to the chief scientist in advising the Administrator and in establishing policy related to scientific aspects of NASA programs and missions. Alexander joined Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in 1962, where he participated in the establishment of NASA's program in space radio astronomy and conducted studies of the sun, the planets, and the galaxy from earth-orbit, lunar-orbit, and planetary flyby spacecraft. In 1970 he became head of the Galactic Studies Section where he was responsible for scientific studies associated with the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite program. Following leave as a visiting scientist at the Department of Astro-Geophysics at the University of Colorado, Alexander became head of the Planetary Magnetospheres Branch and directed a research team conducting both experimental and theoretical studies of planetary environments by using instruments on board spacecraft such as the Interplanetary Monitoring Probes, Mariner-10, Magsat, Pioneer-11, and Voyager 1 and 2. From January 1984 until March 1985, Alexander was a senior policy analyst at the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy where he concentrated on issues related to space science and technology in the civil space program. He then returned to GSFC as associate chief of the laboratory for extraterrestrial physics. A member of the American Geophysical Union, the U.S. National Committee of the International Union of Radio Science, and the International Astronomical Union, Alexander received in 1960 a B.S. degree and in 1962 an M.A. degree, both in physics, from the College of William and Mary. (NASA anno., Dec 2/85)
European Space Agency (ESA), Japanese, and Canadian officials the previous week expressed concern about NASA's expectations of how the costs of operating the proposed space station should be shared, as fears increased that the U.S. Congress or the Office of Management and Budget might slip the planned 1993 operational date for the $10 to $13 billion facility, Aviation Week reported. The officials were meeting with NASA managers to lay the groundwork for critical space station decisions due by December that would determine what type of contribution they would make to the basic $8 billion U.S. investment. The international space officials were unanimous in their view that the non-U.S. contribution to the station's operational costs should be largely amortized through open access and use of their respective portions of the station system—not through funding transferred to the U.S. As the discussions progressed, the possibility of a space station schedule delay to help cut the U.S. budget deficit in FY 87 became a growing factor. Sen. Slade Gorton (R-Wash.), chairman of the Senate science subcommittee, and Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, both influential space supporters, were cautioning that congressional action on the FY 87 NASA budget could trim space station funding and delay the project's 1993 planned operational date by a year or more. Fuqua told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable, a group formed to foster space commercialization, that a slip now, while undesirable and likely to drive up costs later, could be absorbed by the program more easily than one later when the hardware phase was underway. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 18)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
Continuing a project begun in 1984, some of the world's most prominent lightning experts gathered during the summer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to study lightning strikes and their effects, the Spaceport News reported. KSC attracted scientists with a variety of research interests because it was one of the nation's areas of highest frequency of strikes and the presence of French experts who had mastered the technique of triggering lightning. Taking part in the summer's project were representatives of NASA, the U.S. Air Force's Wright Aeronautical Lab, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Naval Laboratory, France's Center for Nuclear Studies, three U.S. universities, and two industry organizations. Since late May, the 36 lightning investigators had conducted studies at a specially equipped lightning research facility located on the shore of Mosquito Lagoon about nine miles north of the vehicle assembly building. The facility included a launch site for the three-foot rockets used to trigger lightning and two nearby trailers that housed the research teams and their equipment. From their control center, the French experts triggered lightning events by launching a small rocket that trailed a thin copper wire to an altitude of about 2000 feet. The wire acted as a trigger, attracting a stroke, which vaporized the wire while traveling down an electrical pathway to the ground. Special instruments and cameras near the launch site recorded the strike in detail. The triggered lightning events allowed researchers to obtain ground measurements that they could use in atmospheric and lightning research. Researchers might eventually use information from the studies to design advanced lightning protection systems for KSC facilities and for greater protection for aircraft such as the Space Shuttle that contained electronic flight control systems. Other research at the facilities included using a Convair C-580 to obtain measurements on a lightning strike; a study to determine how lightning strokes gained access to power lines; investigation of the Maxwell Current, which developed in a particular pattern before, during, and after thunderstorms; and attempts to obtain three-dimensional photos of lightning strikes. In addition to hosting the project, KSC was contributing funding to some of the university research. Project managers hoped to attract more participants in the future with the promise of research leading to tangible benefits in lightning protection and prediction. (Spaceport News, Aug 16/85, 7)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
NASA announced that its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) would begin a series of simulated airline flights to test two experimental laminar air flow control devices. Previous research had shown that laminar air flow could reduce aerodynamic drag from 25 to 40% and thus provide significant fuel savings under laboratory conditions. However, in actual flight insects, ice, and other obstructions adhering to the leading edges of an aircraft's wings could disrupt laminar flow. Ames-DFRC had installed on its business-sized JetStar aircraft the two experimental laminar control flow devices and would simulate airline service flights in widely separated areas of the U.S. to experience a wide variety of contaminant conditions. NASA would conduct the simulated airline service flights just as an airline would under normal air traffic rules and regulations. During the test, researchers planned up to four flights each day over a two-week period to gather as much information as possible on the test articles' performance. The test article installed on the left wing used suction through 27 0.003-in. spanwise slots on the upper and lower surface to maintain laminar flow. A propylene glycol methyl ether (PGME)/water mixture discharged through several slots at the wing leading edge and flowing back over the wing provided ice and insect impact protection. Lockheed-Georgia manufactured the article for NASA. The test article on the right wing used suction through approximately 1 million 0.0025-in. diameter holes in the titanium skin to maintain laminar flow on the upper surface of the article. For insect protection, a shield, which retracted at 6,000 feet altitude, extended much like a wing leading edge flap on commercial transports. Spray nozzles behind the shield could spray the PGME/water mixture on the test article for additional insect protection. For additional ice prevention, glycol was forced through the wing's porous metal section of the shield leading edge. McDonnell-Douglas manufactured the article for NASA. The JetStar would carry a Knollenberg probe, mounted atop the aircraft, to measure the number and size of ice and water particles encountered in flight. A charge patch, located on the pylon that held the probe, would measure the static electric charge caused by particles in the air rubbing across the patch surface, thus giving a qualitative measure of ice and water particles. Correlation of the probe and patch data could calibrate the charge measurement in a simple cockpit display. (NASA Release 85-101)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
NASA announced that scientists from the U.S., France, the United Kingdom, and West Germany released their findings from the rendezvous on September 11 of the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft with Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although some ICE data confirmed the traditional portrait of a comet, other information was unexpected. Perhaps most surprising was detection of electrical wave (plasma) disturbances and high-speed molecular species coming from the comet more than a day before rendezvous. The spacecraft's Plasma Wave Experiment, developed by TRW's Dr. Frederick Scarf, detected the electrical waves while ICE was 1,429,200 miles from the comet. Scientists had theorized that first detection might occur just a few hours before the spacecraft crossed the comet's tail. A few hours after initial detection, but still one day before intercept, two of ICE's instruments discovered electrically-charged particles (ions) as far as 1,130,000	miles from the comet. The Energetic Proton Experiment, directed by Dr. Robert Hynds, Imperial College, London, and the Low-Energy Cosmic Ray Experiment, directed by Dr. Dieter Hovestadt of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching, West Germany, detected these ions. According to Hynds, it was believed solar ultraviolet light ionized gas molecules escaping from the comet's nucleus, then the solar wind picked up and accelerated the ions back toward the comet. In another finding, Dr. Samuel Bame of the Los Alamos National Laboratory reported that, in contrast to the hot electrons on the outskirts of the comet, its tail consisted of a dense narrow structure of cool plasma. The Radio Wave Experiment of France's Meudon Observatory made this same finding. The ICE's Ion Composition Experiment, directed by Dr. Keith Ogilvie of Goddard Space Flight Center, made the first direct measurements of molecules in a comet. The experiment found mainly water vapor ions, confirming the "dirty snowball" model of comets. A major prediction confirmed by the ICE data was that the magnetic structure of the comet's plasma tail consisted of two parallel lobes, each threaded by a magnetic field of opposite polarity. ICE's Magnetometer Experiment of Dr. Edward Smith of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory mapped this structure, which was predicted in 1957 by Nobel physicist Dr. Hannel Alfven. Putting conflicting scientific conjectures to rest, the ICE mission revealed that no clear-cut bow shock—a surface moving ahead of the comet like that through which a jet aircraft passes as it breaks the sound barrier—accompanied the comet. Instead, researchers found around the head of the comet what they called "a transition region" in which the solar wind was heated, compressed, and slowed. Neither the ICE spacecraft nor its instrument payload suffered any detectable damage as a result of the impact with the comet's dust. (NASA Release
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
NASA announced that astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the Universities of Hawaii, Arizona, and Texas were observing Pluto and its only known satellite, Charon, as the two alternately moved in front of one another in a series of eclipses that occurred every 124 years or twice in each orbit of the sun. Each time Charon passed between Pluto and earth, a portion of Pluto's surface was blocked from view, resulting in a dimming of the combined light from both bodies. When Charon moved behind Pluto, their roles reversed. Measurements of the times, durations, and changes in brightness of the events would allow astronomers to calculate the masses, diameters, and densities of Pluto and Charon, permitting development of models of the two bodies' composition. Current estimates of Pluto's density had an uncertainty of 50%, not accurate enough to derive information on its composition. However, researchers thought Pluto's density was about that of water, making it the lowest-density planet known that had a solid surface. The new measurements indicated that the combined brightness of Pluto and Charon diminished by 4% during the eclipses, a dimming that lasted about two hours and was superimposed on a 30% brightness change that occurred over a 6.4-day period. The longer change in brightness happened because one hemisphere of Pluto was 30% brighter than the other. Very little was known about Pluto and even less about Charon, including when or even if the five-year-long series of eclipses would begin. In order not to miss any of the earliest events, the astronomers had established an observing network at McDonald Observatory in Texas, the University of Arizona observatories, Palomar Observatory in California, and Mauna Kea Observatory in Hawaii. Dr. Edward Tedesco of JPL had been the first to see and measure an eclipse of Pluto by Charon January 16 from Palomar; Richard Binzel observed another eclipse February 17 from the McDonald Observatory; and Dr. D. J. Tholen observed a third eclipse February 20 from the Mauna Kea Observatory. Pluto and Charon's great distance from earth and relatively small sizes made them the solar system's most difficult objects to observe. (NASA Release 85-36)
'The Eagle has landed.' In a dramatic and compelling moment in history, the first humans had reached solid ground beyond our own planet . . . "Space exploration is little more than a quarter century old. In that brief period, more has been learned about the cosmos and our relation to it than in all the preceding centuries combined. The ever-increasing knowledge gained from peaceful space exploration, and the uses to which that knowledge is put, potentially benefit all those on Spaceship Earth . . . "In recognition of the achievements and promise of our space exploration program, the Congress, by Senate Joint Resolution 154, has designated July 20, 1985, as "Space Exploration Day . . . PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	4o3 "I call on the people of the United States to observe the occasion with appropriate ceremonies and activities." (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, July 22/ 85, 924) U.S. Air Force
A sophomore at Purdue University and a senior at San Francisco's Lowell High School designed experiments to be carried on two 1986 Space Shuttle Flights, the Washington Post reported. Kentucky Fried Chicken would sponsor an experiment in which eggs would fly in orbit to determine whether chicken embryos could survive the rigors of weightlessness. The Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California would sponsor an experiment to measure the effects of weightlessness on cell division in yeast. Greg Delory, 16, said he got the idea for flying baker's yeast from the first Spacelab mission where bread mold was grown in orbit. "The mold was supposed to produce spores every 22 hours, but in space it lost its circadian rhythm and produced spores all the time," he said. Delory won a competition to design a Space Shuttle experiment while attending the U.S. Space Camp under the auspices of Marshall Space Flight Center. John Vellinger, 20, who won a competition to design a NASA experiment, said, "We hope this will give us some data about the feasibility of raising chickens as a food source in space." (WPost, Aug 15/85, A19)
The information gathered by several Space Shuttle missions underscored the need for improved weather forecasting at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA along with the U.S. Air Force developed a plan to improve the quality of weather data available at KSC as well as the manner in which it was presented to the forecaster, Spaceport News reported. KSC officials recently held a ribbon cutting ceremony at the Range Control Center on Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to inaugurate the new Cape Canaveral Forecast Facility (CCFF), marking completion of a $3 million three-year effort by NASA, the Air Force, and contractor Pan Am World Services. The facility was the first important tool for improving the efficiency of the weather forecaster during launches and landings of the Space Shuttle. The facility housed a system called MIDDS, meteorological interactive data display system, which animated and overlaid data from various forecasting tools in color graphic displays. For example, a forecaster could begin with display of a current satellite picture; over that he could place a color enhanced radar display of shower activity. Next he might add a graphic presentation of indications from wind towers around KSC; and over that he could display locations of lightning potential as well as where lightning was striking cloud-to-ground. Motion added to the entire composite picture would illustrate trends in weather activity over a period of time. The system could overlay maps of upper wind data or barometric pressures collected from weather balloons or sounding rockets. The forecaster could also display figures from the data network of other weather stations around the country or the world. Although the console was at the Cape Canaveral facility, the new rotating antenna was at Patrick Air Force Base to compensate for the blind spot directly above the radar. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration radar located in Dayton Beach supplemented the Cape radar. A forecaster could call up a current graphic display of any official weather radar in the U.S. A lightning location and protection (LLP) system would show cloud-to-ground strikes up to 100 miles away, from which antennas were located ten miles north of the vehicle assembly building and at Melbourne Regional and Orlando International Airports. These antennas supplemented an existing network of 30 area field mills that detected lightning potential. NASA officials hoped within five years to have at the facility a clear air doppler radar, of which there were only six in the country. It would reduce the number of wind towers needed and improve forecasting efficiency. In the meantime, Space Shuttle weather officer Scott Funk said, "We haven't tapped the full potential of the new MIDDS system. Most weather forecasters have never seen anything like this. But there are still a number of potential capabilities the system has which we will add next year." (Spaceport News, Oct 11/ 85, 7)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
19 a.m. today a three-stage, Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket that left several colored clouds high over the mid-eastern U.S. coastline. The objective of the experiment was to provide baseline data on expected yields, vapor expansion velocities, and other parameters for the chemical release canisters for the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), scheduled for launch in July 1987 from the Space Shuttle. The 157-lb. payload ejected balls of greenish-white titanium-boron-barium and barium-cupric-oxide at an altitude of 230 statute miles, one as the rocket ascended and one as the payload descended. The barium clouds rapidly expanded, while ejecting barium ions along the earth's magnetic field to form a visible streak more than 62 miles long. Another red titaniumboronlithium cloud released at 325 miles expanded to a diameter of several hundred kilometers in less than a minute. Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Range Control Center received reports of cloud sightings from as far north as Waterville, Maine, as far south as Wilmington, North Carolina, and as far west as South Bend, Indiana. (NASA Release 85-148; GSFC Release 85-39) Upper Atmospheric Research
The Lewis News reported that NASA had completed conceptual designs for its space station and that industry had submitted proposals for definition studies and preliminary designs of various station components for which NASA expected to award 18-month contracts in April. NASA would award contracts in April 1987 for the next phase of the program—the final design, development, launch, and assembly of the station. Contrary to most large NASA projects, for which an industrial prime contractor coordinated various aspects of a project, NASA would oversee the entire space station program because the station's operational life would extend over a long and indefinite period. Johnson Space Center (JSC) would manage the system engineering and integration function; Lewis Research Center (LeRC) was responsible for the power system. The space station power system was vital for two major reasons: the quantity of electrical power available to governed station capabilities and, since the power system required large areas of solars cells or mirrors, the size of these areas affected station configuration and operation. Plans called for initial power demands of 25 kw for housekeeping needs of a crew of six and 50 kw for experiments and customer applications. Comparing this power system to the largest previously in space—the Skylab manned-mission system, which generated 16 kw—the magnitude of the power station challenge became evident. LeRC personnel would consider a variety of power system technologies, making selections based on detailed studies of the tradeoffs among options. Studies would examine how the options influenced the performance, risk, and cost of the power system and space station, with consideration given to station growth and satisfaction of later needs. In addition, LeRC had to design a system that would be available on schedule, function reliably for an indefinite life with only on-orbit maintenance, be user-friendly, and remain within cost limits. (LeRC News, Feb 8/85, 2)
NASA announced it selected the first participants in a program to assimilate discoveries from space astronomy experiments into a comprehensive modern astrophysical theory in order to use more effectively future experiments such as the Hubble Space Telescope, the Gamma-ray Observatory, the Solar Optical Telescope, and similar planned projects. After evaluating 49 proposals from 300 individuals at 80 institutions, NASA selected seven groups to participate in the astrophysical theory program. Dr. Richard McCray and a scientific team from the University of Colorado would study detailed ways in which spectra form in a variety of astrophysical sources such as stars, supernovae, and active galactic nuclei. Dr. Jeremiah Ostriker and colleagues from Princeton University would analyze the most distant observable parts of the universe to determine possible effects of the theoretical "big bang". Dr. Pierre DeMarque and a team from Yale University would develop computer models of the sun to examine the internal motions and magnetic fields that caused sunspots, solar flares, and solar wind. Dr. Roger Chevalier and his team from the University of Virginia would study the hot gases that appeared to surround clusters of galaxies, individual galaxies, and supernova remnants to determine the origin and motion of the gases as well as their effect on the development of galaxies. Dr. Ronald Taam and colleagues from Northwestern University would study the origin of rapid bursts of high-energy radiation from neutron stars and globular clusters in order to model the ignition, nuclear evolution, and propagation of burning fronts on surfaces of neutron stars and to understand the nature of hot plasma confinement in magnetic fields near such subjects. Dr. David Black, heading a team from Ames Research Center and the University of California, Santa Cruz and Berkeley campuses, would investigate various physical and chemical processes taking place in the formation of stars, concentrating particularly on the stars' origins in giant molecular clouds in interstellar space and the protostellar/protoplanetary disk-shaped nebulae surrounding fledgling stars. And Dr. Simon White and a team of scientists from the University of Arizona would study questions regarding star and planet formation, including properties of star-forming regions, galaxy formation, and evolution. NASA would bring the researchers together in 1986 to exchange information and to encourage a better understanding of the advances that science has made with data acquired from space research. (NASA Release 85-59)
Two groups of scientists, who were making observations at infrared and radio wavelengths, reported the strongest evidence so far of a supermassive black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy, the NY Times reported, strengthening the theory that very massive black holes existed in the cores of all galaxies. Astrophysicists had already deduced that black holes might be at the cores of some distant galaxies. Eight physicists and astronomers from the University of California, Berkeley, reported in the British journal Nature their infrared observations showing gas whipping around a core at 100,000 to 400,000 miles per hour. They concluded the gas was in the grip of a black hole four million times the mass of the sun. The group measured the velocities near the center of the core with sufficient precision to show that they decreased further out in a way to be expected if controlled by gravity from a single central object. They believed this ruled out a dense cluster of stars, proposed by some astronomers, because that gravity field would be more uniform. Radio astronomers using coordinated observations with antennas in West-ford, Massachusetts; Green Bank, West Virginia; Fort Davis, Texas; and Gold-stone, Hat Creek, and Owens Valley, California; and the 27 antennas of the very large array in New Mexico aimed the antennas at a radio source, a suspected black hole, almost directly in the center of the Milky Way called Sagittarius A (in the constellation Sagittarius). The results indicated that the source, despite its enormous mass and output of energy, was smaller than the orbit of Saturn. Donald Lyndon-Bell of Britain's Royal Greenswich Observatory and Martin Fees of Cambridge University had proposed 14 years before that there might be such an object there. Astronomers using improved radio and infrared techniques had mapped in more and more detail the Milky Way core, which was 30,000 light years from earth. They could not see the core with visible light because of dense clouds of dust and gases. (NVTJune 7/85, A15) June 22\ NASA announced that the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) observed for the first time the comet Giacobini-Zinner while the comet was approximately 87 million miles from earth on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. IUE would continue observations of the comet as it moved closer and ultimately became the target of the world's first intercept, on September 11, 1985, of a comet by a satellite, the International Cometary Explorer (/Cf) spacecraft. The June 22 IUE observations of Giacobini-Zinner produced ultraviolet spectrograms—graphic depictions of the intensity of light over a range of ultraviolet wavelengths—revealing emissions of two molecules, carbon monosulfide and another known as the hydroxyl radical. Preliminary evaluation indicated that the ultraviolet emissions from both molecules were somewhat brighter than expected at this stage of the comet's development. The IUE had taken the ultraviolet "pulse" of not only nearby solar system objects such as comets and planets, but also extragalactic objects such as quasars, providing research data to more than 1,000 astronomers around the world. Scientists, engineers, and technicians at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center designed and integrated the spacecraft, which was launched in 1978 as a cooperative venture of the British Science Research Council, the European Space Agency, and NASA. (NASA Release 85-103)
After spending 18 months at the factory in Palmsdale, California, Columbia, the flagship of the Space Shuttle fleet, returned for operational duty to Kennedy Space Center (KSC), the JSC Roundup reported. Columbia had undergone hundreds of modifications to reconfigure the ship from a developmental flight vehicle to a fully operational orbiter. Columbia flew the first five Space Shuttle missions, and NASA modified the spacecraft at KSC for the October 1983 STS-9 Spacelab 1 flight. Following its return to KSC and removal of the Spacelab 1 payload, NASA in late January 1984 ferried Columbia to California atop the 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft. Rockwell International performed five major modifications to the orbiter during its stay at the orbiter production plant. Structural modifications to the wings and midfuselage included strengthening of lower wing surfaces and installation of heavier straps across the orbiter's belly. Rockwell added a heads-up display to the forward flight deck to allow the Space Shuttle commander and pilot to view critical flight information on a see-through panel while they looked through the forward cockpit windows. Production workers removed the commander and pilot ejection seats, which were installed on Columbia for the initial development Space Shuttle flights, and replaced them with standard seats. Overhead blowout panels were also removed. Rockwell modified two orbital maneuvering system pods to make them compatible with the other orbiters in the fleet and replaced the thermal protection tiles on the pods with the advanced reusable surface insulation blankets. Production personnel also installed supplemental instrumentation to gather developmental engineering data. In addition, workers removed and replaced approximately 5000 high-temperature tiles from the orbiter's underside, because engineering analysis indicated several areas where greater heat protection was needed. About half of the wing leading edge panel assemblies was removed and modified to strengthen the supporting structure of the reinforced carbon-carbon panels, an infrared imaging device was installed on the vertical stabilizer to provide a temperature profile of the upper wing surfaces during reentry, and instrumentation was added to the nose cap to provide improved entry air data. During the trip from California to KSC atop the 747 shuttle transport, rain damaged more than 1,000 of its head shield tiles, the Washington Post reported. NASA said that between 200 and 300 of the tiles required replacement. Damaged areas were around the windows and on the forward facing tiles. According to NASA policy, Space Shuttle transports were forbidden to fly through visible rain. However, the shower did not appear on ground radar or on the 747's onboard radar system. NASA had scheduled Columbia to fly next in December on mission 61-C. (JSC Roundup, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 19/85, A17)
NASA announced the first flight at Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, scheduled for late September, of the advanced fighter technology integration (AFTI) F—111 with a mission adaptive wing (MAW). The AFTI F—111 research aircraft was modified with a wing that could change its camber (fore and aft wing curvature) and its wing sweep to adjust to varied flight conditions. NASA expected that MAW's variable camber capability would allow optimum efficiency at supersonic, transonic, and subsonic speeds by adopting the best wing shape for each speed. The MAW program was intended to demonstrate that smooth variable camber technology showed improvements over current aircraft wing lifting-altering devices in such areas as aircraft payload and range capability, maneuverability, fuel efficiency, and aircraft handling qualities. The first flights would test the airworthiness and flight envelope expansion phase of the program, followed by the research phase. The plans for the initial phase called for about 15 flights that gradually increased the MAW aircraft to speeds of approximately Mach 1.05 and altitudes of about 35,000 feet. NASA expected that phase to be complete by January 1986; and the research phase, about 30 flights, by June 1986. The MAW system had smooth-surfaced, variable-camber wing leading- and trailing-edge flaps, an actuation mechanism, hydraulics, and redundant computers to control flap positions. Six independent trailing-edge flaps (three per wing) and two leading-edge flaps provided a smooth continuously variable wing camber using flexible fiberglass skins on the upper surface and sliding panels on the lower surface. Fully developed, the MAW system would result in an aircraft equipped with an automatic flight control system with several control modes. Cruise camber control mode would optimize the trailing-edge flap position for maximum cruise speed. Maneuver camber control mode would continuously position leading and trailing edge for optimum Iift-to-drag ratio depending on the lift coefficient and speed of the aircraft. Maneuver enhancement/gust alleviation mode would enhance the aircraft reponse to pilot control inputs, while reducing the aircraft's sensitivity to wind gusts. Designed for research rather than as a production prototype, the AFTI F-111 was a joint program of Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center and the U.S. Air Force's Flight Dynamics Laboratory. The Boeing Military Airplane Co. manufactured the MAW. (NASA Release 85-129)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced today that it would open in September the microgravity materials science laboratory (MMSL) to help experimenters make better decisions about what is and is not feasible for science experiments in space. Such experiments are expected to provide knowledge leading to new materials, more efficient use of earth's nonrenewable fuel resources, new medicines, advanced computers and lasers, and better communications. Providing a capability that existed nowhere else in the world, the new laboratory would offer U.S. scientists and engineers a low-cost, low-risk way to test new ideas for materials science research in space. Initial research plans would support metal and alloy solidification and electronic crystal growth studies. The laboratory should give U.S. companies a competitive advantage in developing better ground-based materials and/or processing of materials through microgravity research. The laboratory, along with LeRC's assignment to develop the power system for the proposed space station, would put LeRC into the mainstream of the U.S.'s space research efforts. (LeRC Release 85-63) Marshall Space Flight Center
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
Peoples Republic of China President Li Xiannian today made a three-hour visit to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the JPL Universe reported. JPL Director Dr. Lew Allen welcomed him, then said, "We are aware of the ongoing discussions between our governments regarding future space cooperation . . . We look forward to cooperative scientific investigations." Xiannian then viewed JPL's newly revised multi-media presentation, "Welcome to Outer Space," which had been translated into Chinese. After the show, Allen presented the president with a color photograph of Saturn and its moons; Dr. Taylor Wang—the first Chinese-American in space—gave him a photographic collage showing Wang in space during his May Space Shuttle flight and his drop dynamics module equipment. Xiannian completed his visit with a tour of the Spacecraft Assembly Facility where he heard about the Galileo mission and saw a model of the spacecraft as well as actual pieces of its hardware. (JPL Universe, July 85, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced completion of a study done by McDonnell Douglas under a 1983 contract that showed undeniable need for both humans and machines in space. MSFC was continuing to refine and validate the data. In the human role in space (THURIS) study, engineers identified 37 generic tasks requiring human involvement ranging from removing and replacing protective coverings around spacecraft to surgically acquiring tissue samples. The study then established three criteria for allocation of tasks (performance time, relative cost, and technological risk), which became the basis for an objective method to allocate tasks and determine how much of each of the generic tasks would benefit from human involvement. For each task, researchers rated man's participation from essential to not significant. For example, in a task entitled "compute data," man's role rated not significant. However, for the task "surgical manipulations", man's participation rated essential. A second THURIS product was an analytical method to define how man should participate in space systems. The method objectively compared humans, machines, and systems requiring both humans and machines and consisted of a short, logical sequence of questions and a set of highly condensed supporting data covering performance times, relative costs for each man/machine combination, and technology availability data for the 37 generic activities. "The study provided a set of fundamental data for planners that can be used as a guide for many future activities," MSFC's Stephen Hall said. "To me . . . machines and automation allow man to proceed to greater challenges and achievements. . . The THURIS study found that there are tasks for which man is best, and tasks for which machines are best. For most activities, a mixture of both is the best guarantee of success." (MSFC Release 85-1)
NASA had completed a series of tests to validate parachute systems to be used with advanced lightweight, solid-fuel rocket boosters that would replace the boosters then in use on the Space Shuttle, Ames Research Center (ARC) announced. The new boosters would be first used during a Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB no earlier than January 29, 1986. For the tests, researchers used a vehicle a third the size of a solid-fuel booster with one main parachute and, to simulate a splashdown, drop tested it from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility's (DFRC) B-52 over the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Ridgecrest. Most drops were made at an altitude of about 40,000 feet with an airspeed of about 230 knots. ARC and DFRC conducted the drop tests in cooperation with Marshall Space Flight Center, which was responsible for the parachute system. (ARC Release 85-1)
Galileo project team members would soon complete the two-month-long environmental test, phase 2, of the spacecraft, during which they put Galileo in a 25-ft. space simulator, an evacuated chamber cooled to -250 to 270° F, in order to observe how Galileo functioned in a space-like environment, the JPL Universe reported. Engineers also exposed the spacecraft to an array of high-intensity quartz lamps, which simulated the solar effects Galileo would experience in space. Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) personnel would move Galileo in about two weeks to the spacecraft assembly facility for the system test, phase 3. Following spacecraft disassembly, researchers would simulate different operational phases of the mission for spacecraft testing. Galileo was composed of a planetary orbiter and an atmospheric entry probe for investigations of the planet Jupiter's magnetosphere's chemical composition and its physical state of structure and physical dynamics. (JPL Universe, Mar 8/85, 1)
President Reagan and USSR Chairman Konstantin Chernenko had approved the idea of establishing ties between the U.S.'s Young Astronauts and the Soviet's Young Cosmonauts, the Washington Post reported, as a step toward better U.S.-Soviet relations and peaceful cooperation in space. The program would begin with a Young Cosmonauts' delegation visiting the U.S. to view a space launch and tour space facilities. Young Astronauts would then write to Young Cosmonauts, explaining their interest in space and what the groups might accomplish together. Those writing the best letters would visit, all expenses paid, their letters' recipients. In addition, the International Aeronautical Federation had adopted the Young Astronaut program and planned to offer it to other nations to establish ties between Young Astronauts and Cosmonauts around the world. In his Washington Post column, Jack Anderson wrote that the Young Astronaut Council was recruiting 6-to-16-yr-olds for future space exploration and that those joining would be eligible to participate in the "Letter to a Young Cosmonaut" contest. (WPost, Feb 6/85, FIT)
Langley Research Center announced that the Space Shuttle Columbia would carry three experiments on mission 61-C developed at the center to measure the spacecraft's aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics. Columbia, the first Space Shuttle orbiter to go into space, was making its first flight in two years after it was pulled from flight service in December 1983 for extensive overhaul, including modification to accommodate the LaRC experiments, which were the Shuttle Entry Air Data System (SEADS), Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing (SILTS) experiment, and Shuttle Upper Atmosphere Mass Spectrometer (SUMS). SEADS would measure the distribution of air pressure around the orbiters nosecap during entry to provide precise determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming airstream and the density of the atmosphere through which it had flown. Lack of this air data had hindered engineers from determining aerodynamic flight characteristics of the orbiters. The SUMS experiment complemented the SEADS experiment by gathering atmospheric density information at altitudes above 90 km (56 statute miles). SUMS would sample the gas at Columbia's surface through a small hole located just aft of the nosecap and forward of the nosewheel, with its instrument identifying and measuring the quantities of the various gas species present. Data analysis after the mission would allow determination of atmospheric density. The SILTS experiment would obtain high-spatial-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of the orbiter^ port wing and fuselage during entry through the atmosphere. These infrared images would provide detailed "maps" of the surface temperatures of leeside thermal protection materials, indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating on the leeside surfaces in flight. (LaRC Release 85-99)
The Soviet Geophysical Committee of the USSR's Academy of Sciences presented Dr. Alexander Dessler, director of Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Space Science Laboratory, a bronze medal for his contribution to fulfillment of international geophysical programs, MSFC announced. The committee awarded 1,000 medals, 100 to American scientists, commemorating the 100th anniversary of the first international geophysical program, the First International Polar Year, 1892-1983. Scientists receiving the award made important contributions to international geophysics in such areas as solid earth, oceans, atmospheres, solar-terrestrial relations, and the geophysical programs in Antarctica and space. Since beginning his scientific career in 1956, Dessler specialized in research in low-temperature physics, atmospheric electricity, and space physics and authored more than 100 technical papers on these subjects. Dessler was a Fellow of the American Geophysical Union and the American Association for the Advancement of Science and served as an officer of the International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy. (MSFC Release 85-11)
A fire of unknown cause today destroyed one of the four buildings used to mix rocket solid fuels for the Space Shuttle at Morton Thiokol's rocket motor assembly plant outside Brigham City, Utah, the Washington Post reported. No one was injured in the fire that leveled a 400-sq.-ft. building operated largely by robots at a remote part of the Thiokol plant. Because three of the four fuel mixing plants at Thiokol were needed at all times to maintain solid-fuel rocket motor production schedules, NASA said it was concerned enough to send an accident review board team from Marshall Space flight Center to investigate. (IV Post, June 5/85, A5)
Scientists analyzing data recently sent from two monitoring devices aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite said the observations confirmed a progressive deterioration in the earth's ozone layer above Antarctica, the NY Times reported. Since 1974, the satellite data showed that a "hole" appeared each October in the ozone layer there, meaning the layer in that area became less able to shield the earth from damaging solar ultraviolet rays. This had caused scientists to predict that increased atmospheric pollution was causing the gradual depletion of stratospheric ozone; the new data seemed to show researchers that the ozone loss was proceeding much faster than expected. However, Goddard Space Flight Center's Dr. Donald Heath, who had monitored the satellite recordings for several years, said he was uncertain of the reason for the ozone decline. In addition to the theory that fluorocarbons caused ozone depletion, some scientists blamed the depletion on the sulfur compounds and other particles ejected into the stratosphere in the 1982 eruption of El Chichon in Mexico. And Heath said there were other possible explanations, such as the sunspot cycle, which was then near a minimum. According to a study by NASA scientists, the chemical reactions that produced stratospheric ozone were stimulated by a form of ultraviolet radiation that became weak when sunspots were fewest. Even under normal conditions the ozone layer was subject to wide variations, so it was difficult to establish that the recent depletion was part of a long-term trend. Heath also pointed out that it was not clear whether the Antarctic readings manifested a local change in atmospheric circulation or a global depletion, since the condition of the winter atmosphere over Antarctic was unique. Government officials in 1977 imposed a ban on fluorocarbons as spray-can propellants, but it became evident that the ozone varied in response to a variety of interacting natural and human influences. By 1984 a National Academy of Science report estimated fluorocarbon-caused ozone reduction at only 2 to 4%. (NYT, Nov 7/85, B21)
NASA announced selection of 64 research proposals from high-technology small business firms for negotiation of Phase II contracts in its Small Business Innovation Research program established under Public Law 97-219. The contract awards would total approximately $30 million. NASA selected the Phase II programs, follow-ons to previous Phase I contracts, from 113 proposals submitted by Phase I contractors in the 1984 program. Phase I included 127 awards selected from 919 proposals. Objectives of the Small Business Innovation Research program were to stimulate technological innovation, strengthen the role of small business in meeting federal agencies' research and development needs, and foster increased private sector commercialization of innovations from federal research and development. The program also encouraged minority and disadvantaged business participation. In Phase I, NASA awarded six-month fixed-price contracts to explore the feasibility of the proposed innovation and the value of conducting further research and development. Continuation of the activity into Phase II, which could extend up to two years, depended on the merit of the work and agency program plans and needs. Selection might also depend on availability of funds from the private sector and/or government for development or commercialization beyond the scope of the Small Business Innovation Research program. (NASA Release 85-157) Public Affairs
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiation leading to the award of a five-year contract to provide operation and maintenance of the propellants and pressurants facilities for the center. Total price for the first three contract years was approximately $8.8 million. Teledyne Brown would furnish the necessary management, personnel, equipment, and materials required to operate and maintain the gaseous pressurants equipment and distribution systems, liquid propellants storage and transfer systems, fluid transporter services, valve and component refurbishment, and retention of certification status of high-pressure systems, including test stands, wind tunnels, and Department of Transportation certification of fluid transporters. (MSFC Release 85-72) Wallops Flight Facility
NASA announced that, based on a review of engine data following the July 29 Space Shuttle mission 51-F launch, Marshall Space Flight Center and Kennedy Space Center engineers believed that failed sensors—not an engine failure—were the probable cause of the main engine No. 1 shut down [see Space Transportation System/Missions, July 29]. The data suggested the high-pressure fuel turbopump on that engine performed normally, because there were no indications the pump was running hot. If the pump were running hot, Johnson Space Center flight engineers, who monitored engine performance during ascent, would have expected to see changes in the position of an oxidizer valve indicating an increased flow to supply the pump with more power. Data showed the valve position did not change. A second data indication of normal pump performance was present in the engine discharge pressures, which were monitored by ground controllers and the main engine controller. Based on these indications, NASA engineers reviewing the cause of the engine shutdown tentatively concluded that the main engine controller was receiving faulty data from failed sensors. Resistance measurements taken by the engine controller provided an indicator of pump temperatures, because the resistance increased as the temperature increased. The controller logic was able to distinguish, within certain limits, a valid reading from one that indicated the sensor wire, a very thin wire, was broken or had otherwise failed. The controller recognized the bad reading from the Channel B sensor; the reading from Channel A, however, drifted, indicating a temperature rise above the redline limit. Because of the failure mode in the second sensor, which gave readings above the redline limit but below those that would cause the controller to disregard them as unreasonable and thus indicative of a sensor failure, the engine controller believed there was a possible pump problem and shut down the engine. A temperature sensor on main engine No. 3 also failed. Because there was a history of these temperature sensors failing on previous Space Shuttle flights, NASA decided to develop a new sensor for use on future Space Shuttle flights beginning with mission 51-1. Until such time as NASA confirmed this explanation by an examination of the engine and its various systems, NASA would not launch another mission. Flowever, the agency did not anticipate that this would result in a delay in the next mission. The call "abort to orbit" used to describe the action ordered for the July 29 Space Shuttle flight was the preferred type of Space Shuttle launch "abort" in that it gave the crew, the orbiter, and the ground controllers time to review options and to ascertain that the crew and orbiter were in good condition. In nearly all cases, the abort-to-orbit contingency would allow completion of most of a particular mission's flight requirements. Once NASA determined that an orbiter was in a safe orbit (minimum would be about 105 nautical miles circular), then the crew and ground flight controllers could begin to assess the impact on planned mission activities. In the case of mission 51-F, the orbit achieved was 106 by 146 nautical miles, 40 miles short of the planned designations; the orbiter was at a velocity of 25,760 feet-per-second, which was 110 feet-per-second less than planned. NASA determined all abort modes based on the weight of the orbiter, the inclination of the desired orbit, and other characteristics. Each mode had a specific applicable time and duration during the ascent phase, and crew and ground controllers practiced these contingency situations regularly. (NASA Release 85-114)
The U.S. House Science and Technology transportation aviation and materials subcommittee completed its markup of NASA's FY 86 authorization, approving a series of changes that resulted in reallocations for several aeronautics programs and elimination of proposed funding for oblique-wing technology, Aerospace Daily reported. NASA requested $522 million for aeronautics and space technology in its FY 86 budget, of which $354 million was for aeronautical research and technology and $168 million for space research and technology. Under the proposed changes, NASA rotorcraft systems technology funding would increase by $4 million over the agency's request for $20.4 million. Hot section engine technology, for which NASA had requested $5.2 million, would increase by $2 million; and the subcommittee restored high-speed aeronautics funding. The panel approved a $1.4 million decrease for the fluid and thermal physics research and technology program and deletion of the oblique-wing technology, for which NASA had requested $4.7 million, and of funding for altitude wind-tunnel planning. The panel based its decision to delete oblique-wing technology funding on an advisory committee finding that the planned flight portion of the NASA/ Navy oblique-wing program was one whose design solutions would have low payoff to industry. Since the Navy was the only identifiable user, Chairman Dan Glickman (D-Kans.) said, if it was a program worth their while, the service should provide the funding. (A/D, Mar 27/85, 1)
Martin Marietta Corp. completed an agreement giving it a 25% stake in Equatorial Communication Co., a provider of satellite-based data communications networks, the Washington Post reported. Under the agreement, Marietta acquired about 3.6 million shares of Equatorial's common stock for $13.87V2 a share and warrants to purchase an additional 1.8 million shares for $17.50 each. Marietta would assume two seats on Equatorial's board, which would expand to seven members. Equatorial, which provided small, low-cost micro-earth stations, satellite transmission capacity, and other services that let companies construct and control their own private data communications networks, said it planned to use the funds to reduce debt and provide working capital. Marietta and Equatorial said they planned to pursue joint ventures in the information systems market. (W Post, Aug 20/85, E4) AEROSPACE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
NASA today invited Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who chaired the U.S. House science and technology subcommittee on space science and applications, to be a congressional passenger on an unspecified flight of the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Nelson, who represented the district in which the Kennedy Space Center launch site was located, later held a news conference at his office in Melbourne, Florida, to announce acceptance of the invitation. The first congressional Space Shuttle passenger on an April 1985 flight was Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the committee that oversaw NASA spending. Although Nelson, unlike Garn, had no flying experience, he was an outspoken supporter of the space program. (W Post, Sept 6/85, A8)
Space Shuttle mission 51-F was aborted today at three seconds before liftoff when the orbiter Challenger's onboard computer automatically shut down the main engines, Spaceport News reported. Seconds after main engine start, main engine No. 2 lost redundancy to operate the chamber coolant valve. NASA's ground rule restricted launching without an operating backup system in that area of the main propulsion system. Although the valve did assume its proper position after a command from a backup system, the loss of redundancy resulted in a major component failure flag being sent to the orbiter's computers. Challenger Commander Gordon Fullerton later thanked the Kennedy Space Center team on behalf of the crew, saying the team acted quickly and professionally and that at no time did the crew feel apprehensive. In answering a Washington Post reporter's question later, Fullerton said, "We all have mixed emotions here, but we're thankful the system worked the way it should. It was the longest three seconds I've ever experienced." Launch operations manager Thomas Utsman said that crews would strip parts of the malfunctioning engine and that engineers had identified four different parts that could have failed when they should have been pumping fuel from the hydrogen tank into the engine chamber. When the liquid-fuel engines ignited, valves that fed fuel into the chambers were fully open so engines could attain speed instantly. Just before liftoff, the valves were partially closed to cool engines slightly and prevent too much fuel from entering the chamber. The valve on main engine No. 2 failed to close partially, signaling the computer to shut down the system. The first Space Shuttle abort occurred June 26, 1984, when an onboard computer shut down two of Discovery's three engines four seconds before liftoff. That abort triggered an investigation that led to a complete overhaul of Discovery's main engines. NASA had to move Discovery back to the Vehicle Assembly Building where its cargo was removed and placed aboard another orbiter that flew into space two months later. "We don't think the engine valve itself failed the way a valve failed the [other] time we had a launch abort," Space Shuttle program manager Robert Lindstrom said. "I really believe there's a fair likelihood we'll get off again in another week." The delay did have an impact on the mission's objectives. The infrared telescope in Challenger's cargo bay could be operated successfully only in a completely dark sky. Had the flight left on schedule, the sky would have been dark for most of the following seven days until a new moon. NASA had scheduled the next Space Shuttle launch using the orbiter Discovery for August 24. It was not immediately clear how the Challenger's abort would affect that mission. (Spaceport News, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 13/85, A3)
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
Dr. Michael Kaiser of the Goddard Space Flight Center said at a news conference today that, "We see no radio emissions from Uranus that would tell us it has a magnetic field, and we're less than 46 million miles from the planet" with the Voyager 2 spacecraft, the Washington Post reported. "We still pick up Jupiter's radio noise, Saturn's radio noise and even the sun's radio noise but we're not hearing any radio events at Uranus," he added. If Uranus had no magnetic field, it would make it only the second known planet in the solar system without one, Venus being the other. Kaiser said the sign of a planet's magnetic field was its radio noise, generated when protons and electrons poured off the sun and collided with the planet's magnetosphere. This collision triggered the one billion-watt radio signal from earth called the Northern Lights, a 100 billion-watt signal from Saturn, and a signal so loud from Jupiter that it dwarfed every other radio signal in the solar system. "You don't need much to form a magnetosphere that would generate noise out at Uranus's distance," Kaiser said, "so we figure we're either dealing with a planet that has no magnetic field at all or is so bizarre we don't even know what to look for." Kaiser pointed out that a missing magnetic field suggested that Uranus had no internal heat source—no radioactive core such as that which made the rotating earth behave like a dynamo, and no internal heat source such as those that gave the rapidly rotating Jupiter and Saturn a strong magnetic field. "You need an internal heat source to drive a magnetic field," Kaiser said. "A planet's rotation is not enough by itself to create one." Voyager 2, which had been in space for eight years and had passed Jupiter and Saturn, on January 24 would fly within 51,000 miles of the cloud tops of Uranus. Voyager 2 would in August 1989 encounter Neptune, but its flight would not take it near Pluto, the last known planet from the sun. The spacecraft would then pass out of the solar system. (W Post, Dec 4/85, A20)
Roger Bonnet, director of the European Space Agency's (ESA) scientific programs, speaking today at the opening of a meeting with the USSR's "Intercosmos" Council for International Cooperation, Soviet Academy of Sciences, said, "We are keenly interested in extending cooperation with the Soviet Union in space exploration," FBIS, TASS in English reported. "The first results of our joint work and experiments have given us reasons for making the most optimistic forecasts and opened up new opportunities for studying and using space for peaceful purposes." The program for the three-day meeting included discussion of details of the Soviet "Vega" mission to study Venus and Halley's Comet and review of preparations for a similar West European program called "Giotto," which would use data from the Soviet probe. Attendees also heard reports on the Soviet "Phobos" project for the comprehensive study of Mars and its satellites and ESA's plans to develop an orbital radio telescope. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 15/85)
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
NASA announced that its anonymous and voluntary Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS), managed by Ames Research Center, had evaluated some 42,000 incident reports in eight years and had issued 805 alert bulletins and 28 research reports to improve airway safety. Designed and implemented by NASA in 1976 at the request of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASRS gave pilots and flight controllers a means of reporting incidents that would otherwise have passed unnoticed, resulting in revisions to both air traffic control procedures and FAA regulations. NASA served as a neutral third party in operating the system, protecting the confidentiality of those who reported. In addition, FAA could grant participants limited immunity from disciplinary action except in cases of accident or criminal conduct. The system had identified, for example, the need for more flight-controller help to general aviation pilots operating at night over unfamiliar terrain and restriction of cockpit conversation and activity in transport aircraft flying below 10,000 ft. The system had also produced a number of changes in airline, military, and general aviation pilot flight training based on real flight data. Reports in the ASRS data base had become a major resource for human-factors research and behavior models. ASRS received about 500 incident reports a month; experienced pilots and controllers screened these to identify existing safety problems and forecast future problems and trends, and NASA used the data for safety research for FAA, the National Transportation Safety Board, Department of Defense, and other government agencies. ASRS issued a monthly safety bulletin and also alert bulletins for hazards needing rapid response. (NASA Release 85-12) During January. NASA announced that its new findings on the nature of high-altitude, clear-air turbulence (CAT), based on data gathered from airline flight-data recorders, could eventually lead to CAT prediction, enabling pilots to fly around the invisible wind swirls. The findings provided the first detailed description of hazardous, clear-air turbulence, a series of swirls or vortices of air embedded in upper-level wind streams at altitudes between 35,000 and 40,000 feet. The findings also showed that a jet traveling at 500 mph flew through a single-vortex core in about one second. During that second, the wind would push the plane upward and then down, exerting the weight of an extra G (a measurement of gravity) on passengers. Planes might encounter two to four vortices in succession about four seconds apart, possibly causing injury to flight attendants and passengers without fastened seat belts. Ames Research Center investigators had found that the strongest vortices occurred at about 25 miles downwind of large thunderstorms or mountain ranges, which caused a swell in the upper-level wind stream, and that wind shears formed vortices at the tropopause, the boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere. At the tropopause, higher-velocity jet streams traveled just above lower-speed windstreams, the difference in the speeds forming a wind shear. The investigators had verified that wind-shear layers, pushed up over a thunderstorm or a mountain range, acted like ocean waves when forced to rise over an obstacle. The air would form a series of swells that turned to waves that curled like those on the sea. They would continue to curl until they formed complete circles or vortices that whirled at high speeds before disintegrating. As a result of its research, NASA hoped one day to be able to give pilots better indications of when and where they might encounter the vortices. (NASA announcement, Jan 85, 9) February 27\ In its just-released annual "Aviation Forecasts," which covered FY 85-86, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) forecasted healthy growth for the nation's major air carriers in the next dozen years and slow but steady growth for general aviation (private and business flying). The agency noted that U.S.-certificated air carriers had recorded passenger gains in each of the previous three years and in FY 84 achieved their largest operating profit in history—$2 billion. The FAA said airlines, over the 12-year forecast period, would increase passenger enplanements at better than 4.5% annually, from 336 million in FY 84 to 573 million in FY 96. Commuter airlines had increased passenger boardings 14% in FY 84, a figure expected to more than double during the forecast period to 54.2 million in FY 96. The FAA expected the general-aviation fleet to increase from 213,300 aircraft in 1984 to 270,500 in 1996, an annual growth rate of 2%. FAA projections for takeoffs and landings at airports with FAA control towers indicated an increase from 57 to 92 million, as the number of aircraft handled by the agency's en route control facilities would rise from 31.6 to 45.7	million. (FAA Release 8-85) During March: A panel organized by the National Academy of Engineering in conjunction with the National Research Council (NRC) published its assessment of aviation technology in, “The Competitive Status of the Civil Aviation Manufacturing Industry," the NRC Newsreview reported. U.S. aircraft manufacturers in the past had been particularly successful in translating advanced technology into products suited to the marketplace; however, as competition intensified, the timing of the introduction and the fit of the product to customers' needs had become increasingly important. European countries had tried repeatedly to create a viable air transport manufacturing industry; in 1970 their efforts were realized in the creation of Airbus Industrie, which drew on the resources of many companies in a number of countries. Those foreign companies created a dilemma for U.S. manufacturers, whose product lines were not extensive. Furthermore, U.S. markets were relatively open to competitors, while many foreign markets were closed to American-made products. The panel foresaw a need for U.S. manufacturers to form international partnerships, especially as the U.S. aircraft industry was often in virtual competition with governments as well as with private commercial companies. And the panel determined that U.S. manufacturers had to be even more sensitive in interpreting the needs of foreign customers. The panel did conclude that it was possible to further improve reliability of aircraft and air travel, as well as increase efficiency in fuel consumption and operations. Studies cited by the panel indicated that a variety of technological changes together could improve fuel efficiency by as much as 30-50%. Introduction of advanced turboprops or propfans could provide up to 20% additional improvement, and the experimental unducted propfan engine could raise that figure. In the technology area of advanced structures, the panel viewed the U.S. and Europe as on a par in developing this technology. Although the U.S. led in application experience, Europe threatened the U.S. position. In propulsion technology, the panel saw the U.S. lead as not unassailable; Rolls Royce was the principal foreign competitor, and the U.K. was committed to maintaining a comparative position with the U.S. The panel rated U.S. R&D facilities as the best in the world, European facilities as adequate, and Japanese facilities as handicapping their efforts to benefit from technological developments. (NRC NewsReport, Mar/85, 11)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's crew on mission 51-D landed the orbiter at 8:54 a.m. EST April 19 at KSC, a return characterized by the worst damage in 16 Space Shuttle missions—a burn-hole in a wing, two failed brakes, two blown tires, and at least 123 broken heat-shield tiles, the Marshall Space Flight Center's Star and the Washington Post reported. NASA scheduled the mission to last five days, but extended it by two days to give the crew a chance to correct a malfunction in the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite. The damage to Discovery could set back preparation for its next mission scheduled for June 12. NASA would have to replace protective tiles, probably damaged when the Space Shuttle lifted off through the rain [see Apr. 12]. "There's little question that we suffered more severe damage on this landing than on any other so far," Space Shuttle launch director Robert Sieck said. Concerning the brakes, Sieck said, "Brake damage we've seen on previous flights. Brake failure is something we've never seen." NASA had waved off Discovery for a 7:16 a.m. landing because of rain over Cape Canaveral. One orbit later, Discovery headed down to KSC, where NASA told Commander Karol Bobko to land on runway 33 instead of 15 because of sun glare. Bobko landed with no headwind to slow him, touching down at 231 mph, the fastest any Space Shuttle had landed. As Discovery rolled down the three-mile concrete runway, it encountered a nine-knot crosswind and began veering to the right. When Bobko corrected for the wind by braking one side, the strain apparently caused one of the inboard brake assemblies to lock. Moments later the inboard brake assembly on the other side also locked, causing rubber to burn. A burn-hole the size of a dinner plate nearly penetrated through aluminum on the Space Shuttle's left wingtip where a landing flap apparently dislodged several protective tiles. Regarding the Leasat 3, a Hughes representative said initial belief that a lever failed to release was in error [see Apr. 18]. Once Discovery had maneuvered to within 10 feet of the satellite, the crew reported the lever had released. The crew successfully snagged the lever twice to ensure it was fully released, and reported the only change in the satellite's status was a slowing from two to one revolution per minute. The first congressional observer in space, Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), had difficulty negotiating the steps down to the runway and required assistance into the van that took the crew to the dispensary for medical examinations. There had been some controversy over his presence on the flight, including a NY Times editorial that said, "Having pressured NASA to give him his space trip, Mr. Garn is now indebted to the agency. That's a pity for those whom he represents in supervising NASA's budget and its request to build an $8 billion space station." However, Garn commented that "I'm carrying my own weight. I knew I had to prove myself . . . I've dealt with NASA for 10 years. I'm working on the space station right now, setting policy." (Marshall Star, Apr 24/85, 1; W Post, Apr 11/85, B1, Apr 20/85, A1; NYT, Apr 20/85, 22)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pioneered the concept of a satellite system for mobile users and, because a U.S. mobile satellite industry was emerging, was turning its attention to developing technologies critical for future systems, the JPL Universe reported. Similar to cellular phones popular in urban areas, the mobile satellite system (MSS) would provide voice and data communications for the entire North American continent, employing one or two satellites in geosynchronous orbit to relay communications instead of depending on ground-based, line-of-sight relay towers that celluar phones used. There were four categories of MSS users: people who needed uninterrupted communications while they traveled over wide geographical areas, for example interstate truckers; those responding to unpredictable events such as medical emergencies or natural disasters; people working at planned but temporary installations such as oil or gas drilling facilities, mining camps, or archeological excavations; and those in very remote areas. The new technologies JPL was developing included mechanically steerable low-profile and electronically steerable medium-gain vehicle antennas, digital speech compression, digital modems, and multiple-access techniques for integrated voice and data. NASA was working with industry and, through a joint endeavor agreement, would exchange a Space Shuttle deployment for 15% of the channel capacity for two years to test the system. “But first," said Dr. Firouz Naderi, JPL's mobile satellite experiment project manager, "we must further develop the technology and try to squeeze as many channels as we can from a very narrow frequency allocation. That is the biggest obstacle we face." Also, JPL must design sophisticated multi-beam antennas that service "spot areas" and create techniques so frequencies could be reused to provide the most efficient use of the limited spectrum. Recently JPL sponsored a two-day briefing on the state of the industry. Attending were more than 250 representatives of 120 organizations including the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which would regulate the MSS; 11 of 12 candidate companies that petitioned the FCC for the right to operate the system; communications equipment manufacturers such as General Electric, Harris, and Motorola; Canadian government and industry representatives; banking officials; and potential users of the system. At the briefing, the FCC said it hoped by the middle of 1986 to assign a frequency to the mobile satellite industry as well as license an operator to be in charge of the system. NASA scheduled for launch in 1990 the first generation satellite with a 5 to 7 m antenna. During the program's second phase, NASA would launch from the Space Shuttle a 20m (65 ft.) antenna. NASA then planned for the program's final phase to construct on the proposed space station a 50m (180 ft.) antenna for deployment into geosynchronous orbit. (JPL Universe, Nov 29/ 85, 1) During November. Quoting from the Congressional Record, NASA reported remarks of Rep. Don Fuqua, (D-Fla.) chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, who introduced the Federal Science and Technology Revitalization Act of 1985. The act ". . . would establish an alternative personnel management system for scientific and technical people in the federal government," Fuqua said. "This is something I have been interested in for a long time, and I am hopeful that the proposal I am introducing will be able to help improve the quality of government-operated federal laboratories by encouraging the recruiting and retention of highly qualified scientific and technical individuals." Major provisions of the bill would permit agencies to include scientific and technical personnel in the new personnel management systems; simplify job evaluation and remove covered positions from the classification requirements of 5 U.S.C., Chapter 51; provide flexibility to develop a salary structure that ensured a competitive position in the labor market and that reflected the hiring and pay policies needed to attract, retain, and motivate a highly qualified scientific and technical work force; increase base pay on performance, not longevity; allow waiver of the pay cap for up to 5% of specially qualified scientific and technical personnel; provide for performance and special awards and remove the pay cap for lump-sum awards; and create a senior scientific and technical personnel service. In May 1983 the Federal Laboratory Review Panel of the White House Science Council chaired by David Packard reported that federal laboratories had several serious deficiencies and, consequently, a number of them did not meet the quality and productivity standards that might be expected, Fuqua explained. The panel reported that salaries at federal laboratories were noncompetitive with the private sector at entry and senior levels and that federal laboratories had to deal with a personnel management system that was cumbersome and had little flexibility. As a result, there existed what the panel referred to as an alarming "inability of many federal laboratories—especially those under civil service constraints—to attract, retain, and motivate qualified scientists and engineers." The panel concluded that administrative and legislative actions should be initiated to create, at government-operated laboratories, a scientific-technical personnel system that was independent of current civil service personnel systems, Fuqua continued. This "bill is the legislative attempt to deal with these very real problems," Fuqua said. "My own experience ... is that the requirements for NASA and Department of Agriculture labs may be very different, but attracting and retaining quality personnel is absolutely essential for the space program and for emerging fields in agriculture." (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 9)
NASA announced the Lewis Research Center awarded a $10,169,016 contract to General Dynamics Corp. for management and engineering services in support of the Atlas/Centaur launch vehicle program. The contract also called for the company to provide technical management, engineering design, analysis and development, engine testing and development, and reliability and quality assurance. The cost-plus-award fee follow-on contract would begin July 1985 and continue through December 31, 1986. Centaur was a high-energy, upper-stage used with expendable boosters to deliver large payloads to geosynchronous orbit. NASA was modifying it for use as an upper stage on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 85-110)
Taylor Wang, the first space traveller of Chinese origin who performed materials science and fluids studies in weightlessness during the April 1985 Challenger Space Shuttle flight 51-B, arrived in Beijing, China, for a two-week visit at the invitation of the Astronautics Industry Ministry. Wang, a scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was born in China's Jiangxi Province and had not been in China for over 30 years. Wang said the purpose of his trip was to exchange views with Chinese scholars and to conduct academic exchanges with Chinese specialists in Beijing, Xian, and Shanghai. During a welcoming ceremony July 8 at the Ministry, Vice-Minister Bao Kerning said that China's open policy in recent years had given great impetus to the development of its space technology. He concluded by saying that Wang's visit would further promote the friendship and cooperation between scientists of the two countries and that Sino-American space science and technology collaboration and exchanges were promising. (FBIS, Beijing XINHUA in English, July 6/85, July 7/85, July 8/85)
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)
Ames Research Center (ARC) announced that Dr. David Black would become chief scientist for the office of space station at NASA Headquarters, leaving a position he held as research scientist in the theoretical studies branch at ARC since 1972. In his new job, Black would ensure that the space station would accomodate the needs of the scientists who would use it, advising Phillip Culbertson, associate administrator for space station, about steps to make the space station an accessible research facility for scientists from many disciplines. Black's appointment coincided with selection of contractors who would spend 21 months working out details of space station design [see Mar. 14]. Since other countries intended to cooperate with NASA in the space station project, Black would work with the agencies representing the interests of European and Japanese scientists to coordinate their plans with those of NASA. Black had been studying scientists' needs for the space station since April 1984, when he had joined the task force on scientific uses of the space station. That committee brought together 30 scientists from various universities and represented the disciplines that were interested in using the space station. Also, Black was serving on a National Academy of Sciences study group called "space sciences, 1995-2015," which was attempting to identify the future directions for research in the space sciences, thus identifying which technologies would be needed to support future research. (ARC Release 85-14)
NASA announced that interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers selected seven finalists in the fifth national Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program (SSIP), a joint venture of NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, judges based selection of finalists' entries upon individual scientific or engineering merit for possible flight aboard the Space Shuttle. The national winners and their teacher-advisors would attend in August a special Space Shuttle conference at Kennedy Space Center and view the launch of the Discovery Space Shuttle mission 51—L. NASA would present the finalists and their teacher-advisors with orbiter models, and their schools would receive orbiter models for trophy case display. The sixth year of SSIP competition would open in September 1985. (NASA Release 85-79) During August: NASA announced that the newest solid-fuel rocket booster retrieval ship, the U.S. Air Force's Independence, arrived at Kennedy Space Center for outfitting with retrieval gear. The Air Force specifically designed the ship for retrieval of expended boosters after Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Independence would be the mother ship for west coast booster retrievals, towing one of the boosters and providing room for the majority of the crew and the six main parachutes and the bottoms for both boosters. The ship's first booster retrieval would be mission 51-F set for launch no earlier than July 15. The Air Force would lease another smaller ship to tow the other booster and carry the remainder of the 42-member retrieval crew. Independence, at 199 feet long and with a beam of 40 feet, was larger than its sister retrieval ships, the Liberty Star and the Freedom Star. Those two ships were 176 feet long and had beams of 37 feet. The Independence has both fore and aft water jet thrusters, making it highly maneuverable. The other two ships had only stern thrusters. Halter Marine in Moss Point, Mississippi, built Independence. (NASA Activities, Aug 85, 11)
NASA announced that it had completed with the Italian National Research Council's National Space Plan Office (PSN/CNR) selection of U.S. and Italian principal investigators for the cooperative tethered satellite system (TSS), which NASA had scheduled for a first flight in 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle. The system, using the Space Shuttle as a base of operation, would provide a unique reuseable facility remote from the orbiter for space science investigations in the upper atmosphere and in plasma-electrodynamic interactions. 101 The overall objectives of the TSS program were to demonstrate the successful operation of a tethered satellite, perform the initial electrodynamic science and plasma investigations, and develop a reusable facility capable of supporting a broad range of electrodynamic experiments in the ionosphere. On the first TSS mission, a NASA-supplied deployer mechanism would send the Italian-developed and -built satellite upward from the Space Shuttle orbiter to a distance of as much as 12 miles. The motion of the conducting tether across geomagnetic field lines would generate several thousand volts of energy to provide a broad range of electrical operating conditions. Researchers could also use the overall system to artifically generate and study field-aligned currents and associated plasma effects. On the second TSS mission, the satellite would be at the end of a nonconducting tether at 62 miles in the earth's atmosphere, an area previously explored only sporadically, mainly with sounding rocket payloads. The tethered satellite would permit investigation of the region on a global scale over several days. The TSS-3 mission would be a follow-up to the TSS-1 electrodynamics mission, with deployment from either the Space Shuttle or the proposed space station. A memorandum of understanding signed in 1984 by NASA and PSN/CNR established the TSS program. NASA's Marshall Space flight Center had responsibility for project implementation. NASA's office of space science and applications selected Peter Banks, Stanford University (Shuttle Tether Electrodynamic Tether System); Robert Estes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation of Electromagnetic Emissions by the Tether); Gordon Gullahorn, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation and Measurement of Dynamic Noise in Tethered Observatory Satellite Systems); Konstantinos Papadopoulos, Science Applications, Inc. (Theory and Modeling of the Tether); and Nobie Stone, Marshall Space Flight Center (Research on Orbital Flight Plasma-Electrodynamics). PSN/CNR selected Silvio Bergemaschi, Instituto Meccanica, Padova University (A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of TSS Dynamics); Marino Dobrowolny, Instituto Fisica Spazio (Research on Electrodynamics Tether Effects); and Franco Mariana, University of Rome (Magnetic Field Experiment for the TSS Missions). (NASA Release 85-115)
NASA announced that the third phase of the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) magnetotail probe, a U.S., West German, and United Kingdom scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, was underway. Gilber Ousley, AMPTE project manager of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said that the first AMPTE magnetotail release of barium occurred March 21 at 4:20 a.m., EST and that the release conditions had been well within established criteria. The German ion release module spacecraft immediately detected a magnetic field change as expected. The satellite would make one additional release of barium and two of lithium (the tracers) into the earth's magnetotail. The U.S. satellite would analyze the charged-particle space environment around the magnetotail to determine the effects on the environment of the injected elements. Ousley also said that all ground stations except the one in Argentina reported clear weather and that the observatory at Kitt Peak, Arizona, reported visual sighting with the naked eye for about 20 minutes. The airborne NASA Convair 990 and Argentine Boeing 707 observation aircraft had recorded the event. The first phase of the AMPTE project had consisted of lithium releases September 11 and 20, 1984, into solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Lima, Peru. Results of the experiment indicated that the artificial comet was "eroded" by the solar wind much faster than previously anticipated. The only scheduled AMPTE experiment remaining after the March-April releases was formation July 13 or 14, 1985, of another artificial comet on the opposite flank of the magnetosphere from the December experiment. All releases had to satisfy several criteria, including clear voice communications between the U.S. AMPTE science data center located at Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Lab and the German Space Operations Center in West Germany, where German scientists gathered to view the data. The latter sent the command for release through their center and NASA's Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the U.S. portion of AMPTE for NASA's office of space science and applications; Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab under contract to NASA had built the U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release 85-42) July II: Dr. Mario Acuna, project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), announced that the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) project, an international scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, would produce on July 18 or 20 at midnight EDT the world's second artificial comet. In the fourth and final phase of the project, a West German satellite would release at 70,000	miles above earth two barium canisters into the solar wind on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere. The release would create an artificial comet expected to be visible in the southwestern United States to the unaided eye for approximately four minutes. In the first phase of the AMPTE project, the West German satellite released September 1984 lithium into the solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere. Preliminary results of that experiment indicated that less than 1% of the solar wind gained access to the magnetosphere under the conditions in which the releases took place. In the second phase, the German satellite created on December 27, 1984, a barium cloud on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Peru. Data from the artificial comet indicated that the solar wind eroded it much faster than scientists had anticipated. Releases on March 21 and May 13, 1985, of barium and lithium into the earth's magnetotail region ended the third phase of the AMPTE experiments. Acuna said of those releases, "Although, disappointingly, no tracer ions were detected by the U.S. satellite (Charge Composition Explorer) located inside the magnetosphere, this fact is in itself a very significant result. It implies that fundamental revisions to our current models of the magnetosphere need to be made to account for these negative observations." (NASA Release 85-105)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) prime contractor for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster motors, Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division, successfully static fired today a new lightweight version of that motor at its facility in northern Utah, the Marshall Star reported. The firing was the second and final test of the development version of that motor, which contained major sections made from graphite epoxy materials manufactured by Thiokol's subcontractor, Hercules, Inc. Thiokol would perform a final qualification static test of the flight version of the new filament-wound motor in September. NASA had scheduled the first use of the filament-wound motor segments for early 1986 during the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Lawrence Mulloy, manager of MSFC's solid-fuel rocket booster project, said each of the filament-wound boosters would weigh about 28,000 lb. less than the current steel boosters, making possible an increase in Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity of about 4,600 lbs. (Marshall Star, May 15/85, 2)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) would transfer spacecraft tracking and data acquisition operations from its Beltsville Tracking Station to its Wallops Flight Facility by early 1986, consolidating the operations to support balloon, sounding-rocket, and aeronautical-flight research. Diminishing need for ground stations due to the new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) necessitated the realignment. TDRSS would consist of three communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit, providing global coverage by earth-orbiting satellites and replacing the worldwide network of ground stations. NASA had launched the first TDRSS satellite in April 1983 and would launch the second about February 20. GSFC would phase out or transfer to other agencies most of its tracking stations. In addition to Wallops, however, GSFC would maintain ground stations at Bermuda and Merritt Island, Florida, to support Space Shuttle launches from KSC. The White Sands, New Mexico, station was the ground terminal for orbiting TDRSS satellities (NASA Release 85-11)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center (LeRC) awarded a $79,194,665 contract to General Dynamics Corp.'s Convair Division to support the Space Shuttle/Centaur program from August 30, 1985 through June 1987. Under the cost-plus-award-fee contract, General Dynamics would supply labor, materials, and resources necessary for management and engineering services and launch operations services to implement the program. Included in the multi-contract concept were services such as overall program management; administration and engineering support; technical management; operations, planning, and integration; and launch complex modifications. NASA planned that the Space Shuttle/Centaur combination in May 1986 would launch Ulysses, the first and only planned mission to observe the polar regions of the sun, and a week later Galileo to explore Jupiter's atmosphere. In spring 1988 the combination would launch the Venus radar mapper mission to investigate the surface and interior of Venus. (NASA Release
An international team of planetary scientists gathered at the USSR's Space Research Institute to catch the first return of data from the Vega-2 spacecraft plunging into the atmosphere of Venus, the NY Times reported. At 6:06 a.m. Vega-2 began its descent. Among the roughly 100 participants were representatives from eight European nations and the French Ambassador. Two days before, exploding bolts had freed an eight-foot sphere that carried one-and-a-half tons of payload bound for Venus's night side. The main craft would miss Venus entirely and use energy provided by the planet's gravity to propel it toward an encounter with Halley's Comet. Inside the rapidly decelerating sphere a timing device programmed months before switched on the scientific packages around it, then set loose a 15-lb. stack of miniaturized weather instruments built by French, Soviet, and U.S. scientists. An 11-foot-diameter teflon balloon filled with helium kept the instruments from reaching Venus's surface. An hour after the balloon inflated, the Vega-2 lander had reached the surface safely. The lander, in an atmospheric pressure 80 times the earth's at sea level and in a nighttime temperature of 855° F, was relaying information on surface conditions and excavating a small sample of the surrounding soil for crude analysis of its composition. Vega-1's balloon had reached the planet June 11 and had covered nearly 6,000	miles through the Venusian clouds in 46 hours, passing into the planet's sunlit hemisphere before exhausting its battery. The new Vega results suggested the planet had five discrete cloud layers whereas earlier missions detected only three. (NY Times, June 18/85, C8, June 16/85, 24; W Post, June 14/85, A10)
NASA announced that it had selected Boeing Aerospace Operations to receive the Flight Equipment Processing Contract (FEPC) at Johnson Space Center (JSC). Wornick Co. was a Boeing subcontractor. The three-year award with a two-year priced option would begin in January 1986 at an estimated total cost of $76.5 million. The contract also included provisions for two additional unpriced, five-year extensions. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus incentive/award-fee contract arrangement, which included incentive fee for sound cost management and an award fee based on performance. Under the contract, Boeing would assume responsibility for receipt, launch preparation, and postlauch activities relating to the overall process of crew-related flight and flight-type equipment required to support the Space Transportation System program. The contractor would process and resupply individual flight equipment items, which supported the flight crew in its daily operation of the orbiter vehicle, and would operate and maintain support equipment required for the successful processing of the flight equipment, which included extravehicular mobility units, food and medical systems, communications equipment, and other miscellaneous items. In addition to Boeing, NASA conducted final negotiations with Hamilton Standard Management Services, Inc. The selection of Boeing for the contract represented the consolidation into one contract of work currently performed by 16 firms under 19 contracts. (NASA Release 85-174) Military Applications
NASA announced plans to deploy for the first time two small experimental satellites from Get Away Special (GAS) containers mounted in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger during the STS 51-B mission scheduled for launch in late April. Under the GAS program, NASA would deploy for $10,000 each the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) and the Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) in hopes of establishing an inexpensive way to deploy small satellites during routine Space Shuttle operations. Clarke Prouty, technical liaison officer for the GAS program at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said the GAS containers had been upgraded with ejection systems for the 51-B mission and that GSFC had developed a motorized door (full diameter motorized door assembly) for the can similar to the one first flown on the seventh Space Shuttle mission, which would allow the GAS payload to be exposed to space. The door assembly permitted GAS container insulation before and after satellite deployment and provided a means for keeping the satellite in the container in case of malfunction. GSFC had also adapted the spacecraft separation system used in the Delta rocket program for the GAS ejection systems. The GLOMR satellite, designed and built by Defense Systems Inc. was a data relay, communications spacecraft that was expected to remain in orbit for about a year. The NUSAT, designed, built, and tested by Weber State College, Ogden, Utah, in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, was an air traffic control radar system calibrator that would measure antenna patterns for ground-based radars operating in the U.S. and member countries of the International Civil Aviation Organization. NASA would first launch the NUSAT, then the GLOMR, at the end of Spacelab 3 science activities on the sixth day of the seven-day 51-B mission. Independent user ground stations would operate the satellites following deployment. The GAS program was available to anyone wishing to fly a small (for containment in 2Vi- by 5-ft area) scientific research and development experiment. The Space Shuttle had flown 29 GAS containers, including those for materials processing, life sciences, biology, seed and crystal growth, and cosmic radiation. (NASA Release 85-35)
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
President Reagan announced today his intention to nominate William Graham to be NASA deputy administrator to succeed Hans Michael Mark, the Administration of Ronald Reagan reported. Graham, with R&D Associates since 1971, had served there as director of computing operations, division manager, corporate program manager, and most recently senior associate. Before joining R&D Associates, he was a member of the technical staff, physics department, at the Rand Corp.; project officer of the Air Force Weapons Laboratory; and a member of the technical staff of the Hughes Aircraft Corp. research laboratory. Since 1982, Graham had served as acting chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. He had also been a member of the Defense Nuclear Agency Scientific Advisory Group on Effects, a consultant to the Defense Nuclear Agency, and consultant to the Office of the Secretary of Defense. Graham received his B.S. degree from the California Institute of Technology and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University. (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, Sept 13/85, 1073)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced preliminary scientific results from Spacelab 3 flown on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-B launched April 29, 1985. Researchers and participants in the seven-day flight gathered in December at the Center to present their initial findings. "The mission has made some major contributions in the physical and life sciences," said Dr. George Fichtl of MSFC's Systems Dynamics Laboratory. "We have gained a lot of insight for future Spacelab and space station research. And I think we can now say that space research is becoming routine." Initial results from the three Spacelab 3 crystal growth experiments were very promising, Ficthl noted. The two triglycine sulfate crystals and the single mercuric iodide crystal grown in the space laboratory were at least as good as the best crystals grown to date on earth. And they might actually be better, although additional testing was necessary to confirm this, Fichtl said. "This is of major significance, because normally we must grow between one and two thousand crystals on earth to get just one crystal that is equal to the quality of those grown on Spacelab 3. Mercuric iodide crystals have application in X-ray detectors, and triglycine sulfate crystals are used in infrared detectors," he said. In addition, the flight proved the reliability of the methods used to grow the crystals. Triglycine sulfate crystals were grown from a solution as part of an experiment provided by Alabama A&M University. The mercuric iodide crystal grew using a vapor transport process in an experiment provided by EG&G Energy Measurements Inc. The third crystal growth experiment, provided by France and which also used mercuric iodide, performed as expected and added to researchers knowledge about the process of crystal nucleation, a process difficult to study on earth because of gravity-induced convection. The Drop Dynamics Module, a fluid physics experiment developed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, enabled researchers to do some experiments not possible on earth. Results confirmed some of the theories on how drops behaved when rotated, the first opportunity to test theories posed centuries ago including those by Isaac Newton. The experiment also proved that using sound waves was a viable technique for manipulating liquids in a microgravity environment, which had direct application to containerless materials processing in space. The technique allowed processing of materials without incurring the contaminating effects of the container. The experiment showed that the "acoustic bottle" or "crucible of sound" containing the droplet had much better characteristics than originally theorized. Drop dynamics experiments confirmed theories on how drops behaved when rotated slowly; however, experiment data showed violation of some basic theories relating to the behavior of drops rotated at higher rates. It was found, for example, that drops tended to transition (change) to a new shape at rotation rates lower than predicted. "All this tends to indicate that some of our theories may need to be modified," Fichtl said. Researchers for the Geophysical Fluid Flow Cell Experiment reported that all 102 hours of data looked good, confirming existing theories of convection, and were expected to lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of stellar interiors and planetary atmosphere. However, the research team noted that at higher heating rates—such as those that might be found on the sun— the data showed some significant departures from that anticipated. After the mission, researchers developed computer models of some of this new information. The Atmospheric Trace Molecules Spectroscopy (ATMOS) experiment, sponsored by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, for the first time simultaneously measured the concentrations of chemical compounds associated with carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and other chemical cycles in the atmosphere. This would provide better insight into the chemical processes that governed the distribution of minor and trace gases in the atmosphere between 10 and 100 kilometers. The instrument recorded concentrations of gases as low as parts per 100 billion, the first time such sensitive measurements were made, and detected and measured traces of nitrogen pentoxide, a compound previously undetected in the atmosphere. Results from the Research Animal Holding Facility showed that the apparent case of space adaptation syndrome in one of the monkeys supported the contention that this species would be a good model for future studies of vestibular adaptation in microgravity. Results from studies of the largest group of rats flown aboard a single spacecraft showed their hind muscles became 11 to 36% smaller and the bones were less strong after their flight. (MSFC Release 85-73) UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
At the third in a series of hearings on assured access to space NASA and Defense Department officials said today before the House Science and Technology space science and applications and Armed Services research and development subcommittees that available data did not support the need for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in the early 1990s. But the officials acknowledged that there could be a period around 1992 and beyond in which unforeseen launch demands would strain capability, Aerospace Daily reported. Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) pointed out that earlier testimony had revealed a launch demand for 26 to 33 Space Shuttle equivalent flights per year in the post-1992 timeframe, and Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, acknowledged that a flight capability of 30 per year would require a fifth orbiter. He said that NASA projected the annual launch capability of a four-orbiter fleet in the 1990s timeframe to be 24 flights, 20 from Kennedy Space Center and four from Vandenberg AFB, with the ability to surge temporarily to 28 flights per year. When asked to factor in potential extended downtime of one orbiter, Moore replied that NASA had not made a projection of lost flights because it would be directly related to the length of the downtime and when it occurred. He added that NASA could probably fly 20 to 24 flights with the three remaining orbiters if one were out of service for periods up to one year; a sustained launch capacity for three orbiters would be in the range of 15 to 20 flights per year, he said. Edward Aldridge, undersecretary of the Air Force, said that, although the Department of Defense (DOD) was committed to at least eight Space Shuttle missions per year, its current known requirements through the mid-1990s averaged 10 launches per year. Including the one-to-five Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year projected through 1995 for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research, he said the total DOD requirement became roughly 11 to 15 Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year. Those numbers excluded any mission supporting potential deployment of SDI-related systems, he added. At the same hearing, Gen. Robert Herres, commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), said he thought the "time had passed" during which the U.S. might have built a fifth orbiter. He pointed out that resources needed for it might better be devoted to new technology and options, "which afford us more flexibility and versatility." Offering an opposing view, Hans Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas System and former NASA deputy administrator, said that the argument for a fifth orbiter could not be based either on currently projected flight rates or on backup requirements. He said only the proposed space station and SDI requirements could increase space operations to the point where a fifth orbiter was necessary. (A/D, July 26/85, 137)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) announced it had extended an existing contract with Planning Research Corp. (PRC) to provide engineering services for the Directorate of Engineering Development at KSC and at Vandenberg Air Force Base (VAFB). The $12,421,841 extension brought the total contract value to $66,187,413 and extended the period of performance from January 1, 1986, through September 30, 1986. Under the contract, PRC would design ground-support systems for the Space Shuttle/Centaur program, which NASA would use to inject space vehicles into interplanetary trajectories after deployment from the Space Shuttle. PRC would also provide designs for Space Shuttle launch-support equipment for the Department of Defense (DOD) at VAFB, which would become the second launch and landing facility for the Space Shuttle in the mid-1980s, particularly for launching DOD payloads into polar orbit. Another PRC task under the contract was to provide KSC with designs for Space Shuttle cargo ground-support equipment. (KSC Release 186-85)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that July 1 marked the center's 25th anniversary. MSFC currently managed a budget of about $2 billion annually and employed some 3,300 people, while thousands more worked with numerous aerospace and other high-tech organizations in the Huntsville, Alabama, area to support the center's projects. During the 25 years, MSFC had moved beyond its initial role as NASA's developer of launch vehicles and propulsion systems to that of a scientific and engineering organization also responsible for spacecraft and scientific experiments. The center was currently responsible for a number of NASA programs including the Space Shuttle's engines, propellant tank, and booster rockets; the Hubble Space Telescope; Spacelab orbiting research laboratories; the Space Shuttle upper stage systems; and a significant portion of the proposed space station. (MSFC Release 85-31)
Japan nominated three astronaut candidates, one a woman, to fly in January 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, a UPI bulletin in NASA Current News said. The one selected to fly would become the first Japanese in space. Those selected were Takao Doi, a researcher at a NASA center; Mamoru Mori, assistant professor of nucleonics at Hokkaido University; and Chiaki Naito, an assistant at Keio University's Medical School in Tokyo. Japan's National Space Development Agency selected them from among 533 applicants. The Japanese astronaut would conduct a 12-minute experiment during Columbia's one-week mission. The other two candidates would serve as backups. The three would take further medical and space simulation tests at Johnson Space Center and then undergo training before selection in May 1987 of the astronaut to fly on the mission. (UPI bulletin in NASA Current News, Aug 7/ 85) Launch Vehicles
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility conducted today a coordinated series of rocketborne experiments to study effects of lightning in the earth's troposphere. Three rocket payloads at different altitudes simultaneously collected lightning measurement data, and a series of ground-based instruments designed to detect the location and characteristics of lightning also made coordinated measurements. Wallops researchers launched at 8:01 EDT a single-stage Orion sounding rocket, 70 seconds later a two-stage Taurus-Orion, and then 57 seconds later a Nike-Orion; all three were solid-propellant sounding rockets. The Taurus-Orion lofted its 297-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 120 statute miles, and the Nike-Orion carried its 303-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 71.5	statute miles. The Taurus-Orion experiment package contained a water recovery system using an eight-foot parachute with flotation bag, flashing strobe light, and recovery beacon. Wallops personnel, following the three rocket series, launched a meteorological data sonde on a small rocket to determine the meteorological characteristics in the upper atmosphere near the time of the other measurements. The Wallops P-3 search aircraft located the Taurus-Orion payload package at 9:45 p.m. that same day about 40 miles offshore, and the next day the Coast Guard cutter "Point Brown" recovered and returned it to the Wallops Flight Facility for refurbishment and future spaceflights. (GSFC Release 8526)
NASA announced the first flight of the NASA/Air Force/F-111 mission adaptive wing (MAW) [see Aerospace R & D/Aeronautics, Sept. 17] at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility. The flight accomplished functional verification of the variable camber MAW at flight conditions up to MACH 0.6 and altitude of 15,000 feet. The Boeing Military Airplane Co. manufactured the MAW. (NASA Daily Activities Report, Oct 21/85)
NASA Administrator James Beggs told the U.S. House Science and Technology Committee that the agency's launch service's market position had eroded "very severely" and that he had to be "a little bit pessimistic" about NASA's ability to hold a lion's share in the future, Aerospace Daily reported. Beggs made the comment in response to a question about the need for a 5th Space Shuttle orbiter. During the previous 14 months, NASA had won five new commercial launches; The European Space Agency's (ESA) Ariane, five. Beggs said the Europeans were "coming along very aggressively" in using the Ariane 4 and 5 vehicles to improve launch capabilities and that agreement by ministers attending the ESA council meeting [see European Space Agency, Feb. 4] to further Ariane 5 development "was significant." (A/D, Feb 7/85, 1)
NASA announced that its Administrator selected Dr. Charles Chappell of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Dr. Dirk Frimout of the European Space Agency (ESA) to serve as alternate payload specialists for the first Earth Observation Mission (EOM), which would use the Spacelab scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis in the latter half of 1986. Chappell and Frimout would serve as backups to flight payload specialists Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and his alternate, Dr. Michael Lampton. Chappell was chief of the Solar Terrestrial Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC and was responsible for directing a research group that studied the physics of the sun-earth environment. He served as mission scientist for the 10-day Spacelab 1 mission, during which 70 investigations were carried out. Frimout was the senior engineer supporting European researchers who would have experiments on the mission, and he had served as ESA crew coordinator and operations manager for Spacelab 1. Chappell and Frimout would train with the flight crew and serve as members of the mission management team in the Payload Operations Control Center during the flight. They would communicate directly with the crew on orbit, assist the payload operations team during normal operations, and aid in trouble shooting problems and in changing crew procedures when necessary. They would also advise the mission scientist, Dr. Marsha Torr, of the possible impact of problems and timeline changes. The EOM flight was the first in a series of Space Shuttle missions primarily dedicated to measuring solar irradiance and the chemical composition of the earth's stratosphere and mesosphere during an 11-year solar cycle. NASA would refly several instruments originally carried on the Spacelab 1 and 3 missions to accomplish these measurements. The mission would use the short version of the Spacelab module, in which a single Spacelab pallet and special support structure would hold instruments that required exposure to the space environment. The mission would consist of 15 experiments conducted in six disciplines—atmospheric science, solar physics, plasma physics, earth resources, astronomy, and life sciences. The international mission included experiments sponsored by Belgium, France, Japan, Federal Republic of Germany, and the U.S. ESA would provide operations support for the European investigations. The Investigators Working Group (IWG), which consisted of the principal investigator for each of the mission experiments, recommended alternate payload specialist candidates for selection by NASA's administrator. (NASA Release 85-179) External Tank November 27r The U.S. Senate awarded Martin Marietta Corp. the United States Senate Productivity Award for the state of Louisiana for manufacturing improvements and costs savings in production of the Space Shuttle's external tank, Defense Daily reported. The Senate cited the company for its innovative across-the-board productivity program that included plant modernization, installation of automated production processes, and development of an employee participation program that led to a number of improvements in the manufacturing process. "Estimates are that this increased productivity will save NASA and ultimately the American taxpayer more than a billion dollars over the long run," said Louisiana Senators J. Bennett lohnston (D) and Russell Long (D) in a joint statement. The two also cited the "flawless performance" of the tanks in Space Shuttle missions to date. (D/D, Nov 27/85, 142) Launch and Landing Facilities
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
NASA announced it selected April 29, 12:00 noon EDT, for launch of STS mission 51-B, the Spacelab 3 flight, and Dryden Flight Research Center/Edwards Air Force Base, California, as the primary end-of-mission landing site, with KSC as an alternate. Landing was set for May 6 at 12:03 EDT. NASA selected Dryden over KSC for the landing as a result of problems encountered during the STS 51-D mission when the orbiter Discovery's right-hand braking systems locked causing a tire to blow out. Landing conditions had included a crosswind—the first experience at KSC of such conditions—and a higher-than-usual sink rate. A landing at Dryden would provide a greater safety margin for Challenger's tires and brake systems due to the availability of the unrestricted lakebed and the smoother surface. The decision to land at Dryden for the next flight only would enable engineers to determine what corrective actions were appropriate before returning to the KSC runway for nominal end-of-mission landings. (NASA Release 85-63) During April: NASA announced it had scheduled for launch on April 12 from KSC the remanifested Space Shuttle 51-D mission with landing on KSC's Space Shuttle runway after the five-day 78-orbit flight. NASA originally scheduled mission 51-D for March 1 for deployment of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility, but cancelled the 51—E Challenger mission and revised the 51-D cargo to include LEASAT-3 and the Canadian communications satellite Anik C-1. Other payloads were the continuous-flow electrophoresis system and the American echocardiograph experiment [see Apr. 12], two middeck student experiments, and two Getaway Special canisters. (NASA Release 85—47)
NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced it had awarded a total of $8.7 million in contracts to Sundstrand Corp., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Boeing Aerospace Co., and Harris Corp. for advanced development contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of the power system for the proposed permanently manned space station. A major technical issue in Phase B was determination of whether photovoltaic arrays or a solar dynamic (heat engine) system should supply solargenerated power for the space station. Photovoltaic arrays were the accepted system for electricity production in manned and unmanned space missions. However, the space station's electrical power requirements were ten times greater than any mission flown to date and would necessitate arrays of approximately one-half acre for the initial station. Therefore, there was interest in solar dynamic systems because of their higher overall efficiency and relatively smaller size. In a solar dynamic system, an alternator driven by a turbine in a heat engine cycle produces electricity. Focusing the sun's rays by means of a concentrating mirror into a heat receiver heats the engine gas or liquid. The system operates as a closed-cycle heat engine, and a radiator cools the working fluid and rejects waste heat into space. Sundstrand Corp., under its $1,010,303 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, would study the magnitude of possible chemical and thermal degradation in the working fluid of an organic rankine cycle engine. Under its $1,010,000 cost-reimbursement contract, Grumman would study solar dynamic waste heat radiator technology. Boeing Aerospace Co., under its $3,117,059 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, would study the heat receiver/storage unit and identify and recommend testing required for concept verification. And Harris Corp., under its $3,619,870 cost-sharing contract, would generate conceptual designs for the solar dynamic dish concentrator, as well as identify and test materials, identify and recommend testing required for concept verification, perform engineering designs, fabricate the concentrator, and conduct verification and testing. (LeRC Release 85-77) SPACE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS (STS) Civilian in Space Program
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that the European X-ray Observatory Satellite, EXOSAT, had been in orbit over two years, during which time it had performed nearly 2,000 observations, returning data to an observatory based at the European Space Operations Centre, ESOC, in West Germany. The EXOSAT telescopes had provided among other findings detailed images of the remnants of dead stars, called supernova, which had consumed their nuclear fuel (hydrogen and helium) and ended their lives in a spectacular explosion. The images enabled astronomers to deduce the amount of energy in the original explosion and the physical conditions in space in the neighborhood of the explosion. Some astronomers speculated that a supernova might end as neutron stars or black holes, and EXOSAT was helping astronomers study a number ol these "exotic" objects in the Milky Way. Early in 1984 astronomers proposed using EXOSAT to search for very fast rotating neutron stars in X-ray binaries. In mid-July 1985, ESA announced that these observations had led to the discovery of a completely unexpected phenomenon, that of quasi-periodic oscillations that might indicate the presence of fast rotating neutron stars in very old X-ray binary systems. The discovery of the oscillations opened up an entirely new area of investigation in the study of neutron stars that, because of the stars' extreme gravitational conditions, could make it possible to test to their limits some of the fundamental laws of physics. (ESA release July 1/85; ESA release July 19/85)
The U.S. Air Force announced today that it had selected Air Force Undersecretary Edward "Pete" Aldridge to fly on the first Space Shuttle mission launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Arizona Daily Star reported. The Air Force said Aldridge and Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson would serve as payload specialists with five astronauts named by NASA for the Defense Department's mission set for launch March 20, 1986. Aldridge, 47, who had been Air Force undersecretary since 1981, said in a statement, "I'm thrilled at the opportunity and thrilled at the prospects that I will be able to apply what I have learned to expanding U.S. efforts in space." NASA and the U.S. Air Force were building the Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch facility primarily for military missions. Because the Space Shuttle could be launched from there directly south, it could go into a north-south orbit that covered the entire globe, passing over both poles and allowing Space Shuttle crews to observe Soviet military forces anywhere in the world. Space Shuttles launched from Kennedy Space Center could not go directly north or south because they would fly over inhabited areas during the initial minutes of flight, possibly endangering the population if something went wrong. Those Space Shuttles launched into east-west orbits did not fly any closer than about 2000 miles to the poles. (Ariz. Daily Star, Sept 12/85, A3)
NASA announced that flight controllers for its International Cometary Explorer (ICE) performed the first and largest of four midcourse corrections to direct the spacecraft toward a September 11 intercept of Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Conducted from ICE mission control at Goddard Space Flight Center, these corrections used two thousand pulses of the spacecraft's two-lb. hydrazine thrusters to change its heading so it would fly through the comet's tail 16,200 miles from the comet's nucleus. The thruster burns lasted four-and-a-half hours. In 1982, NASA redirected the International Sun-Earth Explorer, which was launched in 1978, toward the comet for what would be the first satellite/ comet encounter in history. This encounter would provide scientists with their first look at the makeup and dynamics of a comet's tail. The ICE trajectory adjustment would place the satellite/comet encounter within the coverage window of the world's largest single dish radio astronomy telescope located at the Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico. The 300-m dish, managed by the National Science Foundation, would supplement coverage by three NASA deep space network stations at Goldstone, California; Madrid, Spain; Canberra, Australia; and the recently completed 64-m antenna of the Japanese Space Agency at Usuda, Japan. NASA based ICE's course adjustment on telescopic observations of Giacobini-Zinner as the comet emerged in April from behind the sun, the first observation since July 1984. The comet was approximately 149 million miles from the sun on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. NASA would direct three smaller orbit maneuvers as ICE approached the comet, the last scheduled for three days prior to encounter. Course corrections were necessary because material spontaneously outgassed from the comet's core, acting as jet thrusters on the comet's body, slightly altered the its orbital path. Astronomers in 1900 discovered Giacobini-Zinner, which returned to earth's neighborhood every six-and-one-half years. It would not be visible to the naked eye, but amateur astronomers with small telescopes would be able to see it. (NASA Release 85-86)
NASA launched from KSC at 5:00 p.m. EDT today Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger carrying Spacelab-2. The flight was the eighth for Challenger and the 19th Space Shuttle mission. The flight commander was Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, who served as pilot on the third Space Shuttle mission. Air Force Col. Roy Bridges, Jr. was pilot; mission specialists were Dr. Anthony England, a geophysicist; Dr. F. Story Musgrave, a physician; and Dr. Karl Henize, an astronomer who at the age of 58 was the oldest American to travel in space. Payload specialists were Dr. Loren Acton, a solar physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, and Dr. John David Bartoe, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory. Approximately 5 minutes and 45 seconds after launch onboard computers shut down Challenger's center engine (SSME 1) due to failure of the orbiter's two high-pressure, fuel turbo-pump discharge temperature sensors. Challenger was 70 miles above earth at the time, about 50 miles below the orbit considered safe for a manned spacecraft. The two remaining main engines ran smoothly and burned about a minute and 10 seconds longer than originally planned, putting the Space Shuttle into a lower-than-scheduled orbit. The crew then used two auxiliary engines to raise the orbit in steps from an initial 122 miles to 194 miles at 10:30 p.m. the night of launch. The crew also dumped as much as 4,400 lb. of fuel to achieve the higher orbit. In explaining the problem with SSME 1, NASA associate administrator Jesse Moore said the onboard sensors first indicated that the center engine might be overheating four minutes after liftoff, the Washington Post reported. "Computers then ordered the center engine fuel pump to bypass one valve and use another to feed fuel into the combustion chamber," he said. Two minutes later computers again sensed that the fuel pump was overheating and automatically shut down the center engine.The mission control center in Houston also received indications of dangerously high temperature readings on a second engine and instructed the crew to disconnect a backup sensor to prevent the second engine from shutting down before the spacecraft reached orbit. The crew encountered the next problem when attempting to operate a $60 million telescope-pointing device. The instrument pointing subsystem (IPS) and its four solor telescopes were one of 13 experiments carried on the European-built Spacelab-2. Mission specialist Henize told mission control that the pointing attempts were "rather dismal," the NY Times reported. Lee Briscoe, flight director, elaborated to reporters. "It appears that we are able to find the sun, find the stars, get into what we call a rough track mode," he said. "But we never appear to get into a fine track and actually finish the total tracking." Since the problem appeared to be with the computer programming that drove the unit, NASA radioed up a new version of the programming. However, it initially failed to correct the problem, and NASA told the crew to try harder. Eventually the IPS operated successfully after the crew inserted a series of software patches developed at Marshall Space Flight Center. NASA extended the mission duration by one day to allow additional collection of engineering and scientific data. The Spacelab-2 aboard Challenger was the second of its two verification test flights and consisted of an igloo attached to a lead pallet, the IPS mounted on it and a two pallet train behind, with an experiment special support structure. Experiments conducted during the Spacelab-2 mission were in the fields of life sciences, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, solar physics, atmospheric physics, and technology. Experiments were located on the IPS, the three pallets, the special support structure, the orbiter mid-deck, and one on the ground (NASA FOR M-989-51-F [postflight] Sept 27/85, [prelaunch] July 9/85; NASA MOR M-977-51-F-03 [prelaunch] July 1/85; W Post, July 30/85, A1, July 31/85, A3; NYT, July 31/85, B4)
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) service and contractor personnel completed within 90 days installation of a launch environment instrumentation system (LEIS) for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Spaceport News reported. The LEIS, a 400-channel instrumented system, was designed to acquire data on the environment in the vicinity of the launch pad and support facilities during launch. The system's transducers measured in the launch pad vicinity pressure, acoustics, strain, vibration, and temperature for use in determining baseline data, sources of problems, and possible solutions. Such equipment at KSC, for example, pinpointed engine gas leaks during the first mission of the orbiter Challenger and provided design measurements of the overpressure problem that occurred during the first Space Shuttle launch. The KSC engineering development directorate, with the assistance of Planning Research Corp., completed design, management, and integration of the system, which Fairchild Weston Systems Inc. built under the direction of KSC for the Air Force. Fairchild began work on the system in March 1984 under a $4,549,256 contract. (Spaceport News, Aug 2/85, 7)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to industry to develop a space platform providing five years of on-orbit services to NASA payloads while allowing the developer to market it to commercial users, an innovative approach considered a first step toward creating a closer partnership between government and industry in space. Industry would finance, develop, own, and operate the platform with first use planned in late 1988 and would be free to market the platform (totally separate from NASA's plans for a government-developed, permanently manned space station) for materials processing or other manufacturing activities. NASA stipulated that the platform be capable of providing services for four future projects: the extreme ultraviolet explorer (EUVE), the x-ray timing explorer (XTE), a zero-gravity payload, and an as yet unidentified project. The Space Shuttle or other launch vehicle would place the commercial platform in orbit. Commercial payloads would reimburse the government for use of the orbiter and facilities. (NASA Release 85-7) Johnson Space Center
The Department of Defense announced that a large high-powered chemical laser destroyed at a distance of six-tenths of a mile a large liquid-fuel booster stage from a Titan 2 rocket in an experiment for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, the Arizona Republic reported. The experiment, conducted at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, was significant "because this was the first full-scale test against an object this large," said Mary Pshak, a spokeswoman for the SDI organization. "We had done a lot of subscale testing, but this particular experiment verified our earlier tests," she noted. Pshak declined to discuss the amount of power used because the information was classified, but said the laser was a large working model of MIRACL (mid-infrared chemical laser), considered the largest weapon-grade device of its type developed in the U.S. However, the SDI research program also was focusing on other types of lasers, some of which were considered even more promising. (Ariz. Republic, Sept 14/85, A28)
NASA announced that Gerald Griffin, director of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), would leave the agency January 14, 1986, to become president of the Houston Chamber of Commerce. Robert Goetz, deputy director of JSC, would become acting director upon Griffin's departure. Griffin had been JSC's director since August 1982 and had served with NASA for more than 20 years in a number of key positions at three NASA centers and in Washington, D.C. Griffin served in the U.S. Air Force and worked in the aerospace industry before joining NASA in 1964. "It was a tough decision to leave NASA," Griffin said, but "I'll depart with the comfort that the NASA team of government, industry, and university people will continue their outstanding job in space activities for this country." William Graham, acting NASA administrator, said, "As one of NASA's key senior executives, Gerry has had a long distinguished career. He has received many honors and awards in recognition of the contributions he has made both to aeronautics and space. We shall all miss him very much and wish him great success as he moves on to new accomplishments." (NASA Release 85-172) Kennedy Space Center
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded ASEA Robotics Inc. a $1,143,622 contract to build a robotic development prototype system to be installed in the Robotic Applications Development Laboratory (RADL) and serve as KSC's control center for robotics, Spaceport News reported. KSC currently had two labs for robotics research: Lab A was a test facility for training devices, sensor and end-effector development, and small robotic projects; Lab B functioned as a control center made up of complex work cells and "smart systems" (independent control systems integrated into one coordinated system) for large robotic applications. The objective of the new system was to permit engineers to combine existing and new technology to create advanced independent and semiindependent machines and machines with independent decision-making capabilities or a "computer brain," which could accomplish more on their own without step-by-step instructions from human supervisors. The initial thrust of the new system would be to develop the technology and techniques needed to automatically load and unload hazardous fuels aboard space vehicles and payloads during prelaunch ground operations. Future challenges included application of these refueling techniques to other fuels such as cryogenic propellants. RADL would have an electrically driven articulated robot composed of a six-axes arm and interchangeable end-effectors or "hands," a computer with user-friendly software, and a vision tracking system. The facility would serve as the focal point for combining robotics hardware, algorithms, software, sensors, and control systems. Leon Davis, a development engineer and electrical lead for the Robotic Control Systems, said of the new system, "This is not a manipulator that is teleoperated by a man, but a robot with a computer brain capable of memorizing the contours and panels of its intended subject and carrying out its functions autonomously." Because NASA would be asking KSC to design processing facilities for new-generation launch vehicles such as the second generation Space Shuttle and the heavy lift launch vehicles, KSC would need these state-of-the-art robotics to provide the most efficient and effective processing methods. Hazardous, time critical, and repetitive Space Shuttle and payload operations all had potential uses for robotics. A special feature of the system was a "real time" tracking system using "closed-loop" responsive adaptive control commands, feedback, and error signals. "Adaptive control" meant that the robot altered its path automatically in response to sensory feedback from its environment. The KSC robot's servo-controls and software utilities would allow its arm to operate adaptively to control positions and orientation of all six axes, not only the end-effector as found in standard applications. An electrically driven, servo-controlled robot had several advantages over hydraulic robots, the major one being that smooth motion, speed, and trajectory controls were possible when the robot handled loads up to 200 lb. As Davis said, "We really don't have applications for hydraulic robots. Hydraulic robots can leak, proving a potential hazard to the tile and other sensitive areas of the orbiter." KSC's robotics research would progress in four phases: phase one was the development of the robotic arm in static work cells; phase two proposed advancing the robotic capabilities to operate in dynamic work cells; phase three would include off-line programming using 3-D graphics and simulated work cells; and phase four entertained the possibility of employing artificial intelligence. Possible future capabilities of robots were three-dimensional scanning; higher order processing; artificial intelligence; sonic, laser, and other ranging systems; and "touch" and mobility systems. (Spaceport News, Nov 7/85, 6) Langley Research Center
NASA announced it selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. and Rockwell Internatl.'s Space Station Systems Division for fixed-price contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of the structural framework and other elements of a permanently manned Space Station. Johnson Space Center (JSC) would manage the 21-month contracts, which had an estimated value of $27 million each. NASA previously announced other industry teams selected for negotiations for definition and preliminary design of other Space Station elements [see March 14]. In addition to work on the Space Station structural framework, the JSC contracts would cover interface between the Space Station and Space Shuttle; mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems; attitude and thermal control; communications and data management systems; plans for equipping a module with sleeping quarters, wardroom, and galley; and plans for extravehicular activity. (NASA Release 85-56)
At 44 million miles from earth, the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spent 20 minutes traveling through the tail of Comet Giacobini-Zinner, the Spaceport News reported. During the precedent-setting encounter, ICE was traveling at 46,000 miles per hr. when it entered the 14,000-mile wide tail at a point 4,900 miles behind the comet's nucleus; when it emerged, ICE had no apparent damage. Dr. John Brandt, head of Goddard Space Flight Center's Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics, summarized scientists' tentative conclusions at a press conference, saying that mission discoveries added significantly to and confirmed many predicted features of the scientific portrait of a comet. Scientists expected to see a sharply defined bow shock, but instead they observed that a broad U-shaped turbulent interaction region preceded the comet as it moved through the solar wind of interplanetary space. Some data, however, confirmed what cometary scientists postulated about the comet's plasma tail: it was threaded by hairpin-shaped magnetic field lines captured from the solar wind and included electrified gases both denser and colder than those of the surrounding solar wind. The flight also showed that the hazard of flying through the dust in Comet Giacobini-Zinner's tail was less than expected. There was one new-found phenomenon that puzzled the ICE scientists. At least 300,000 miles before the ICE reached the comet, it detected high-speed heavy ion beams never before found in space. ICE scientists theorized that these beams were actually low-speed molecules that escaped from the comet, were ionized by solar ultraviolet light, and then turned around by the supersonic solar wind and accelerated back toward the comet as particle beams. ICE was then continuing on to take solar wind measurements upstream of Halley's Comet on two occasions—the second, March 28, 1986, to be within 19.5	million miles of the comet. (Spaceport News, Sept 27/85, 1)
In a ceremony today in the East Room of the White House, President Reagan presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom to 12 people including former test pilot Chuck Yeager. "More than you'll ever know," Reagan said, "this world would have been much poorer and a dimmer place without each of you." In presenting Yeager's award, Reagan said he was "a hero in war and peace," who on October 14, 1947, in a rocket plane named "Clamorous Glennis" after his wife, "became the first human being to travel faster than the speed of sound, and in doing so, showed to the world the real meaning of 'The Right Stuff'." After the ceremony, Yeager gave Glennis Yeager his medal. In an interview with a Washington Post reporter upon his arrival in Washington for the ceremony, Yeagar said, "I was just a lucky kid who caught the right ride. But then I was as naive as could be, living a cloistered life out at Muroc, where the flying was fun and the living was easy. ". . . We didn't know what the word 'macho' meant. We were jes' a bunch of hell raisers . . . It wasn't a case of the right stuff. Just dumb luck. "When they refer to a pilot 'having the right stuff,' that doesn't mean a rat's ass to me or any other pilot. It's more meaningful to be in the right place at the right time." (W Post, May 23/85, D1; May 24/85, B1)
NASA announced today that an American journalist would fly on a Space Shuttle mission in late 1986 as the second in a series of communicators to be selected as part of the agency's Space Flight Participant Program. The first candidate selected under this program was Christa McAuliffe, a classroom teacher scheduled to fly in January 1986. In today's announcement NASA said it would select the journalist, like the teacher candidate, after a nationwide competition conducted by professionals representing a broad spectrum of individuals in the candidates' field. The competition would be limited to full-time working media representatives (U.S. citizens) with five or more years' experience covering or commenting on the news for U.S.-based audio, video, or print media. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly and effectively to mass audiences in both broadcast and print media would be the basis for evaluation of applications, although it was not necessary for the candidate to have worked professionally in both. The selection process would first require identification of eight candidates from each of five regions in the U.S.; from the 40 regional nominees, a National Selection Panel would recommend five for final consideration by the NASA Space Flight Participant Evaluation Committee composed of seven senior NASA officials. The five semifinalists would undergo medical examinations and receive briefings on the spaceflight experience at the Johnson Space Center. Based on results of the physicals and subsequent interviews, the evaluation committee would recommend a primary and backup candidate to the NASA Administrator who would approve the final selection. The Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communication in cooperation with the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication and a Journalism Advisory Committee comprised of representatives from 16 professional journalism organizations including the American Newspaper Publishers Association, Radio Television News Directors Association, American Society of Newspaper Editors, National Association of Broadcasters, Society of Professional Journalists/Sigma Delta Chi, and the National Newspaper Association would administer the competition. (NASA Release 85-147)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
NASA announced that an eight-member review team at Goddard Space Flight Center concluded that the failure of the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) to deploy from its canister during the April 1985 Space Shuttle 51-B mission was due to the failure of two switches designed to activate bolt cutters on the canister. On June 7 the team would issue a final report along with recommendations for a solution to the problem. The Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) along with GLOMR would be the first satellites successfully deployed from canisters aboard the Space Shuttle. The door of the GLOMR canister opened, indicating normal battery operation, but the bolt cutters would not activate. After a second deployment attempt, NASA decided to return GLOMR to earth for evaluation. (NASA Release 8585)
Reiichi Takeuchi, chief of Japan's science and technology agency, said Japan had decided to take part in the U.S. space station beginning with the preliminary design stage, FBIS, KYODO in English reported. He said the Japanese would sign with NASA Administrator James Beggs a memorandum on the decision when Beggs visited Tokyo early in May. The agreement would cover two years of work, at which time, Takeuchi said, the two countries would probably sign a similar document for later stages of the project. Takeuchi noted he expected the U.S. would ask Japan to design the laboratory room of the Space Station, scheduled for operation in 1992. He estimated the cost at 200 to 300 billion yen. Under the memorandum, the U.S. would provide Japan with technical information on how the Space Station would be used. (FBIS, KYODO in English, Apr 12/85)
The U.S. Senate passed by voice vote H.R. 1714, the NASA Authorization Bill for FY 86, NASA's Legislative Activities Report noted. As passed, the bill embraced the concept of a budget freeze at the FY 85 level of $7,510 billion; however, it also provided for three specific augmentations that totalled $142 million, accounting for a FY 86 growth of 1.9%. Among the authorizations for research and development were $200,000,000 for the space station, $477,200,000 for space transportation capability development, and $608,400,000 for physics and astronomy. Spaceflight, control, and data communications authorizations included $941,500,000 for Space Shuttle production and operational capability; $1,700,100,000 for space transportation operations; and $745,300,000 for space and ground network, communications, and data systems. Among the authorizations for space transportation facilities were $14,000,000 for construction of an orbiter modification and refurbishment facility at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), $3,600,000 for construction of a thermal protection system facility at KSC, and $6,500,000 for modification of enhanced life support systems testing at Marshall Space Flight Center. (NASA Legislative Activities Report, June 27/85, 1)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Service Internatl., Inc. and United Technologies Corp. for negotiations leading to award of a single contract for flight equipment processing at the Johnson Space Center (JSC). The contract, covering a basic period of three years plus a single priced option for an additional two years, would be for services expected to begin in January 1986. Follow-on awards could ultimately result in a total contract period of 15 years. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract arrangement that would include incentive fee on sound cost management and an award fee on the basis of performance. The contractor selected after final negotiations would be responsible for receipt, launch preparation, and postlaunch activities related to the overall processing of crew-related flight equipment required to support the Space Transportation System program. The contractor would process/resupply individual equipment items in preparation for launch and would operate and maintain assigned facilities and support equipment required for successful equipment processing. Equipment covered under the contract included extravehicular mobility units (spacesuits), food and medical systems, communications equipment, display and control equipment, and other miscellaneous items. The competitive procurement consolidated under one contract work previously performed by 16 firms under 19 contracts. (NASA Release 85-149)
Planetary scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory outlined plans for two future $400 million missions, one of which NASA would select for funding, the Washington Post reported. One mission entailed a spacecraft that in September 1991 would fly by the asteroid Hedwig and rendezvous in 1995 with Comet Wild 2. The other called for a spacecraft in 1995 to pass by the asteroid Freia and rendezvous in 1996 with Comet Tempel 2. JPL scientists preferred the Hedwig and Wild 2 mission, in part because Wild 2 was a newer and brighter comet than Tempel 2. Plans for that mission called for a March 1991 spacecraft launch from the Space Shuttle with an ultimate encounter January 8, 1995, with Wild 2, when the comet was at the far end of its orbit 465 million miles from earth. Scientists would program the spacecraft to match the comet's speed as it turned in toward the sun, which would then draw the comet and spacecraft toward it at the same speed for the next 850 days while the spacecraft's instruments measured the comet. (W Post, Sept 31/85, A23)
The National Society of Professional Engineers had recognized Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) role in the first Spacelab mission as one of the nation's 10 outstanding engineering achievements for 1984, the center announced. Because the 10-day mission occurred so late in 1983, the society had placed it in the 1984 competition. The society also cited MSFC for its management of NASA's role in Spacelab development, which had included the transfer tunnel connecting the Space Shuttle orbiter cabin to the module and other components necessary for successful laboratory operation, for its technical and programmatic monitoring of Spacelab's European design and development activities, and for lending technical expertise and support to the European Space Agency (ESA) in the project. MSFC's deputy director Thomas Lee had accepted the award on behalf of center employees at the society's winter meeting in Albuquerque, New Mexico. (MSFC Release 85-5) February /. The U.S. Navy awarded Dr. Robert Stevenson, an oceanographer with the Office of Naval Research (ONR), its Meritorious Civilian Service Award for his role in the application of space technology to the solution of oceanographic problems, the U.S. Navy announced. The award cited Stevenson as the "father" of space oceanography in the western world, recognizing him as one of the first American scientists to suggest that remote sensing instruments in space could accurately record oceanographic measurements. As an advisor on space-related programs, Stevenson had worked with the National Council for Marine Resources and Engineering Development, the National Academy of Science, North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), and NASA. Stevenson was a Fellow of the Geological Society of America and author of numerous scientific articles on ocean surface-layers' research, particularly as observed from earth-orbiting satellites. (Dept, of the Navy Release 1-85)
The NASA exhibit entitled "Living, Learning, Working in Space" at the 36th Paris Air Show, May 30 through June 9 in Le Bourget, would highlight full-scale elements of a space station, including mockups of working and living quarters, NASA announced. Audiovisual presentations throughout the 6,900-sq. ft. exhibit area would depict life inside a space station. To give viewers the impression they were looking out into space from a space station module, NASA would suspend in a diarama a large model of the power tower configuration space station along with models of future U.S. space science programs such as the space telescope and Galileo. Exhibits would also showcase NASA's latest aeronautical research. (NASA Release 85—41)
A prime time TV series for the first time would offer a comprehensive look at the history of manned U.S. and USSR space flight, the Ames Research Center's Astrogram reported. SPACEFLIGHT, a series of four one-hour programs sponsored by the Public Broadcasting System and the Du Pont Co., would chronicle man's achievements in space from the rocket plane that first broke the sound barrier to the touchdown of the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The series' executive producer, Blaine Baggett, said his staff interviewed some 40 key participants in space activities—astronauts, people on the ground, scientists, and historians. In addition, the Soviet science attache in Washington provided about 10 hours of film footage. Among those interviewed for the series were Chuck Yaeger, first man to break the sound barrier; Scott Crossfield, first to travel twice the speed of sound and to pilot the X-15; Werner von Braun, who worked on the U.S. rocket program; Alan Shepard and John Glenn, first American in space and first American to orbit the globe, respectively; and Sally Ride, first American woman in space. From the point of view of the USSR, the series sought answers to such questions as who the chief designer was of the Soviet space program and why the Soviets were first in the early days of space activities. SPACEFLIGHT also examined future space plans such as space colonies, space stations, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 11/ 85,4) PRECEDING PAGE SLAJ^K ftQT FILMED PAfilA.{0 INTENTlOHAtlT BUN*
The deputy for tactical systems at the Air Force Aeronautical Systems Division (ASD) issued a request for proposals for demonstration and validation of the Air Force's planned Advanced Tactical Fighter (ATF), Defense Daily reported. ASD planned to award up to four fixed-price contracts running approximately 33 months. Seven ATF concept formulation contractors would compete for the contracts. The companies were Boeing Military Airplane, General Dynamics, Grumman Aerospace, Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas, Northrop, and Rockwell Internatl. ASD said the demonstration/validation contractors would develop detailed concepts and designs of the ATF to meet operational needs, conduct testing to validate and assess proposed concepts, and identify and reduce overall program risks prior to start of full-scale development. General Electric and Pratt & Whitney were competitively developing the joint advanced fighter engine for the ATF. ASD was planning a FY 89 decision on full-scale development of the ATF, with initial operational capability set for 1995. The Air Force estimated the cost of developing and building 12 research and development ATF aircraft at $15.3 billion and believed it could build the ATF at a total unit cost only 20% higher than that of the F—15. A top Air Force official had noted in 1984 that the ATF would have a basic Mach 1.5 speed and that it could employ technologies being demonstrated by the Grumman X-29 forward swept wing aircraft. (D/D, Aug. 14/85, 1)
In an administrative realignment reflecting the maturation of the Space Shuttle program, NASA announced the appointment of Arnold Aldrich, a 26-year NASA veteran and head of the Space Shuttle projects office at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), to manager of the National Space Transportation System (NSTS). He would fill the vacancy left when Glynn Lunney retired in April. The Level II NSTS organization at JSC would assimilate the projects office, consolidating all program elements under Aldrich. With this combined responsibility, Aldrich would take charge of integration of all Space Shuttle program elements including flight software, orbiter, external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, main engines, payloads, payload carriers, and Space Shuttle facilities. His responsibilities would also include directing the planning for NSTS operations and for management of orbiter and government furnished equipment projects. NASA named Richard Kohrs, who was acting program manager, and Lt. Col. Thomas Redmond, U.S. Air Force, deputy managers. In a related move, Thomas Utsman, head of Space Shuttle management and operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), would become deputy director of KSC, with NASA dividing shuttle management and operations into two primary organizations: Shuttle engineering and Shuttle operations. The engineering directorate, headed by Horace Lamberth, would expand to include skills necessary for sustaining engineering of the orbiter. The operations directorate, headed by Robert Sieck, would retain all functions necessary to manage day-to-day Space Shuttle processing and its logistical support. NASA would transfer later in the year from Johnson Space Center to KSC launch support services and orbiter thermal protection system manufacturing contracts, functions closely associated with KSC responsibilities for Space Shuttle maintenance and launch preparation. At the beginning of 1986, KSC would take over logistics responsibility for spare parts refurbishment and procurement and would assume sustaining engineering responsibility for orbiter subsystems. (NASA Release 85-112)
President Reagan, at a White House ceremony, presented Distinguished Executive Awards worth $20,000 each to 32 career civil servants for their professional accomplishments, including in many cases, their plans and programs that saved millions of dollars, USA Today reported. Among the recipients were Samuel Keller, NASA's deputy associate administrator for space science and applications; and Andrew Stofan, director of NASA's Lewis Research Center. (USA Today, Dec 13/85, 9; LeRC Release 8584)
NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) announced that the world's fastest and most powerful supercomputer, the Cray-2, arrived at ARC to assist researchers in taking major steps toward simulating actual aircraft flight and thus making possible important advances, both in cost savings and performance, in aircraft design. The Cray-2 could perform 250 million continuous calculations per second, which was more than three times faster than the previous generation of supercomputers. The Cray-2 was the first building block in the creation of NASA's Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) program, planned to provide the world's most powerful, large-scale high-speed processor system. In addition to its advantages for aircraft design, NAS represented an important national facility in such research areas as aerothermodynamics, computational chemistry, atmospheric modeling, and other computationally intensive scientific applications. NASA planned the NAS system as an ongoing project with continuous improvements in speed and memory. Its objectives were to establish and maintain a leading-edge national computation capability to ensure leadership in computational fluid dynamics and related disciplines, provide an integrated processing system capable of a sustained 250 million floatingpoint, operations-per-second processing rate in 1986 and a one billion rate in 1987, and act as a pathfinder in advanced, large-scale computer systems capability. The Cray-2 was four feet high and four feet in diameter; its small size was made possible by microminiaturization of the electronic circuits and extremely dense packing of the circuit boards. Since the speed of light was a fundamental limit on computer speed, super fast machines had to be smaller in order to reduce distances that information traveled. Computer scientists indicated they expected to get still more speed in future machines by further reducing size and adding more parallel processors. A main feature of the Cray-2 was its large random-access memory, which was 16 times larger than previous supercomputers' memories. The Cray-2's memory provided random access from any of the machine's four main processors and any of its high-speed data channels. This meant a user could use all or part of this memory quickly, rather than taking hours to access data for large calculations. Another main feature of the machine was that its tightly-packed, heat-producing electronic components were immersed for cooling in a colorless odorless, inert fluorocarbon liquid, the first such design in computer history. (ARC Release 85-38) Goddard Space Flight Center
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
NASA announced that H. William Wood, deputy associate administrator (Networks), Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems (OSTDS), was retiring effective early in January after more than 30 years of government service. Wood had served in his present post since April 1984. Before that he managed the Network Systems program as the division director since 1981. Wood was a research engineer at Langley Research Center when NASA was formed in 1958; and in 1959 he became the group leader with the Tracking and Ground Instrumentation unit for the Mercury Network. His other NASA assignments included associate director, Network Systems Division; NASA senior scientific representative in Australia; and associate director, Operations, in the Network Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center. Earlier, Wbod had served several years in the U.S. Air Force. Wbod received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal and two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, and he is a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society. In 1955 Wbod received a BSEE degree from North Carolina State University. (NASA anno., Dec 18/85) December23: NASA announced that Dr. Charles Kupperman was appointed effective immediately as executive assistant to the deputy administrator. Kupperman came to NASA after serving as executive director of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. From 1978 to 1981 he was the research associate and defense analyst for the Committee on the Present Danger, and he also served as a member of President Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign and defense transition team. Kupperman was a consultant to R&D Associates and taught at the School of International Relations, University of Southern California. Kupperman graduated Phi Beta Kappa with a B.A. degree in political science from Purdue University, received an M.A. degree in political science from the University of British Columbia, and a Ph.D. in international relations from the University of Southern California. He was the author of articles on defense, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), and national security policy for academic and public journals. (NASA Release anno., Dec 23/85)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) director Dick Smith and Lockheed Space Operations Co. president Doug Sargent today hosted a dedication ceremony for KSC's launch pad B after six years of modification at a cost of $150 million, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would use pad B, the second of the two complex 39 launch pads to undergo modification from the Apollo configuration, to support Space Shuttle and Shuttle Centaur upper stage launches. First launch from the modified pad would be Space Shuttle mission 51-L, scheduled for January 22, 1986. NASA first used pad B in May 1969 for the Apollo 10, third manned Saturn V/Apollo launch. Its last use was for the launch of the Apollo/Soyuz mission in July 1975. Pad modifications included a new Centaur rolling beam, permanent orbiter weather protection system, TV camera floodlights and a TV camera system, boxcars, upgrading of the payload changeout room, a cost-saving lighting system, variable speed motors for loading liquid oxygen, and hydrogen flare stacks. Although there were currently minor differences between pads A and B, the work underway at pad A would eventually make the two functionally identical. (Spaceport News, Dec 20/85, 1; Kennedy Space Center Release 242-85) Launch Schedules
An air-launched antisatellite missile (ASAT) hit its target in the Air Force's first ASAT test against a target in space, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. An F—15 from Edwards Air Force Base launched the two-stage ASAT missile 35,000 to 40,000 feet above the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base, then two boosters carried the ASAT into space. When the ASAT's infrared sensors locked on to the target, which was about 350 miles over the Pacific, small rocket motors guided the weapon to its kill. The Air Force in 1979 launched the ASAT's target, an Air Force satellite known as P78-1, which gathered scientific data on the space environment but which had outlived its usefulness. In 1984 F—15s launched two live-fire tests but not at targets. The first was an ASAT launch to a point in space; the second tested the ASAT sensor's ability to home in on a star's infrared emissions. Air Force plans called for nine more target tests against specially instrumented balloons and satellites that had completed their missions. The Washington Post later reported that, according to Robert MacQueen, director of the high-altitude observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado, the Solwind satellite destroyed in the test was providing "very useful data" on solar activity until the moment it was hit. MacQueen said he was surprised and upset at seeing a fruitful experiment being used as a military target and said it was "deplorable" that the Pentagon "had taken a scientifically useful thing and sacrificed it in this way." The satellite carried seven experiments for the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and other government agencies. One NRL experiment used a corona-graph that sent to earth during each of the satellite's orbits, or roughly 15 times a day, images of activity on the sun's surface. Several months previously, NRL scientists had to draft what one source said "they thought was a routine paper to justify continued operation of their coronagraph." Although the scientists acknowledged problems with the spacecraft system, the source said, they wrote that it should continue. NRL scientists were told in July that "the satellite would be turned off sometime after August 1, but they weren't told how," the source said. The Washington Post reported on September 6 that Solwind was the likely target for the ASAT test because the original target, an instrumented balloon, was plagued with technical problems. A Pentagon spokesman said the satellite was intended to operate for three years at most and that recent data from the satellite had "marginal value." The Washington Post reported that another Defense Department official said the Solwind research satellite was originally scheduled as a target in the weapon's seventh test, which probably would have come in 1987. The satellite's solar research program was expected to be ending by then, scientists associated with the program said. Although Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger described the satellite as "burned out," an Air Force spokesman said the fact that the satellite was still sending signals back to earth played a key role in its selection as a target. "We had to have an active telemetry system to verify it had been hit," the spokesman said. "A dead satellite would not have given us that." (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 27/85, 1; W Post, Sept 20/85, Al, Sept 21/85, A9)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced signing today with Rockwell Shuttle Operations Co. a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract for Space Transportation System operations (STSOC) [see Space Transportation System/Management, Sept. 12]. JSC estimated the first two years of the contract, starting January 1, 1986, to be valued at $378,536,000 and the followon two-year extension option from January 1, 1988 through December 31, 1989 at about $374,320,000 for a possible four-year total of $752,846,000. Rockwell's STSOC tasks would include project management; maintenance and operations of mission control center-Houston, shuttle mission simulator, shuttle avionics integration laboratory, software production facility, and the central computing facility; sustaining engineering; flight preparation requirements and analysis; flight preparation production; and direct mission operations and testing and support for Space Shuttle operations at JSC. The Rockwell team included Bendix Field Engineering Corp., System Development Corp., Omniplan Corp., RMS Technologies, Inc., and System Management American Corp. (JSC Release 85-051)
When launched August 12, 1978 from Cape Canaveral, ICE was known as the International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE-3). The 1054-lb. 16-sided spacecraft became the first spacecraft to orbit at the sun-earth libration point (that point in space where a satellite is suspended in a gravitational equilibrium between the sun and the earth-moon system) and the first to traverse the earth's distant geomagnetic tail. ISEE-3 also was the first spacecraft to make multiple swings by the moon and the first to use a lunar gravity-assist maneuver for targeting-escape trajectory. It made more gravity-assist maneuvers (five) than any other spacecraft. After the spacecraft completed most of the objectives of its original mission, it remained in good operational condition and had approximately 75% (150 lb.) of its total propellant reserves (200 lb.). Engineers at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), under the leadership of Dr. Robert Farquhar, developed a plan that would divert ISEE-3 from its libration point orbit, take it past the moon five times, and propel it out toward Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although the spacecraft was not designed for cometary investigation (it had no cameras or dust detectors), GSFC scientists believed it was well-suited for measurements of a comet's plasma properties, a chief objective of cometary exploration. In addition, the trajectory developed by Farquhar and his colleagues brought the spacecraft within range of a March 1986 upstream intercept of Comet Halley. That 1986 upstream pass, following an October 31, 1985 distant pass, was important because ICE would provide data on the solar-wind state upstream from Halley and earth-based telescopes would then observe the effect of the solar wind on Halley's tail. The spacecraft would return in July 2012 to the vicinity of earth, where a lunar gravity-assist maneuver could place the spacecraft into an earth orbit from which it might be retrievable. (NASA Release 85-121)
An accident at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) today damaged the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery and injured a technician, forcing delay in the orbiter's next flight originally scheduled for March 29, the Washington Post reported. The accident occurred about 8 a.m. when the bucket of a "cherry picker" crane hovering over Discovery fell, hitting a Lockheed technician who was on a work platform and then striking Discovery, which was horizontal on the floor of the orbital processing facility. The 2,500-lb. bucket broke the technician's leg and injured his shoulder, then fell onto the closed left-hand cargo bay door, which was so thin and made of such light-weight material that it could not be opened on earth without elaborate supports to keep it in a fixed position. The bucket made two holes about three feet apart in the heat protection tiles insulating the door and damaged the door's structure. A NASA spokesman said an investigating board would determine the cause of the accident, extent of the damage, and impact on the flight schedule. Officials speculated that NASA would have to replace the 2,400-lb. door, which would require shipment of a new door from the manufacturer and as many as three or four days of work to complete installation. (W Post, Mar 9/ 85, A2)
Presidential Science Advisor Dr. George Keyworth said to the U.S. House aviation subcommittee today that the U.S. was in the forefront of an unprecedented revolution in aeronautical technology, Defense Daily reported, and he called for an immediate start by the country on a streamlined, focused, and coordinated program by both government and industry to develop the necessary technology to field—before the end of the century-hypersonic transatmospheric passenger transport and space launch vehicles/military space planes. The latter could provide a two orders of magnitude reduction in the cost of transporting a pound of payload into orbit. Keyworth said he believed it was possible to develop the technology for the follow-ons to current commercial jetliners and the Space Shuttle under one R&D program. Although he was not certain if one vehicle could fill both roles, he predicted that the vehicles would be "very similar." Keyworth did not give specifics about funding requirements or a timetable but said that the government should in the course of the coming fall's discussions of the FY 87 budget focus on the opportunities available in the hypersonic area. Alluding to the British view that they could build the HOTOL (Horizontal Take-Off and Landing) transatmospheric vehicle by 1997, Key-worth said it was possible for the U.S. to exceed that goal. He noted that the Reagan Administration over the next few months would work with the aerospace industry to develop a program focusing on well-defined goals and added that he hoped NASA and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency would appropriately budget funds to make the program stand out. Keyworth said he was not talking about tomorrow's technology in the hypersonic area but technology that "is here" waiting to be assembled. At the same hearing, Rep. Tom Lewis (R-Fla.) said the British claimed that the HOTOL would be able to put payloads in orbit at one-half to one-fifth the cost of the Space Shuttle, and that they would capture 75% of the commercial launch market by the year 2000. Deputy Assistant Commerce Secretary Crawford Brubaker added that Britain had closed to the outside world all information about the engines being developed for HOTOL, so "they think they have made a breakthrough" on those engines. It was reported that a combination of Rolls-Royce conceived, airbreathing engines using atmospheric oxygen and liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engines would power HOTOL. (D/D, July 25/85, 129)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center announced the launch at 6:01 a.m. DST today of a single-stage Orion sounding rocket from its Wallops Flight Facility to evaluate electrical fields and charged particles in earth's middle atmosphere. The Orion, about 16 feet long and 14 inches in diameter, carried the 90-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 52 statute miles, after which a Wallops Skyvan aircraft recovered the payload in mid-air. NASA launched the experiment from the Poker Flat Research Range (PFRR) in Alaska on April 12, 1985; however, snow cover hindered payload recovery. On August 26 a sheep hunting party found the payload and its parachute floating on Beaver Creek in the White Mountains, Alaska and returned it to the PFRR. Range officials on September 23 sent the payload to Wallops for refurbishment for today's launch. NASA tentatively scheduled for July 1986 another launch of the experiment in Sweden. (GSFC Release 85-29)
$341,496,165. Under the contract, the company would provide system integration, selected flight hardware, software, ground support equipment, and mission integration support for manifested Spacelab missions. Spacelab, developed by NASA under an international agreement with the European Space Agency, when carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter converted it into an orbiting scientific research center. MSFC was responsible for monitoring Spacelab design and development activities and for management of U.S. development of selected Spacelab components. (MSFC Release 85-53)
30 p.m. they had done in four hours a job given them to complete in five. NASA referred to the first activity as ACCESS (assembly concept for construction of erectable space structures), researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center explained, and the second as EASE (experimental assembly of structures in extravehicular activity). Together they were the first flight demonstration of construction of large space structures, so called because they were distinguished by different assembly methods and physical characteristics. The astronauts used no tools in the construction, rather they snapped together prefabricated components to form the EASE/ACCESS structures. EASE/ACCESS should provide NASA with valuable on-orbit construction experience as well as a comparison of assembly rates and techniques used in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tank tests. The activity should also help evaluate potential assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques for the proposed space station and identify ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. TV views at NASA Headquarters showed the astronauts trading places twice during their work and appearing in almost complete control of a job that had never been done before in space. Ross had the only complaint, saying his gloved hands were sweating and that he was using too much oxygen. When the two had finished assembling the six required pyramids, astronaut David Leetsma at mission control told them to take a break. "I'd be willing to do at least one more," Ross replied. "It feels good to do some good hard work." The two then proceeded to begin work again. Spring once hit his feet against the tower, and Ross by mistake hit a switch with his hand that turned on an outside light, the only "accidents" that occurred during the exercise, although they triggered a warning from Atlantis's commander Brewster Shaw, Jr. "You guys are going great but just remember to be careful. The way that thing shakes up there, it's not going to be easy to chase anything down if it breaks loose," he cautioned. (WPost, Nov 30/85, A1; Marshall Space Flight Center Release 85-60)
NASA announced it had selected six industry teams for negotiations leading to 21-month fixed-price contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements for a permanently manned space station. Four NASA centers previously did this work. The responsible centers and the industry teams selected for negotiations were: Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) with Boeing Aerospace Co., Seattle, and Martin Marietta Aerospace, Denver; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) with RCA Astro Electronics, Princeton, New Jersey, and General Electric Co., Space Systems Division, Philadelphia; and Lewis Research Center (LeRC) with Rockwell Internatl., Rocketdyne Division, Canoga Park, California, and TRW Federal Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif. In addition, NASA would negotiate with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale, California; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, California; and Rockwell Internatl., Space Station Systems Division, Downey California, the proposers for work to be performed under the management of Johnson Space Center (JSC). Negotiators would present a report to the NASA Administrator who would then award one or more contracts. Although negotiations would determine values of the contracts, the September 14, 1984, Request for Proposal (RFP) indicated that the approximate value of contracts could be $24 million at MSFC, $27 million at JSC, $10 million at GSFC, and $6 million at LeRC. In addition to Phase B work, NASA required the contractors to study how those elements of the space station would change depending on whether the station was man-tended rather than permanently manned and to pay particular attention to the recommendations of the NASA advanced technology advisory committee that was identifying automation and robotic technologies that could be used in the space station. Following completion of the contracts, NASA planned to move into final design and development (Phase C/D) of the space station. A major objective of the space station program was to involve international partners as builders, users, and operators of the space station. The European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan had indicated interest in participating. They would provide their own funding and award definition and preliminary design contracts in coordination with NASA activities. NASA, through JSC management, would retain responsibility for overall program definition and for systems engineering and integration throughout the program. (NASA Release 85-38)
NASA announced it was discussing with representatives of the Chilean Government possible arrangements for landing support for the Space Shuttle in the event of an emergency during launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The discussions were consistent with arrangements made with other countries since 1981 supporting launches from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning provided for emergency landing options for all phases of the flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. Since the first launch of the Space Shuttle from KSC, NASA had plans for each mission for trans-Atlantic landing sites (TAL) and contingency landing sites (CLS) in addition to the primary landing sites. This was consistent with relevant international agreements relating to the rescue and recovery of astronauts in distress and return of the space vehicle. Space Shuttle launches, scheduled to begin from Vandenberg in early 1986, required one or more trans-Pacific landing (TPL) and CLS sites in the Pacific Basin. NASA had determined that Mataveri Airfield on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) could serve as a Space Shuttle TPL/CLS in the event of an emergency. A Chilean contractor was working on preliminary designs for minor improvements at the airfield, which would be necessary in the event an agreement was reached. Improvements would be in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island. Any actual improvements were contingent on final agreement with the Government of Chile. (NASA Release 85-74)
At a news conference to discuss the recent flights of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgiy Grechko, Soviet space officials said today that they expected to have a permanently manned space station by 1990, but that the Salyut 7 orbital laboratory would not be the spacecraft that hosted the rotating crews, the NY Times reported. Oleg Gazenko, head of the health ministry's Biomedical Problems Institute, which oversaw space medicine, said no unresolved problems remained to block development of the permanent station and that the crew rotation on Salyut 7 showed that incoming cosmonauts performed their research work better when they were spared the start-up operations needed to reactivate the space laboratory. At about the same time, Soviet officials told a U.S. Congressional delegation headed by Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) [see U.S. Space Policy/International, Oct. 10] that it was building a new space station that would be ready for launch in 1986, Defense Daily reported. Because the Soviets did not want to have two space stations in orbit at the same time, timing of the launch depended on the condition of the orbiting Salyut 7station, which was nearly doubled in size in September by the orbiting and deployment of a large new module. Nelson said the Soviets gave no details of the new station, which, if it is designed to be permanently manned, would beat the planned U.S. space station by seven or eight years. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C11; D/D, Oct 21/85, 259) October31: The Soviet Union, which had kept its space program under tight military control since it launched in 1957 the first satellite, announced creation of a civilian space agency, the NY Times reported. The agency would be responsible for the design, construction, and use of spacecraft for scientific research, remote sensing applications such as surveys of resources and crops, and joint space programs with other countries. In making the announcement, the government newspaper Izvestia identified the new agency as the Main Administration for the Creation and Use of Space Technology for the Economy and for Scientific Research, the Post said. It would be known as Glavkosmos, an acronym for the Russian terms "main" and "space." Izvestia did not specify the position of the agency in the Soviet government's table of organization but did identify the head of the agency as A. I. Dunayev. The only other publicly disclosed space-related agency in the Soviet Union was the Space Research Institute, founded in 1965 and a unit of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Western officials generally regarded that institute as performing some civilian space coordinating functions. However, in announcing Glavkosmos, Izvestia said, "It goes without saying that the effective use of space technology is of interest to many government ministries and agencies and to scientific organizations. The space program has reached such scope as to require the creation of a special coordinating agency." According to the announcement, the new agency would consider proposals for projects, work out long-term plans, and administer programs. It would also be responsible for launching satellites on vehicles expected to be supplied by the military and for collection and dissemination of satellite information. Izvestia said the agency would administer the Intercosmos program and the search and rescue satellite program, an international effort of the Soviet Union, the U.S., Canada, and France. The announcement did not make clear whether the new agency would administer any manned flights; but the emphasis seemed to be on automated space vehicles concerned with remote sensing, which until then had been part of the Cosmos series, a mixture of nearly 1700 civilian and military satellites launched since 1962. (NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13)
McDonnell Douglas Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Sanford McDonnell in a letter to Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger explained a company policy that instituted "expanded, no-questions-asked" refund policies on the sale of spare parts and support equipment to the U.S., foreign countries, and commercial customers worldwide, Defense Daily reported. McDonnell said the government could return "any covered spare part or piece of support equipment if there is any dissatisfaction with its cost—no questions asked." McDonnell described the refund policy as the most comprehensive in the aerospace industry and said that if the military felt it must retain an item in stock for operational readiness, "their complaint will be addressed without concern for a time limit." Under the new policy, the military could, if dissatisfied with the price, return within six months of delivery new and unused parts or equipment built by McDonnell Douglas and purchased under prime contracts. The company said the policy applied to prices to the government up to $100,000; at that level the company furnished cost data in advance of establishing price. Earlier Weinberger directed establishment of a standard industry-wide refund policy based on voluntary refund policies of Boeing Co. and the General Electric Co. The Boeing/General Electric refund programs accepted for credit the return of any spare parts or support equipment that the Pentagon considered to be unreasonably priced. (D/D, Aug 2/85, 1)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) selected Boeing Aerospace Operations, General Electric Co., Grumman Technical Service Inc., Hughes Aircraft Co., Messerschmidt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno (the West German firm that produced Spacelab), and McDonnell Douglas Technical Services to serve as prime assessment teams to observe payload processing activities, the Spaceport News reported. KSC made the selection in connection with the initiation of a competitive procurement for a single payload ground operations contract (PCOC) during the Space Transportation System's operational period. NASA expected to request proposals from the companies near the end of 1985 or the beginning of 1986 and would award a contract during fall 1986. This contract along with those for shuttle processing and base operations were the last major contracts to streamline operations as the Space Transportation System matured. The PCOC contract would consolidate operations, minimize interfaces, and focus clear responsibility on a single payload contractor at KSC. Under the new arrangement, NASA would consolidate work then performed by four KSC contractors into a single contractor with prime responsibility for processing of payloads at KSC, primarily for the Space Shuttle. Other contract duties would include sustaining engineering, communications, instrumentation, and telemetry operations, and miscellaneous support. (Spaceport News, Sept 13/85, 1)
A C-5A aircraft carrying the German Spacelab D-1, the first payload in the history of U.S. manned spaceflight to be controlled from another country, landed May 1 at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Space Shuttle runway, Spaceport News reported. The Federal German Aerospace Research Establishment's (DFVLR) German Space Operations Center in Oberpfaf-fenhofen near Munich would have responsibility for the 80 Spacelab D-1 (D for Deutschland) experiments. During the welcoming ceremony, (KSC) Director Dick Smith said, "We are looking forward to giving your payload 'tender loving care' and seeing it launched aboard the shuttle and getting it safely returned to you after the mission." Germany's Parliamentary State Secretary Albert Probst responded, "We are pleased to take part in this event and consider the joint ventures between the Federal Republic of Germany, Europe, and the U.S. in manned space flight to be a good example of international cooperation." Spacelab D-1, scheduled to fly on the seven-day Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia mission 61-A no earlier than October 16, consisted of a long Spacelab module containing the space sled and a unique support structure. Half of the D-1 experiments were from Germany, the remainder from the U.S. and European countries. Investigations included the vestibular sled, a device driven by an electromotor and traction rope, positioned in the center aisle of the Spacelab module, in which astronauts would serve as test subjects to collect information on human reactions to the equilibrium sensing system; the Biorack for botanical and medical/physiological experiments; the navigation experiment (NAVEX) to test systems performance of clock synchronization and one-way distance measurement; the materials experiment assembly (MEA) that would use Marshall Space Flight Center furnaces and alloy, fluid physics, and crystal growth investigations. The DFVLR, the result of a merger of three organizations and employing about 3,500 people in five research centers, would also participate in the European Retrieval Carrier (EURECA), a free-flying apparatus of experiments, and project "Columbus," internationally manned space station modules. (Spaceport News, May 10/85, 5)
NASA announced that through a cooperative effort with Satellite Communications for Learning Worldwide (SCOLA), it would televise live via satellite to hundreds of high schools, colleges, and universities across the U.S. all the science events on the Space Shuttle Discovery following its launch no earlier than April 12 from KSC. Two days prior to launch, NASA scientists and engineers would conduct a permission videoconference with the schools to acquaint students and teachers with the planned mission and science experiments. Students from selected schools would ask questions of the NASA briefers. NASA's educational affairs office was providing Discovery mission and educational materials to the participating schools. SCOLA, an association of schools, colleges, and universities based at Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska, was one of the largest voluntary associations of institutional satellite antenna owners in the U.S. (NASA Release 85-51)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced it awarded Honeywell Inc., Avionics Division, a $14,900,000 contract for fabrication and delivery of three flight inertial measurement groups (IMG) for the Shuttle/Centaur guidance and navigation system, which maintained a fixed reference orientation for and measured acceleration of the Centaur. Work under the sole-source firm-fixed-price contract would begin in May 1985 at the contractor's plant in Clearwater, Florida. NASA was modifying the Centaur, which had launched domestic and military communications satellites and sent spacecraft to investigate planetary systems, to fit into the Space Shuttle. NASA would first use the Shuttle Centaur combination to launch the Galileo and then the Ulysses missions. (LeRC Release 85-40)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft's (SCA) functional check flight was successfully flown today following engine repairs made in accordance with specifications. The SCA would fly the Atlantis orbiter to Kennedy Space Center on April 12, with one refueling stop. (NASA Daily Activities Report, Apr 11/85)
Observations by the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) revealed what appeared to be a variable gas cloud surrounding the star Beta Pictoris. This was the first evidence of gas around the star as well as the large dust particles previously observed from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) and ground-based telescopes, the JSC Roundup reported. Many astronomers considered Beta Pictoris, in the constellation Pictor in the southern hemisphere, a leading candidate for another planetary system. Dr. Yoji Kondo, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) IUE project scientist, and Dr. F.C. Bruhweiler of Catholic University jointly made the observations in December and said the coexisting dust and gas clouds were consistent with scientific theories of planetary system formation. "Many stars like Beta Pictoris show evidence of being surrounded by clouds of gas at ultraviolet wavelengths," said Kondo. "If such data imply that these stars also are surrounded by a protoplanetary gaseous cloud with a disk of dust particles, then many nearby stars may have evolving planetary systems. That's exciting," he concluded, "because these stars would offer a unique opportunity to see the way a solar system might appear in formation." Theories of planet formation had generally predicted that planets evolved from large stellar clouds of dust and gas that gradually condensed into orbiting planetary bodies, a theory strengthened by the IUE observations. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 3)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) planetary scientist Steve Ostro recently completed a five-year study of asteroids located in a belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, the JPL Universe reported, and then turned his attention to observing near-earth asteroids using the world's most powerful radar telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. "Some asteroids are among the most primitive planetesimals—the matter which accreted to form the solar system," Ostro said. "Asteroids are every bit as exciting as comets and potentially the most important objects in our solar system," he pointed out. Asteroids constituted an enormous and diverse population, ranging in size from a few hundred meters to 1,000 km, and varying in composition, spin rate, and shape. Most asteroids were in the belt Ostro had studied and were thought to be the remnants of a planet that failed to form due to Jupiter's gravitational influence. However, many other asteroids tumbled through space close to and sometimes across earth's orbit. Some scientists believed near-earth asteroids could be the nuclei of burned-out comets. "We really don't know what the nucleus of a comet is," Ostro said. "Comets might eventually lose all of their volatile compounds and then travel as asteroids." And scientists believed asteroids were some of the most primitive objects in the solar system. "We really have a spectrum of asteroids—some of the primitive material left from the solar nebula all the way up to those that are highly evolved," Ostro commented. "So asteroids are a laboratory for studying the evolution of planets and other planetary objects." No spacecraft had ever explored an asteroid, nor had scientists obtained an image of an asteroid's surface. That was why many planetary scientists believed JPL's proposed Comet Rendezvous/Asteroid Flyby mission was critical to understanding not only comets and asteroids, but also the history of the solar system. Another JPL planetary scientist, Eleanor Helin, recently discovered a nearearth asteroid with a 36-inch telescope located in Caussols, France. The asteroid, designated 1985-PA and the 22nd asteroid discovered by JPL researchers, had a small elongated orbit highly inclined to the ecliptic plane; scientists had discovered only two other near-earth asteroids with orbital inclinations higher than 1985-PA. Helin said the asteroid's inclination suggested it could have had a close encounter with Mars and been knocked into the steeply inclined orbit. At discovery the asteroid was moderately bright—measuring at 16.5 magnitude—and reddish, indicating the asteroid was probably a stony, silicaceous body. (JPL Universe, Nov 1/85, 1 and 2)
measure the response of the GAS Bridge to the Space Shuttle environment during liftoff, orbit, and landing (GSFC). RCA developed the IR-IE infrared camera, and during the mission payload specialist Rober Cenker would supervise its operation to acquire radiometric information that appeared within the field of view of the self-contained optical system. RCA hoped it might photograph storms, volcanic activity, or other natural occurrences. Middeck payloads would include the Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP) [see Astronomy, Dec. 17], Initial Blood Storage Experiment (IBSE), Protein Crystal Growth (PC 6), and three student experiments. IBSE, funded by Johnson Space Center and led by the Center for Blood Research, would study blood storage and sedimentation characteristics in microgravity. Rep. Bill Nelson would assist with an experiment sponsored by the University of Alabama, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Comprehensive Cancer Center to try to grow crystal proteins in space for cancer research. There would be three Shuttle Student Involvement Project (SSIP) experiments on board Columbia. In the Measurement of Auxin Level and Starch Grains in Plant Roots experiment, bean plants would be grown and frozen in space. Researchers would analyze the plant roots after the flight for auxin location and concentration and correlation with statolith in the cells. The Air Injection as an Alternative To Honeycombing experiment would investigate the feasibility of producing a high stiffness, density ratio, low-weight casting with an internal framework. And the Study of Paper Fiber Formation in Microgravity experiment would further increase basic papermaking knowledge through a drainage study of paper fiber formation in microgravity and later comparison to this same formation on earth. NASA scheduled Columbia to land on the sixth day of the flight at KSC, the first landing there since mission 51-D on April 19, 1985. (NASA Release 85107; NASA FOR M-989-61-C [prelaunch] Dec 16/85; Spaceport News, Dec 6/85, 4; Goddard News, Dec 85, 1) Shuttle Orbiter
NASA announced that Rockwell Internatl. Corp. made significant additions to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to accommodate three research experiments that would measure orbiter aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics as it reentered earth's atmosphere. Researchers would use the flight data to develop future generation space transportation systems. The most obvious change was a cylindrical housing that replaced the fintip atop the vertical tail. The new experiment pod, containing equipment for the shuttle infrared leeside temperature sensing (SILTS) experiment, was approximately 20 in. in diameter and was capped at the leading edge by a spherical dome. SILTS would obtain high-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of Columbia's port wing and fuselage as the orbiter reentered the atmosphere, providing detailed temperature maps at the surface of the leeside thermal protection materials and indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating of surfaces in flight. Tape recorders would store experiment data. Infrared cameras mounted inside the dome would view Columbia's left wing and fuselage through two windows protected during launch from debris by plugs that filled the window cavities and that fell away when the experiment began about 400,000 feet above earth at reentry. Injection of gaseous nitrogen into the cavities would cool the cameras during that period. For the shuttle entry air data system (SEADS) experiment, a new nosecap had 14 penetration assemblies distributed about its surface, each containing a small hole through which local surface air pressure was measured from an altitude of about 56 miles through landing. This would allow precise postflight determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming air-stream and the density of the atmosphere through which the vehicle was flying. The shuttle upper atmosphere mass spectrometer (SUMS) would complement the SEADS experiment by providing atmospheric density information at altitudes above 50 miles. SUMS would sample air at Columbia's surface through a small hole, located just aft of the nosecap, to measure the number of molecules of various gas species in order to determine the atmospheric density that, with vehicle motion information, would allow determination of orbiter aerodynamic characteristics at altitudes where the atmosphere was extremely thin. NASA originally developed the SUMS mass spectrometer for the Viking spacecraft that landed in 1976 on Mars and modified it to operate in the orbiter's reentry flight environment. NASA' Langley Research Center developed the experiments as part of the orbiter experiments program managed by NASA's office of aeronautics and space technology. (NASA Release 85-127)
NASA announced that it had named effective immediately John Hodge acting associate administrator for space station. Hodge became director of the Space Station Task Force on its establishment in May 1982 and was appointed deputy director of the Interim Space Station Program Office in April 1984 when the task force completed its work. He directed activities that resulted in the initial concepts definition for the space station, established program management policies, initiated advanced development programs, defined user needs, and organized potential international cooperation. In 1984 NASA appointed Hodge deputy associate administrator for Space Station, coinciding with establishment of the Office of Space Station. Hodge joined NASA in 1959, after working with Vickers-Armstrong, Ltd. and AVRO Aircraft Ltd., as chief of Flight Control, supervising a team of over 200 technical and administrative personnel and 100 aerospace contractors and serving as flight director for Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo flights. In 1970 Hodge worked for the Department of Transportation as director of transportation systems concepts at the Transportation Systems Center and later became associate administrator for Policy, Plans and Program Management before rejoining NASA. Hodge received a B.S. degree in engineering from Northampton Engineering College in London and in 1966 the honorary degree of Doctor of Science from the City University, London. (NASA anno., Dec 26/85) NASA Installations Ames Research Center
NASA announced that its deep space network (DSN), as part of a French-led international tracking network, would track the first of two international balloon experiments carried aboard the Soviet VEGA spacecraft to study beginning June 10 Venus's atmosphere. The VEGA 1 and 2 spacecraft each would drop an instrumented lander and an instrument-laden balloon into the Venusian atmosphere as they approached the planet on their way to a March 1986 rendezvous with Halley's Comet. After reaching the equatorial regions of Vfenus's atmosphere, the balloons would float free in the middle, most active, layer of Venus's three-tiered clouds. The flight plan called for the entry packages, consisting of the atmospheric balloon and a lander, to plunge from a 125-km (78 miles) to a 65-km (40 miles) altitude, where a parachute would deploy. The lander would separate from the balloon at 63 km (39 miles) and head for the surface. The balloon would then inflate and carry its instrument package through the atmosphere at an altitude of 55 km (34 miles) for more than two days. NASA's deep space network and other stations around the world would use a technique called very long baseline interferometry to measure the balloon's velocity, and therefore the wind velocity, with a precision of about 3 km (2 miles) per hour at Venus's about 108 million-km (67 million miles) distance from earth. A Soviet internal network would also track the balloons. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory was cooperating with the French National Space Agency (CNES), Paris, in the tracking activity. Scientists believed data from the balloons would further their understanding of Venus's complex weather system. (NASA Release 85-87) Management and Personnel
The National Science Foundation (NSF) in its Science Resources Studies Highlights reported that since 1980, annual increases in federal support of industry-performed research and development, primarily as a result of Department of Defense funding, had outpaced growth in company-financed R&D expenditures. In 1983 federal funding of industrial R&D performance amounted to $20.4 billion, 11% more than the 1982 level (7% in constant 1972 dollars), whereas industry's own R&D spending increased 8%. Federal and company funds together in 1983 were up 9% to a total of $62.9 billion. An NSF projection for 1984 placed total industrial R&D expenditures at $70.5 billion, 12% over the 1983 level. Companies in aircraft/missiles and electrical equipment industries received more than three-fourths of all R&D funds provided by the government. Industrial firms spent $42.5 billion of their own funds on R&D in 1983; between 1975 and 1980 the average annual constant-dollar rate of growth in company R&D financing was 6.6%, which slowed to 4.9% over the following 3-year period. The number of full-time-equivalent (FTE) R&D scientists and engineers in industry rose 3% during 1983 to 538,000. The electrical equipment industry, which employed over one-fifth of industrial R&D scientists and engineers, showed the highest gain—6%. (Science Resources Studies Highlights, June 21/85, 1)
The Soyuz T-14 spacecraft carrying three Soviet cosmonauts made an unscheduled return to earth today because its commander, Vladimir Vasyutin, was ill and needed hospital treatment, the Washington Post quoted the official news agency Tass as saying. The illness forced the crew to leave the Salyut 7 orbiting laboratory, the first time in either the Soviet or U.S. programs that a spaceflight was curtailed because a crew member became sick in orbit, the Washington Times said. Vasyutin, who was making his first flight, landed after spending 65 days in space. He, Viktor Savinykh, and Alexander Volkov, who were both reported feeling well, had been conducting scientific experiments aboard Salyut 7. Tass gave no details of Vasyutin's illness, but western space experts said it was unlikely he was suffering from a simple case of space sickness—the inability to acclimatize properly to conditions in space. The Tass report quoted doctors who performed a preliminary examination on Vasyutin as saying his condition was satisfactory. The unscheduled return of the cosmonauts left the Salyut 7, which had been in orbit since April 1982, unmanned for the first time since June. Almost a week later, the Post reported that officials at Johnson Space Center said that cosmonauts who stayed in touch with U.S. astronauts had said Vasyutin caught a cold that grew worse and spread to his sinus cavity and lungs. The sources said Vasyutin had a fever that refused to break and may have come down with viral pneumonia, which was untreatable with the antibiotics the cosmonauts carried. (IV Post, Nov 22/85, A26, 27/85, A3; W Times, Nov 22/85, 2A)
The Space Shuttle Enterprise arrived the afternoon of November 18 at Washington Dulles International Airport after a two-hour delay due to inclement weather, the Washington Post reported. NASA had announced earlier that it would transfer title to Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum [see Smithsonian Institution, Nov. 8], NASA delayed Enterprise's takeoff from Kennedy Space Center until an early morning fog burned off so more people along the route could see the craft. Enterprise, atop a Boeing 747, was visible to onlookers in Annapolis and Baltimore before it began a counterclockwise circuit over Washington's Capital Beltway. Officials at Dulles would store the spacecraft in a temporary shed about two miles from the airport terminal until a permanent facility was constructed. (IVPost, Nov 19/85, Bl) SPACE SCIENCE AND APPLICATIONS
NASA announced selection of the scientific investigators whose projects would be included on the proposed Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), an observatory that would operate in low-earth orbit for at least 15 years. A spacecraft carrying an array of instruments and providing power, precise pointing, and data transmission would house the observatory containing a 1.2m diameter, 10m focal length telescope. AXAF construction could begin around 1987-88 with launch approximately five years later. In orbit, AXAF would join the Hubble Space Telescope, scheduled for launch in 1986, and the Gamma-Ray Observatory, planned for a 1988 launch. The three observatories, together with the planned Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would provide simultaneous observations of cosmic sources over infrared, visable, ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma-ray wavelengths. Those selected included instrument principal investigators to design and fabricate scientific instrumentation for placement in the telescope focal plane, interdisciplinary scientists to provide expertise on X-ray astrophysics and other fields of astronomy, and a telescope scientist to guide telescope fabrication. Instrument principal investigators selected were Dr. Gordon Garmire, Pennsylvania State University (charged coupled device imaging spectroscopy); Dr. Steven Murray, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (high-resolution camera); Dr. Stephen Holt, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) (X-ray spectroscopy investigation for the AXAF); Dr. Claude Canizares, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy using AXAF); and Dr. Albert Brinkman, University of Utrecht, Netherlands (high throughput transmission grating for cosmic X-ray spectroscopy). Interdisciplinary scientists selected were Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, Space Telescope Science Institute (advanced X-ray astrophysics facility mission); Dr. Jeffrey Linsky, National Bureau of Standards (the coronal structures of selected cool stars and close binary systems); Dr. Richard Mushotzky, GSFC (a program to measure the mass of galaxies and clusters of galaxies with AXAF); Dr. Andrew Wilson, University of Maryland (studies of radio jets and the narrow line regions of active galaxies with AXAF); and Dr. Andrew Fabian, Cambridge University, United Kingdom (cooling flows in clusters and galaxies). Dr. Leon Vay Speybroeck, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, would serve as telescope scientist. The investigators, as members of the AXAF science working group, would provide scientific and technical guidance throughout the project and would receive a specified amount of time to use the telescope during its first 30 operational months. Astronomers from the U.S. and around the world would . use the majority of observing time. Marshall Space Flight Center managed the AXAF project for NASA's astrophysics division, Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release
NASA announced that Acting Administrator William Graham confirmed the appointment for an indefinite period of Philip Culbertson, associate administrator for space station, to the position of NASA general manager. In that capacity he would assist Graham and have specific responsibility for the Offices of Space Science and Applications, Commercial Programs, Space Flight, Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space Station, and Space Tracking and Data Systems. Culbertson had held his current position since August 1, 1984, coinciding with the establishment of the Office of Space Station. Since November 1981 he had been associate deputy administrator, serving as senior staff advisor to the administrator and the deputy administrator and directing the formulation of policy, strategy, and planning for the space station. From 1979 to 1981 he served as assistant for the Space Transportation System (STS), providing continuous assessment of STS development, acquisition, and operations status and otherwise advising the administrator and deputy administrator on STS matters requiring policy decisions. His earlier NASA assignments included the positions of deputy associate administrator for STS/technical, assistant administrator for planning and program integration, director of advanced manned missions, and manager of the institutional assessment conducted in 1977. He also served as the NASA representative in the 1979 antisatellite treaty negotiations and in 1976 and 1977 was detailed to the Executive Office for a five-month period as Executive Director of the President's Committee on Science and Technology. Culbertson received a B.S. in aeronautical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology and served as a commissioned officer in the U.S. Navy, after which he spent four years as a research associate at the University of Michigan, where he received his M.S. degree in aeronautical engineering. (NASA anno., Dec 6/85)
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
The 16th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, March 11-16 at Johnson Space Center (JSC), would highlight exploration programs planned by the U.S. and the USSR, including a discussion of major trends in space science and the possible role of the space station in planetary exploration, JSC announced. Speakers at the special session would include Dr. Geoffrey Briggs, director of the Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Headquarters; Dr. V. L. Barsukov, Vernadsky Institute of Sciences; Dr. Eugene Levey, chairman of the Planetary Sciences Department, University of Arizona; and Dr. Ronald Greely, a planetary scientist from Arizona State University. Other sessions of major significance would be the Florensky Memorial Symposium on Venus, possibly including results from the Soviet Venusian probes, and the Shergotty Consortium, focusing on the debate concerning meteorites that may have originated from Mars's surface. Planners had scheduled 27 regular session with 315 oral presentations taken from 497 abstracts published in the official conference proceedings. (JSC Release 85-11)
During a news conference today at Johnson Space Center, Space Shuttle mission 51—F commander Gordon Fullerton said the Challenger's crew members could not endorse either the Coca-Cola or Fepsi-Cola they carried into space for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Both drinks were warm, fizzy, and full of froth whenever the crew tried to drink them. "They both failed miserably, mainly because we had no refrigerator. Warm cola is not on anybody's favorite list of things . . . They just weren't at the right temperature and we had no desire to drain the cans the two drinks came in," Fullerton said. He added that, although the crew suffered no gastric distress from drinking the two colas, "I just can't extrapolate to any great desire to want them." When reporters asked the seven crew members if they would forsake the fruit juices they usually drank for the colas if the colas were refrigerated, they all shook their heads. "The drinks we have on board now are quite attractive," said astronaut Anthony England. (W Times, Aug 15/85, A8)
NASA announced that S. Neil Hosenball, NASA general counsel since 1975, would retire on August 2 to become director of the University of Colorado's new Center For Space Law and Policy. Before appointment to his current position, Hosenball served as deputy general counsel since October 1967. Earlier he had been assistant general counsel for procurement and had served for four years at Lewis Research Center. From 1970 to 1979, Hosenball was a member of the U.S. delegation to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and headed the U.S. delegation at legal subcommittee and committee sessions. Hosenball, who received a B.S. degree from the University of Michigan and his LL.B. degree from Harvard Law School, was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1967, the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1973, the National Civil Service League Career Service Medal in 1980, and the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive in 1983. The Center for Space and Law Policy, established in November 1984, was one of a very few such institutions in the world and was intended to guide the university in its space research efforts. (NASA Release 85-104)
NASA announced that, effective October 13, Carroll Dicus, Jr. was appointed chairman of the NASA Board of Contract Appeals and chairman of the Inventions and Contributions Board, succeeding Frederick Lees who retired in September. From 1968 to 1974 Dicus was an attorney in the chief counsel's office at Goddard Space Flight Center and from March 1974 to October 1980 an administrative judge on the NASA Board of Contract Appeals. He then went to the U.S. Postal Service where he was an associate judicial officer and vice chairman of the Board of Contract Appeals. Dicus is a graduate of Johns Hopkins University and the University of Baltimore Law School. (NASA anno., Oct 85)
In order to improve communications among Indonesia's Eastern Island University's member campuses, which were spread over 1,600 miles of ocean, NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) recently supervised installation of a solar power system for a teleconferencing center and earth station in the village of Wawotobi. The earth station provided the communications link among Wawotobi, Djakarta, and an earth communications satellite system and helped make the member campuses' scarce professors, research findings, and library resources more widely available to the rapidly increasing number of students throughout the region. The teleconferencing center, a classroom large enough for 50 people, was equipped with a speaker system, microphones, a telecopier, an electronic blackboard, and a computer graphics display. The system was interactive and could connect with 11 main campus locations of the Eastern Island University Association and a conference room in the offices of the Director General of Higher Education in Djakarta. Purpose of the teleconferencing system was to demonstrate the use of satellite communication in developing countries, and the solar power system showed the feasibility and practicality of solar (photovoltaic) power systems for small earth stations in remote areas. Although diesel electric generators generally powered earth stations in the absence of conventional power lines, the high cost of diesel fuel and the high operation, security, and maintenance costs for diesel generators made use of a photovoltaic system attractive. The total photovoltaic array capacity to power the earth station at Wawotobi was 1.5 kilowatts, and LeRC expected the battery used in conjunction with the array to last about 10 years. The photovoltaic array had a life expectancy of more than 20 years. The existing satellite system provided national communications services by radio, telephone, and telegraph to the 5000 inhabited islands. Hughes Aircraft Co. was prime contractor for the photovoltaic power system, and their subcontractor in Indonesia was P. T. Elektrindo Nusantara. LeRC and Hughes would provide operations support for repair, maintenance, and spare parts through June 1986, when NASA would turn over complete responsibility for the system to PERUMTAL, the Indonesian national telecommunications authority. The project completed the renewable energy systems programs managed by LeRC for the Department of Energy and the U.S. Agency for International Development. Since 1976 LeRC had been responsible for the installation of 71 photovoltaic power systems in 27 countries and the United States. These systems provided power for entire villages for water pumps, grain grinders, lights, vaccine refrigerators, schools, highway signs, forest lookout towers, insect traps, rural dispensaries, and the Wawotobi teleconferencing center/ earth station. (NASA Release 85-176) PEOPLES REPUBLIC OF CHINA
NASA announced that NASA Administrator James Beggs and Japanese Minister of State for Science and Technology, Reiichi Takeuchi, signed that day in Tokyo a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for the conduct of a cooperative program concerning detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned Space Station. Under the MOU, the U.S. and Japan would conduct and coordinate over the next two years parallel Phase B studies and exchange information. Japan would study an experimental module that had pressurized workspace and an exposed workdeck. Cooperation during the space station's development, operations, and use phases would require separate agreements. In a speech that day to the Federation of Japanese Economic Organizations, Beggs outlined initial uses of the space station and reported on specific projects undertaken by other countries participating in space station development. He then noted, ". . . in negotiating with our potential partners, NASA has emphasized that we view the space station as a potential long-term international partnership—one that should last for decades. Any nation that joins with us in such a full partnership must be prepared to make significant investments in the station, and also be prepared to help operate and use it. "We expect our partners to continue to shoulder responsibility for owning and maintaining their portions of the facility, while continuing to enjoy the overall benefits our joint efforts will make possible. And we expect their contributions to remain a permanent part of the station's infrastructure." Beggs then added, "To cement our long-term relationships, the United States will provide partners with assurance on equitable access to all of the space station's facilities. We also will protect their technology and intellectual property and ensure them suitable roles in the station's management and operation." (NASA Release 85-71, NASA Note To Editors, May 8/85)
The first test of a Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) component on June 19 ended in failure when crew members of the Space Shuttle Discovery found themselves 180° out of position to receive an Air Force signal beamed at them from Maui, Hawaii; another beam of laser light was sent on June 21 from the same spot, and it successfully bounced off a reflecting mirror on Discovery, which was flying at 17,500 miles per hour and 230 miles high, the Washington Post reported. It was not clear why Discovery was out of position for the first attempt or why the crew had not realized it in time to correct it. Flight directors at Johnson Space Center took the blame for what the newspaper called easily one of the worst navigating mistakes in more than 20 years of American manned space flight. After the successful attempt, the Air Force noted the test was not intended to solve any of the most difficult problems of setting up an SDI defense system, nor was it the first laser tracking test. Air Force Lt. Col. Thomas Meyer, manager of the laser test program, said the experiment was more a test to see how the atmosphere distorted the laser beam than a test of the beam's ability to track the Space Shuttle, as atmospheric distortion could limit the usefulness of ground-based lasers against targets in space. In the June 21 attempt, the laser beam "painted" a blue-green light on the nose of Discovery for at least two-and-one-half minutes, three times longer than the minimum time set by the Air Force. So tight and steady was the beam that it never wavered from the nose of orbiter, which measured 110 feet from nose to tail. "We were able to pulse the beam and change the size of the beam from a fine point a quarter of an inch across to a beam 30 feet across at the point where it tracked the shuttle," Meyer said. "We did everything we wanted to do." Discovery's crew observed from the port windows the beam shining on them, which they could do without danger to their eyes due to the low power output of the four-watt beacon. "We demonstrated today that we can track a fast-moving target with a laser on the ground," Meyer said. "Our next step is to perform the same kind of test with rockets fired to an altitude of 260 miles to see if ground-based lasers can stay with them all the way to altitude." A far more difficult and important goal than tracking objects with lasers was the Pentagon's plan to develop more powerful lasers as weapons. The Defense Department would test a 2-million-watt laser soon at White Sands Missile Range, and it was building a 5-million-watt laser. (W Post, June 20/85, A3, June 22/85, A3)
NASA announced that a cubic crystal art work, the first nonscientific payload to fly aboard a Space Shuttle, would go into space in the spring of 1986. "The Boundless Aperture," created by artist Lowry Burgess, was one in a series of seven works in a project entitled "Quiet Axis," intended to express through art the scientific observation of order and harmony in the universe. The De Cordova Museum, the New Works Program of the Massachusetts Council on the Arts and Humanities, and the Massachusetts Artists Foundation funded and would pay for launch of "The Boundless Aperture," which was a six-lb. five-inch sq. cube of bronze-tinted transparent glass. The cube contained such materials as water from 18 of the world's rivers and minute amounts, or an appropriate substitute, of each of the elements in the periodic table. After flying in a middeck locker of the Space Shuttle orbiter, the work would be placed inside a petrified sycamore tree obtained from the Grand Canyon; and both would hover in a permanent magnetic field inside a rock formation on the grounds of the De Cordova Museum. Burgess was a professor at the Massachusetts College of Art in Boston and was director of its graduate program in fine arts and design. He was also a fellow and senior consultant at the Center for Advanced Visual Studies of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA would determine the final cost of flying the work when it arrived at Kennedy Space Center. (NASA Release 85-175)
Arthur Smith, 74, retired chairman of United Technologies Corp. and the originator of the concept for water injection in piston engines that made major contributions to the performance of World War II combat planes, died August 6 after a long illness, the Washington Times reported. Smith retired as chairman of United Technologies—then known as United Aircraft—in 1973. He had assumed the post 15 months earlier after serving as executive vice president, president, and chairman of the executive committee. In 1935, after two years in the automotive industry, Smith joined Pratt & Whitney as an experimental test engineer. As a project engineer, he and a coworker invented and patented a system for water injection to control detonation and increase horsepower in aircraft piston engines. The 1938 invention increased the speed of U.S. fighter planes used during World War II by 40 mph. In 1949 he became chief engineer at Pratt & Whitney and helped develop the J57, which powered the F-100 fighter, the first production aircraft to exceed the speed of sound in level flight. Smith became president of the company in 1967. {W Times, Aug 8/85, 7B)
The Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A landed at 9:44 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported, before an estimated audience of 9,000. "The bird fspace flight, said at a post-landing news conference. "The brakes look like it's in good shape," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator good coming in and we are very, very pleased with the results of the nosewheel steering test." During the landing, Challenger commander Henry Hartsfield tested a new steering mechanism built to reduce tire and brake damage that had occurred during several Space Shuttle landings. An orbiter had not landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) since the previous April, when both main landing gears collapsed and one tire blew out. The test called for Hartsfield to engage the new steering mechanism seconds after the nosewheel touched down on the runway so he could steer Challenger 20 feet off course and then bring it back to the centerline. One more successful test later in the year would clear orbiters to resume landing in December at KSC. Officials in West Germany, which paid NASA $64 million to fly Spacelab D-1 on Challenger, called the mission "highly successful" and predicted that 90 to 95% of all the science studies would be completed. Earlier, a West German official at the science control center near Munich said only one study, a heat diffusion test on a sample of salt, would be unfinished by the time Challenger returned to earth. Crew members Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, Col. Guion Bluford Jr., Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid, Dr. Reinhard Furrer, and Dr. Wubbo Ockels did not attend a postflight press conference, the Washington Post reported, but traveled to Dryden Flight Research Center where researchers would run tests on them to determine how well they readapted to gravity after a week in weightlessness. Later the five would go to Kennedy Space Center for more elaborate tests. The European Space Agency (ESA) announced after the flight that it was particularly satisfied with results from Spacelab D-1, on which ESA had 38% of the payload in terms of critical resources (mass, energy, and crew time). All ESA facilities on Spacelab D-1—the Space Sled, for studies of man's behavior under microgravity conditions; the Biorack, a multi-purpose facility for biological investigations of microgravity and cosmic radiation effects on life forms; and the Fluid Physics Module, for studies of basic fluid phenomena in space—performed perfectly with no operational or technical failures. (NASA FOR M-989-61-A [postflight] Nov 8/85; NYT, Nov 7/85, A21; W Post, Nov 6/85, A4; ESA release Nov 11/85)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced today the 10 finalists in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. The finalists would travel July 7 to Johnson Space Center for medical examinations and initial spaceflight suitability testing. The NASA Spaceflight Participant Committee would then interview the teachers in Washington, D.C., submitting results of the examinations and interviews to NASA Administrator James Beggs who would select the primary and backup candidate. NASA had tentatively scheduled the teacher for a January 1986 Space Shuttle flight. Finalists were Kathleen Beres, Kenwood High School, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert Foerster, Cumberland Elementary School, West Lafayette, Indiana; Judith Garcia, Thomas Jefferson School for Science and Technology, Alexandria, Virginia; Peggy Lathlaen, Westwood Elementary School, Friendswood, Texas; David Marquart, Boise High School, Boise, Idaho; Sharon Christa McAuliffe, Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire; Michael Metcalf, Hazen Union School, Hardwick, Vermont; Richard Methia, New Bedford High School, New Bedford, Massachusetts; Barbara Morgan, McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho; and Niki Wenger, Ven-dervender Junior High School, Parkersburg, West Virginia. (NASA Release 85-99)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) opened the Microgravity Materials Science Laboratory (MMSL) to aid scientists on earth in determining what was and was not feasible for science experiments in space [see NASA Installations/Lewis Research Center, Aug. 26]. "The MMLS will permit U.S. government, university, and industry researchers to conduct scientific experiments using equipment that functionally duplicates equipment aboard the Space Shuttle," explained Salvatore Grisaffe, chief of the LeRC materials division. "Access to such a laboratory will give U.S. companies a competitive advantage in developing better materials through microgravity research." Other microgravity research facilities at LeRC included two drop towers in which experiment packages could free-fall up to 500 feet, achieving a weightless condition for up to five seconds, and the Lewis Lear jet, which could fly parabolic trajectories to achieve a microgravity environment inside the plane for up to 22 seconds. The MMSL was one part of NASA's microgravity science and applications program, which fostered research in the science and technology of processing materials in low gravity. The aims of the program were to obtain a clearer understanding of the factors controlling earth-based processes to guide their improvement and development of new materials that could not be made on earth and procedures to support long-term space operations. The Space Shuttle then offered up to seven days for microgravity experimentation; the proposed space station eventually would provide a very longterm microgravity research and materials processing capability. However, the most efficient use of such space resources demanded that experimental procedures be based on a firm scientific understanding with extensive prior ground-based examination. (NASA Release 85-123)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
A flight today of an F—14 marked the completion of the latest phase in the plane's aileron-rudder interconnect (ARI) program, which was intended to coordinate turns, prevent wing rock, and resist spins at high angle-of-attach flight conditions, the DFRC X-Press reported. Dryden Space Flight Center (DFRC) modified the F—14 X's basic analog flight control system for ARI. Although earlier configurations were successful in flight tests, pilots noted a deficiency in loss of roll power in high angle-of-attack flight regions. NASA then developed a "cross control" feature in the ARI system to correct the problem. The cross control feature allowed the pilot to roll the aircraft opposite to lateral stick input but in the direction of the rudder pedal input. This gave the F—14 pilot roll power needed for tactical maneuvering while the aircraft was in a high angle-of-attack mode. Flight tests of the cross control feature began in June 1985. Two NASA Ames-DRFC F—15 project pilots, three Navy pilots, and one Grumman pilot flew these initial evaluation flights. As part of the evaluation program, four other Ames-DRFC pilots not involved in the F—14 program flew the aircraft. NASA Ames-DFRC pilot Ed Schneider said after his flight that "The new modification permits improved rolling performance at angles of attack above 30°, yet the system retains spin resistance and wing rock suppression, both ARI features." Navy personnel taking part in the evaluation would make presentations on program results to NAVAIR. Navy pilot Lt. Commander Chuck Baucom would also present results at the Society of Experimental Test Pilots' September symposium. (DFRC X-Press, Aug 16/85, 2)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it had scheduled for September 12 at Kennedy Space Center a 20-second on-the-pad test firing of the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis's three main engines to verify the flight readiness of Atlantis—the fourth and newest of the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet. The flight readiness firing in a launch-day environment would exercise the Space Shuttle's main propulsion system and computer programs to demonstrate the proper integration of all elements prior to the first Atlantis launch scheduled for October 3 for mission 51-J. Engineers had previously test fired each engine individually at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories. On September 9 a firing simulation would kick off preparations for the test. The one-day test would check out critical flight and ground computer systems that controlled the actual engine firing and give the Space Shuttle launch team a chance to re-review test procedures. Countdown for the flight readiness firing would begin at 4:00 a.m. September 10, with the clock at the T-43 hour mark, and culminate with the 20-second static firing. Three days of preparations would precede the firing countdown, including purging the external tank with inert gases, installing special firing instrumentation, and mounting a radiation shield on the deck of the mobile launcher platform to protect the solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank structures during the test firing. Total flight readiness firing, including pre- and post-test activities, would span six days and require support from personnel and operations from various NASA centers including MSFC and Kennedy and Johnson Space Centers. Events leading to the September 12 engine firing would be nearly identical to those that preceded an actual Space Shuttle launch, with built-in holds distributed throughout the countdown at the same times they occurred in an actual launch countdown. An automated ground launch sequencer would control the final nine minutes of the countdown. The sequencer performed the final series of events in a specific order, monitored various measurements of out-of-tolerance conditions, and detected system malfunctions for which it would automatically stop the countdown. Following the test, technicians would inspect externally and internally the three main engines to verify their readiness for flight. These post-firing activities would take about 11 days. (MSFC Release 85—44)
NASA announced that John O'Brien, currently NASA deputy general counsel, was appointed effective August 4 NASA general counsel, succeeding S. Neil Hosenball who was retiring. O'Brien began his career in 1962 with NASA at the Launch Operations Center, later Kennedy Space Center (KSC), during the Mercury Program. He then served as chief counsel of the KSC and assistant general counsel for procurement matters at NASA Headquarters. He received an A.B. degree from Niagara University and his J.D. degree from Georgetown University. After joining NASA, O'Brien was designated a Princeton Fellow in Public Affairs at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, and in 1976 received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA Release 85-108)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) engineers and technicians recently practiced the exact technique that would be used to fuel the Galileo spacecraft, simulating the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) environment where the spacecraft would actually be fueled, the JPL Universe reported. This was necessary because Galileo's propulsion system, designed and built by West Germany and unlike previous JPL spacecraft in which the propulsion system was a separate module, would be sandwiched in between the bus and the despun section of the spacecraft. This would require fueling when Galileo was fully assembled, and any resulting problems could jeopardize the sensitive cargo. "This four-day exercise is basically an 'undress rehearsal'," Hank Delgado, propulsion and pyro devices group leader, said. "We want to acquaint everyone with the procedures and equipment we plan to use to fuel Galileo." Instead of using the actual propellants—mono-methylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide—that Galileo would use, the team practiced with less hazardous fluids—isopropyl alcohol and freon—allowing them to work without special suits. When Galileo was fueled at KSC, technicians would wear 55-lb. SCAPE (self-contained atmospheric protective ensemble) suits to protect them from the highly toxic propellants. Although the suits had an air supply and thermal control system, the limited air supply allowed only about an hour of work, requiring technicians to work in shifts. JPL would send Galileo to KSC early in 1986 for final launch preparations. Technicians would then fuel the spacecraft, taking a day for each of its four tanks. For the following four months, the technicians would monitor the propellant closely for leaks or changes in temperature. (JPL Universe, Sept 6/ 85, 1)
Vice President George Bush announced that Sharon Christa McAuliffe would be the teacher to go into space in January 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. McAuliffe, a social studies teacher at Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire, was the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Program that was announced by President Reagan in August 1984. Her backup was Barbara Morgan of McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho. McAuliffe proposed that, while in space, she would gather information for a personal journal, "just as the pioneer travelers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal journals. My journal would be a trilogy. I would like to begin it at the point of selection through the training program. The second part would cover the actual flight. Part three would cover my thoughts and reactions after my return," McAuliffe said. Vice President Bush, in his announcement of the selection at a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, where McAuliffe was accompanied by the other nine finalists selected from among 11,416 applicants, said, "We're here today to announce the first private citizen passenger in the history of spaceflight . . . We're honoring all [the teacher applicants] today, and we're doing something else because the finalists here with me and the more than a hundred semifinalists will all in the months ahead serve as a link between NASA and the nation's school system." McAuliffe, a teacher of 15 years and the mother of two children, would work a year for NASA. She and Morgan would report in September to Johnson Space Center for 114 hours of training over four months. The Washington Post reported that a top NASA official said McAuliffe was an early favorite of the 20-member selection panel. The official said "the judges thought McAuliffe appeared to be a good team player and—vital to her image-making duties—stood out as a good communicator," the Post reported. (NASA Release 85-107; Admin of Ronald Reagan, July 19/85, 913; W Post, July 22/85, A1)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that NASA would sponsor an exhibition July 22 through July 30 at the 1985 National Scout Jamboree at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia. The jamboree, celebrating scouting's 75th anniversary, was expected to draw more than 35,000 U.S. and international scouts and leaders and many thousands of general public participants. The NASA exhibit, for which LaRC was serving as lead coordinator, would include information on subjects ranging from current aeronautics research to the Space Shuttle and man's future in space. A 100-seat theater would have video presentations and live programs throughout each day. Astronaut Frederick Gregory, a former scout and long-time scouting enthusiast, would participate in the jamboree's opening program on July 24 and would talk with scouts in the NASA exhibition area on that day. NASA would sponsor July 24 through 28 model rocket launch demonstrations and presentations on earning the Space Exploration merit badge. (LaRC Release 85-38)
NASA announced that its associate administrator for space science and applications, Dr. Burton Edelson, in a speech today at the 36th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Stockholm warned his audience that the earth's environment as was presently known might be in jeopardy and called on the world's scientific community to accelerate its study of the planet. "Resources, once thought to be limitless, are slowly being depleted," Edelson said. "Earth's atmosphere is changing, and some of its life forms are threatened. It is imperative that we, as scientists and engineers, take action now to maintain the quality of life on our planet and improve its biological productivity." Edelson cited the many accomplishments of planetary science since the beginning of spaceflight 28 years ago. "We have examined most of the planets in the solar system at close range and have performed systematic studies of our closest neighbors, Venus and Mars, through telescopes and more recently, through data and imagery received from planet-orbiting spacecraft," he said. "We still lack synoptic, systematic, and temporal knowledge, predictive skills, and an understanding of the mechanisms underlying earth's global processes," he pointed out. Calling for an international study effort, Edelson said, "Our sophisticated spacecraft; new air, sea, and spaceborne sensors; and enormous computing capability will enable us to measure, monitor, model, and finally begin to understand the earth as a system. This mission to planet earth could unlock the secrets of life itself . . . and could well prove to be the most important ever undertaken by humankind." Edelson called particular attention to the problems of water pollution in rivers, lakes, and streams; potential depletion of the ozone layer; growing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide; and a sharp increase in the levels of carbon monoxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. "Economic development over large portions of the earth have significantly changed the patterns of land and water use," he said. "The results have been mixed—while in some cases the benefits have been significant—we have paid a substantial price. We must study the land and learn to use it properly." To emphasize the importance of his proposal, Edelson said, "The U.S. National Academy of Sciences has reviewed the scientific merit of the global habitability concept and has found it to be both sound and worthy. The Academy is now participating in the broader efforts of the International Council of Scientific Unions in a program called Global Change. NASA and several other government agencies, notably the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation, also will participate." Edelson said he envisioned multifaceted investigations with oceanographers, meteorologists, biologists, and foresters studying the land, sea, atmosphere, and the air-sea and solar-terrestrial environments. "This is truly an international challenge," he concluded, "involving many scientific disciplines. Everyone on earth has a stake in our success." (NASA Release 85-142)
measure the effect convection had on heat flow in a liquid (General Electric/Penn State University);
NASA announced that the governments of Chile and the U.S. signed agreements concerning use of Mataveri Airport on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) as an emergency landing site for the Space Shuttle. The intergovernmental agreements provided the basis for contingency planning for launches of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base beginning in March 1986. This planning was consistent with arrangements already in place to support launches from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning had to provide for emergency landing options for all phases of a flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. The Vandenberg launches would also have a requirement (analogous to those from KSC) for one or more trans-Pacific landing sites in the Pacific Basin. Although the probability of a contingency Space Shuttle landing was extremely remote, identification and preparation of suitable contingency landing sites was consistent with prudent operational planning. A Chilean contractor had prepared designs, in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island, for improvements at the air field that were necessary to support a Space Shuttle landing. These improvements included an extension of the existing runway and associated lighting system, construction of a storage building, and enhancement of certain permanent and temporary navigation equipment in the area. The modifications would not affect the historical treasures for which Isla de Pascua was known. As part of the agreement, the two countries would undertake enhancement of the existing program of scientific cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, thereby building upon a long and successful relationship of technical cooperation in this arena. (NASA Release 85117)
The first month of the flight of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinhkh aboard Salyut 7 was drawing to a close during which time the crew had accomplished all planned activities to bring the Soviet space station into a manned flight mode, checked the condition of onboard systems, and carried out a variety of scientific research projects and experiments, FBIS Moscow TASS in English reported. The cosmonauts had unloaded the Progress-24 transport spacecraft, positioned the delivered equipment, and replaced three sets of storage batteries as well as individual instrument units. They had used oxygen delivered in containers aboard the transport to pressurize the Salyufs living compartments. The cosmonauts had started preparation of the station's united propulsion unit for refuelling by checking for leaks in the fuelling lines. They would then pump compressed nitrogen out of the fuel tanks. The schedule for July 5 called for the cosmonauts to perform maintenance on a system for the regeneration of water from atmospheric moisture, take medical checks including measurements of body mass and evaluations of the condition of muscles, and exercise on a bicycle ergometer and running track. The cosmonauts would continue geophysical experiments in a research program on earth's natural resources and environment. They also would make visual observations and take photos of individual areas of the Atlantic Ocean. (FBIS Moscow Tass in English, July 5/85)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
NASA announced that a five-year project at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) resulted in development of the real-time multiprocessor simulator, a low-cost easily programmable computing system that simulated or monitored complex physical processes in real time. The simulator could offer considerable savings, for example, in the development and testing processes for producers of airplane engines. Real-time simulations were particularly important in studying the internal aerodynamics of a jet engine, including such variables as the performance of turbine and convergent-divergent nozzles, bypass valves, injectors, and fan and compressor geometry and the coordination of these variables with fuel flows and flight controls. In a real-time simulation of a helicopter engine, the NASA system solved all 63 engine equations within 1 /100th of a sec. The system had hundreds of real-time applications where there was a critical need to simulate or monitor many processes at once or when the reaction of one process could be vital to the performance of another, such as monitoring the structural dynamics of a space station at several locations, with a processor dedicated to each location. The essence of the NASA system was a network of computers tied together and operated simultaneously but with different programs, each one a portion of the overall task. The system could detect a change in one aspect of a dynamic process and report the effect of that change on other parts of the process. Using state-of-the-art, high-performance microcomputers, NASA scientists had designed hardware configurations that enabled a person at a single terminal to control up to 10 microcomputers operating simultaneously, each handling a portion of a total program. NASA scientists had also developed a companion form of computer language, taken from the PASCAL format, that enabled an engineer who was not a computer specialist to program his or her own multiprocessor for experimentation and monitoring. (NASA Release 85-39)
The U.S. House Science and Technology Committee approved President Reagan's request for a $7.9 billion NASA budget for FY 86, the Washington Post reported, but allocated the funds differently than he had requested. By a 32-to-9 vote, the panel decided to retain a subcommittee's recommendation to shift $45 million to spare parts procurement for the Space Shuttle in order to keep the Space Shuttle assembly line open and thus increase chances for a fifth orbiter. The administration requested $2.1 billion in FY 86 for 14 Space Shuttle flights and delivery of the fourth orbiter, Atlantis; it sought no funds for a fifth orbiter. (W Post, Apr 1/85, A9)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that a December 1985 experiment, EASE or the experimental assembly of structures in EVA (extravehicular activity), aboard Space Shuttle flight 61-C would provide information about humans working in space. In the experiment, two crew members would move six aluminum beams, each 12 feet long and four inches in diameter, into space from the Space Shuttle payload bay and assemble them into a tetrahedron shape and then disassemble them. This experiment would demonstrate human ability to build strong, practical structures in space. During the experiment videotape and still photographs would record crew member movements to link beams by special connectors at the beam tips. This building approach was a technique in the Large Space Structures program called an "erectible" method, as opposed to a "deployable" method that would not be demonstrated until 1986 or 1987 when NASA would orbit a structural-assembly demonstration experiment. MSFC had conducted tests similar to EASE in its neutral buoyancy simulator, a million-gallon water tank that gave a sense of weightlessness to submerged people working in space suits. Researchers would compare assembly and disassembly times recorded in the space test with results found in the neutral buoyancy tank. However, MSFC's Ed Valentine, experiment manager, noted, "We'd like to be able to measure a human's productivity in space scientifically, and we're not really sure if time measurements are all that are needed to guage that, so we'll be examining other possible criteria to use in the future." A Langley Research Center structural assembly experiment would accompany the MSFC experiment. (MSFC Release 85-3) During April: NASA announced it awarded to Howard University's School of Engineering Large Space Structure Institute (LSSI), Washington, D.C., an ongoing grant expected to total $1.9 million to develop theoretical knowledge supporting the design and construction of very large space systems. NASA expected the knowledge to make a significant contribution to the establishment of large space stations and space settlements. The LSSI research project would help demonstrate the practical benefits of U.S. space capabilities, including construction of a solar power satellite that would convert the sun's energy into electricity for transmission back to earth and construction of large platforms that would allow scientists to observe the earth for improved understanding of the weather and the ground water table. The LSSI team would consist of Dr. Taft Broome, chief project investigator and chairman of the Department of Civil Engineering, and other Howard University faculty members; and one faculty member each from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge University, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Graduate students from the latter institutions would also participate. NASA was primarily interested in LSSI doing the concept development and the research and demonstration analysis. Once Broome and his team provided the agency with the needed data, NASA could turn the project over to private industry for implementation. (NASA Activities, Apr 85, 8) Launch Vehicles
NASA announced that John Young would command Space Shuttle flight 61-J scheduled for launch August 1986, Vance Brand mission 61-K scheduled for September 1986, and Donald Williams mission 61—I. Other crew for the 61-J mission, during which astronauts would deploy the Hubble Space Telescope, were pilot Charles Bolden Jr. and previously named mission specialists Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce Mc-Candless. S. David Griggs would pilot mission 61—K, and other crew would be mission specialists Robert Steward, Owen Garriott, and European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier. NASA previously assigned payload specialists Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg to the mission. Remaining mission 61-1 crew would be pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists James Bagian, Bonnie Dunbar and Manley "Sonny" Carter. NASA also announced that Norman Thagard would replace John Fabian on mission 61-G scheduled for May 1986 during which crew would deploy the Galileo interplanetary spacecraft. Fabian was leaving NASA; he had not announced his plans. James Buchli would replace Thagard on mission 61-H in June 1986. (NASA Release 85-131)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced a NASA source selection board was evaluating proposals from the industry teams of Boeing Aerospace Co. and Wornick Corp.; General Electric, Northrop, and Integrated Systems Analysts; and Hamilton Standard, ILC, and RCA for a single Flight Equipment Processing contract (FEPC) that would consolidate work being done by 15 firms. NASA planned by the end of October to award an initial three-year contract with a two-year priced option extension. The contract would be cost-plus-award-fee for the first six months; cost-plus-incentive-fee, plus an award fee, for the remainder of the term. Estimated contract value at the end of 15 years was $300 million. The contract would cover processing Space Shuttle flight crew equipment, including operation and maintenance of associated ground systems, primarily at JSC. The winning contractor would be responsible for space suit maintenance and testing before and after flights; failure analysis and repair of spaceship galleys; operation of the space food production facility; preparation and delivery of food for each mission; medications and equipment for medical kits; clothing, personal hygiene and flight kits; tools; radio and TV support; and all film and cameras. The award would be the second large consolidation contract let in 1985 at JSC; on September 12 Rockwell International won the Space Transportation System Operations Contract to consolidate JSC Space Shuttle operations. (JSC Release 85-038)
Christa McAuliffe, first teacher as well as private citizen to fly onboard the Space Shuttle, and backup Barbara Morgan arrived September 9 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) to begin their training program, the JSC Roundup reported. Reporters, photographers, and TV crews accompanied the two as they arrived at building 100 to receive their identification badges. Mission commander Francis "Dick" Scobee that afternoon welcomed McAuliffe and Morgan at a meeting with the crew of mission 51 -L, scheduled for launch in January 1986. Other 51 —L crew members were pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, and Judith Resnik. JSC personnel the next day measured them for flight suits, helmets, and G-suits. McAuliffe said she would be allowed to select either a jumpsuit or a standard flight suit to take home with her following her flight. After a food tasting and rating session, in which food lab manager Dr. Charles Bourland asked McAuliffe and Morgan to taste about 40 food and drink items and rate them on a scale of 1 to 9, both teachers commented on their surprise in finding space food so flavorful. They would have several more opportunities for taste tests before McAuliffe selected her flight menu. Other first-week activities included orientation briefings by management and training officials and familiarization tours of training facilities and mission control. Asked by a reporter how drastically her life had changed since her selection, McAuliffe said that other than having the opportunity to fly onboard the Space Shuttle and the accompanying publicity she didn't perceive that much difference. She pointed out that as a teacher for a long time she had to gather material and present information to students daily. "As I see it, I'm doing basically the same things, only my audience has changed." (JSC Roundup, Sept. 27/85, 7)
Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester of Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Spacelab Payload Project Office said today that the Spacelab 2 payload was declared "ready for installation" into the orbiter Challenger, the Marshall Star reported. Spacelab 2 would be the second of two Spacelab missions designed to demonstrate the performance of hardware received from the European Space Agency (ESA). The Spacelab 1 mission verified the majority of Spacelab systems including the habitable module, tunnel, scientific airlock, and pallets. For the second verification mission, Spacelab would not use a habitable module but only a pallet configuration. The crew would operate experiments from Challenger's aft flight deck. Spacelab 2 consisted of a pressurized igloo approximately the size of a five-gallon oil drum and three pallets, two of which joined to form the train needed to support several experiments. Also new on the mission was the instrument pointing system for pointing four of the onboard solar experiments. Spacelab would carry 13 experiments in 7 scientific disciplines. Primary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the performance of the igloo, the two-pallet train, and the instrument pointing system. John Thomas, manager of the MSFC Spacelab Program Office, said NASA had removed Spacelab 3 hardware from Challenger's cargo bay and was reconfiguring the bay for Spacelab 2. "We expect to begin installation of the Spacelab 2 payload on June 3," he noted. The last major test for the hardware before July 12 scheduled launch would be an end-to-end test planned for June 10, in which NASA would test all systems connecting Challenger, Spacelab 2, and the MSFC-operated payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center. Thomas said the other primary effort was to complete training of the payload team. (Marshall Star, May 29/85, 1)
NASA announced it awarded a $145.8 million contract to General Electric Co.'s Valley Forge Space Center, Philadelphia for development of the upper atmosphere research satellite (UARS) observatory. Scheduled for October 1989 deployment from the Space Shuttle, the satellite would carry 10 scientific instruments into a 373-mile circular orbit. Valley Forge Center would design the observatory system, design and fabricate an instrument module compatible with the NASA standard multimission modular spacecraft (MMS), integrate the instrument module with the MMS and flight instruments, test the observatory system, integrate the observatory into the Space Shuttle, and support postlaunch flight operations. The UARS, with its remote sensing instruments providing essentially global coverage, would for the first time generate data for understanding the composition and dynamics of the upper atmosphere, important to solving many questions about the earth's weather and climate. For example, the observatory would provide previously unavailable data on the nature of natural and human effects on earth's ozone layer. GSFC would provide UARS project management for NASA's office of space science and applications. (NASA Release 85-32)
NASA announced that effective January 24, Dr. Dale Compton became deputy director of Ames Research Center (ARC), where he had been director for engineering and computer systems since February 1983. Compton joined NASA in June 1957, serving as deputy director of astronautics, then chief of the space science division and manager of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). Recipient of the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal, Compton earned a B.S. degree in 1957 and an M.S. degree in 1958, both in aeronautical engineering, and a Ph.D. degree in aeronautical and astronautical engineering in 1969. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/ 85) During February. Ames Research Center (ARC) announced it had formed the information sciences office to do basic and applied research in artificial intelligence (Al), automation sciences, and space-related computer science technology, with emphasis on applications to the NASA space station. NASA had designated ARC as the lead center in Al research, and the new office's research would cover Al programming languages, expert-systems development, knowledge representation and information understanding, machine vision and learning, sensor fusion, and optical processing. Space-related computer-science research would focus on symbolic-processing and data-flow architectures; network design, protocols, and simulation; and optical read/write information-storage technology. ARC would combine in-house studies, primarily on applied research and development of flight experiments to validate and demonstrate the technologies being developed, with the work of outside research organizations, such as SRI International, Symbolics Inc., Innovative Optics, Inc., Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, MIT, University of Texas, and University of Michigan, on basic research issues to accomplish project objectives. ARC would orient research toward the user community, particularly other NASA centers, focusing on both technology development for user applications and help to users during implementation. Space station automation would be the primary application, and ARC had signed agreements with Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center to work together on this implementation. ARC would also advise on space station automation through participation on NASA advisory groups such as the space station automation study team, space station automation and robotics panel, advanced-technology automation committee, and NASA headquarters space station data systems steering committee. (ARC Release 85-6)
NASA announced it had launched on March 22 at 6:58 p.m. EST the Intelsat V-A (F-10) by the Atlas/Centaur 63 from Cape Canaveral. Eighth in a series of 10 Intelsat V-type international telecommunications satellites, the spacecraft would undergo several weeks of on-orbit testing before positioning in geosynchronous orbit. The AC-63, second of the new stretched version of the Atlas/Centaur for which Lewis Research Center had development and operation management responsibility, had an 80-in. extended first stage enabling it to hold more propellants. (NASA MOR M-491-203-85-08 [postlaunch] Apr 29/85; LeRC News, Apr 8/85, 2)
NASA announced that researchers at its Langley Research Center (LaRC) were developing use of pyrotechnic-activated emergency exit systems that might save lives in an emergency situation aboard commercial transport aircraft. Although pyrotechnic components aboard commercial aircraft might seem dangerous, Laurence Bement, an aerospace technologist specializing in pyrotechnic-activated aircraft escape systems, pointed out that military aircraft had used such escape systems for more than 20 years and NASA had used them in their manned spaceflight programs as far back as Project Mercury in the 1960s. The emergency egress system he proposed would be more reliable and more effective in aiding the rapid evacuation of airplanes and more cost-effective than existing mechanical and electrical systems. "What we have done is take the best materials and applications from years of pyrotechnic usage and tried to assemble the best escape system, using our past experiences," Bement said. One U.S. Air Force system, the emergency life-saving instant exit, used pyrotechnic chargers to sever a panel inside the aircraft door. Another, the NASA general aviation egress opening system, created by an explosion an opening in the fuselage without modifying the airframe structure. The pyrotechnic-activated escape systems on U.S. armed forces planes had already saved approximately $10 million by avoiding component replacement costs. However, they added weight and complexity to the aircraft and do not increase the structural efficiency of the airframe. To improve existing systems, Bement studied the possibility of replacing fuselage skin sections with an explosively severed, composite material panel. Researchers had tested graphite/epoxy and fiberglass composite panels, demonstrating that the graphite/epoxy was the better material. Not only was the graph ite/epoxy easier to sever than the original fuselage material, but the composite panel was much lighter and more crashworthy. Once activated, the explosive material severed the panel from the fuselage and jettisoned the panel outward. No debris was projected inward and no sound or over-pressure hazard existed inside the aircraft. The composite system was more reliable than existing mechanical and electrical systems and would require less maintenance, since the system was expected to last at least 15 years. Bolts would hold the composite panel to the primary structure and it would be a load-carrying component, unlike existing emergency exits. Bement estimated that using composite panels with the pyrotechnic system could reduce the weight of existing emergency exits by 30 to 50%. If the airframes were designed to include the composite panels, the weight reductions would be far greater, because the light-weight composite panels were capable of carrying loads, meaning the fuselage would not require as much support structure around the emergency door frames. The explosive in the system was hexanitrostilbene (HVS), an organic compound insensitive to handling, impact, gunfire, and lightning and was unaffected by 50 hours of exposure to temperatures of 350° F. HNS would burn if exposed to a flame but would not explode. Another advantage of the compound was its explosive power; in a test of the Langley general aviation opening system, less than 0.4 ounce of the compound was sufficient to sever a panel about 30 square inches. (NASA Release 85-171)
Astronauts aboard the Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F spent an extra day in space gazing at the sun after the instrument pointing system was back in order, the Washington Post reported. The sudden recovery on August 4, as a result of a lucky radio command transmitted on a whim after a jolting rocket firing, of a fourth solar telescope called a solar optical universal polarimeter added to the science data. Most of the August 5 sun observations used that telescope after NASA had considered it a failure. The telescope initially recorded images of sunspots, dark splotches that erupted through the visible surface of the sun when underlying magnetic fields became convoluted, the Washington Times reported. The astronauts turned the telescope on the sunspot again on August 5, and the TV image was so clear scientists on the ground reported that they could see changes in its penumbra, a surrounding halo-like feature made up of jets of gas streaming out from the dark central area. (W Post, Aug 6/85, A5; W Times, Aug 6/ 85, 2A)
NASA announced that a flight simulation laboratory, the Man-Vehicle Systems Research Facility (MVSRF), was in operation at its Ames Research Center to give scientists a new tool to study human factors in operating commercial aircraft. The MVSRF contributed to flight safety by allowing researchers to simulate the complex set of relationships among pilots, their crews, converging aircraft, the weather, and air traffic controllers. Using the facility, scientists could study the effects of new and increasingly automated technologies on flight crew performance. NASA's human factors researchers worked directly with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), airplane manufacturers, and commercial airlines to improve flight safety. For example, with the 727 simulator, NASA scientists researched airplane landings to learn methods that minimized fuel consumption while allowing pilots to maintain safe distances between their planes and other air traffic. The MVSRF included an exact replica of a Boeing 727 cockpit, a mock air traffic control station, and a cockpit known as the advanced concept flight simulator (ACFS). In both the 727 replica and the ACFS, a computer visual system provided out-the-cockpit window displays of approaching aircraft and landscapes of many U.S. airports. The computer system also depicted clouds and other weather conditions, the glow of the horizon at dusk and dawn, and the varied texture of the area illuminated by the simulated aircraft's landing lights. Researchers at the MVSRF put the pilots and controllers through created situations, during which the researchers monitored communications among flight crew members and between the crew and traffic controllers. They also read the aircraft's instruments and observed flight control settings while making audio and video recordings that included tracking a pilot's eye movements. (NASA Release 85-162)
NASA announced that space age technology was in use in the Republic of Gabon, Africa, where solar photovoltaic power systems installed in four rural villages would improve public health and education facilities and lighting and sanitary water supplies. NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the project, which was jointly funded by the U.S Department of Energy (DOE) and the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources of the Republic of Gabon; the Gabon government selected the villages to participate in the program. The project provided a photovoltaic power system, lights, air circulation fan, and a refrigerator/freezer for vaccine storage to each village dispensary and a power system, lights, and a color TV and video cassette recorder/player to each village school. The villages' sanitary water systems had a newly drilled well, a photovoltaic system, a submersible well pump, a water storage tank, and a water distribution system that piped water to village fountains. Public lighting systems included a power system and sodium vapor lamps mounted on poles. All systems were instrumented to collect data for performance analyses. Total photovoltaic array capacity for all systems was 12.1 kw; output of the smallest array was 80 watts for street lights, the largest 3 kw for one water pump. Batteries for the solar arrays should last about 10 years before replacement; solar arrays had a life expectancy of at least 20 years. According to Tony Ratajczak, project manager at LeRC, "The goal of DOE and the Republic of Gabon, for this project, is to investigate and evaluate the economic, social and technical value of photovoltaic power systems in aiding progress and improving the quality of life in Gabon." (NASA Release 85-68) During November: NASA announced that three physicians from Washington University Medical Center, St. Louis, Misssouri, met the previous month with NASA scientists from National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) to discuss using remote sensing techniques as an analytical tool for use in the field of body scanning known as nuclear magnetic resonance or NMR. Dr. Michael Vannier, radiologist and principal investigator for the project, said NMR was already used on a number of organ systems in the brain. However, interest had grown in how magnetic resonance imaging might fit into the scope of breast diagnostic techniques. So Drs. John Gohagan and Ed Spitzna-gel, also of Washington University, on behalf of the National Cancer Institute's Breast Imaging Project joined Vannier at the discussions. The meeting resulted in a three-year collaborative effort among the Mal-linckrodt Institute of Radiology in St. Louis, NSTL, and the Kennedy Space Center. Vannier commented that the union with NASA was vital to maximize the potential of NMR scanning. "One of the characteristics of these magnetic resonance scanners is that they provide very specific anatomic information about the location and size of a tumor. However there are other ways to get the same information, one being the use of a mammogram, or breast X-ray." At NSTL, scientists Doug Rickman and Jim Anderson were responsible for applying the analytical capabilities to make NMR scans a notable advancement over other methods of X-ray and body scanning techniques. They had demonstrated the use of ELAS software to enhance NMR images, thus increasing disease detection accuracy. Vannier explained, "No one in medicine really has the kind of experience with classifying or analyzing these types of images this way. That's why we are using NASA expertise to help us." By incorporating the ELAS software used in processing satellite imagery into the system, NMR scans could provide not only information on the location and size of a tumor, but also its biological behavior. That is, physicians could determine the status of a mass of tumor directly from the NMR image without having to enter the body surgically. Close affiliation with pathologists while working on actual cases was important in determining whether there had been misclassification on the image processing machines, Gohagan said. "Our goal is to ultimately get the kind of discrimination necessary to distinguish different anamolous conditions," he explained. For example, blood clots would appear distinctly different from benign tumors, and a marked difference would be evident between benign and malignant tumors. Vannier concluded that, as a result of the collaboration, an improvement should evolve in the way NMR images are acquired. "I think it will have significant influence on what we do in the future," he said. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 7)
NASA officials said damage sustained by Discovery during mission 51-D [see Apr. 19] could endanger its next mission and the upcoming week's flight of Challenger, the Washington Times reported. "We may have to do a fair amount of tile work on this one," Space Shuttle chief Jesse Moore said. "Fifty tiles has been our standard up until this last one." However, NASA engineers were more concerned about a hole on a control flap, called an eleven, on the ship's left wing. Such damage had not occurred previously. The chief Space Shuttle mechanic said the hole "most likely" developed after a heat-shield tile, jarred loose during Discovery's liftoff, allowed temperatures of more than 1,200° F to penetrate the wing flap during reentry. Also, NASA said it would not approve the Challenger mission or Discovery's next flight, scheduled for June 12, until technicians completed their examination of damage and determined why the brakes locked. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
NASA launched today from KSC Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-G with a crew of seven, including Saudi Prince Sultan Salman A1-Saud and Patrick Baudry from France, for the 18th Space Shuttle flight, the Washington Post reported. Earlier NASA had announced that mission 51-G would carry the automated directional solidification furnace (ADSF), Spartan 1, and the French echocardiograph (FEE) and posture (FPE) experiments. The objective of the ADSF was to provide a technology demonstration of the capability of the equipment to perform directional solidification of a magnetic composite material and to study the role of gravity-driven phenomena in such processing. The apparatus used for the directional solidification experiments was a specially designed furnace that melted a sample contained in a quartz tube one cm in diameter and 35 cm long. A furnace module (a heater with an integral quench block) moved along the four tubes in the experiment so that the manganese-bismuth alloy samples melted and solidified at a controlled rate. Electric resistance provided the heat; the quench block was liquid cooled. In that first flight, all four samples were the same alloy with only the solidification rate changed to allow a better understanding of that aspect of the process. Spartan 1 was the first of a continuing series of low-cost free flyers designed to extend sounding rocket experiment capabilities. The Spartan 1 objective was to map the X-ray emissions from the Perseus Cluster, the nuclear region of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Scorpius X-2 (SCO-X-2). NASA had flown the Spartan 1 instrument several times on sounding rockets; the resulting information led to the need to obtain greater viewing time of the selected targets, thus permitting more detailed studies with greater resolutions. The crew would deploy the Spartan 1 from the Space Shuttle and retrieve it using the Canadian-built remote manipulator system. After deployment, the Spartan 1 would perform scientific observations for up to 40 hours via an onboard microcomputer controller that commanded all pointing sequences and satellite control. There was no command or telemetry link; when observing sequences were complete, the satellite "safed" all systems and placed itself in a stable attitude for retrieval. The objectives of the FEE and FPE, a part of a cooperative program with France, was to obtain on-orbit data regarding the response of the cardiovascular and sensorimotor systems to weightlessness. French payload specialist Patrick Baudry would perform the experiments with participation from other crew members including the Arabsat payload specialist. The USSR's July 1982 Salyut mission had also flown the FEE system. By 4:30 p.m. June 17, Discovery's crew had successfully deployed a Mexican satellite, Morelos-1, the first of two identical satellites, which headed for a position 22,300 miles above the equator west of the Galapagos Islands. It would beam TV programs to the most remote regions of Mexico. (NASA Flight Operation Report M-980-51-G [prelaunch] June 5/85, NASA MOR E-420-51-G-16 [prelaunch] June 7/85, MOR E-420-51-G-17 [prelaunch] June 5/85, MOR E-420-51-G-18 [prelaunch] June 13/85, MOR-989-51-G [postflight] July 3/85; W Post, June 18/85, A3) During June: NASA announced that the Space Shuttle mission 51-G would carry three communications satellites, a deployable/retrievable Spartan 1 spacecraft, and six Get Away Special canisters. The orbiter Discovery would fly several mid-deck experiments including one for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) organization and a materials processing furnace. The Mexican spacecraft, Morelos-A, was a version of the Hughes HS 376 satellite, a number of which had already been deployed from the Space Shuttle. Morelos-A was the first of two domestic communications satellites that would provide advanced telecommunications to the more remote parts of Mexico. Arabsat-A, owned by the Arab Satellite Communications Organization and built by Aerospatiale, would provide telecommunications links between the member nations. A U.S. domestic communications satellite owned by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Telestar 3-D would provide telecommunications services to the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. All three spacecraft would first spring-eject from the orbiter's cargo bay, then on each a small attached payload assist module would ignite about 45 minutes after deployment to propel the satellites to transfer orbits out as far as 22,300	miles above earth. A second small rocket motor would then fire on each spacecraft to circularize the orbits, placing the spacecraft in geosynchronous orbits. Three of the six Get Away Special canisters contained West German payloads for study of materials processing in space and behavior of liquid propellants. A fourth canister contained a U.S. Air Force/U.S. Naval Research Laboratory investigation of the ultraviolet radiation environment in space. A fifth canister had a package of nine student experiments in biological and physical sciences. A Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) investigation of a developmental heat transfer system was in the sixth canister. A capillary pumped loop (CPL) experiment, it was the first flight of a CPL two-phase thermal control system. The advanced development and flight experiments section of the thermal engineering branch at GSFC developed the CPL (NASA Release 85-83)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) researchers believed their engine research, focusing on development of supersonic combustion ramjet (scramjet) technology, would lead to air-breathing engines capable of operating at speeds through Mach 12, Aviation Week reported. Testing had already produced net thrust-to-drag ratios of better than one at high Mach numbers. Research included solution of engine aerodynamics, diagnostics and measurement problems, and effects of change to full-scale, flight-weight engine prototypes. Although the Reagan Administration budget request for NASA FY 86 hypersonic research continued the existing level of effort, NASA believed propulsion technology development would be the pacing factor for hypersonic-flight capability and looked to congressional interest, evidenced by a request for a NASA report on hypersonic research, for increased funding. Initial scramjet technology applications might lie in missile development. As the potential for higher speeds and longer ranges became attainable, NASA concentrated on basic research for later generations of military cruise missiles rather than applications to aircraft. (AvWk, Feb 25/85, 52) During March: After a detailed review of the history of Concorde development, J.C.D. Baine in his article, "The Concorde Supersonic Airliner—The Struggle for Survival," concluded that the survival of Concordes or their being superseded by second generation supersonic airlines appeared doubtful under the persisting circumstances of international economic, political, and social relationships. He noted that the confrontation between aviation technology and the environment had brought into focus problems, whether real or emotional, that only advanced aeronautical science and technology would solve. That was especially true with respect to airport noise, sonic booms, and stratospheric pollution caused by emissions from multi-engines that consumed large quantities of petroleum-based fuels. Until those acceptable solutions were found, he concluded, opposition to civilian supersonic aircraft would continue and might further restrict or ban the aircraft's use on national and international routes. However, he noted that the efforts of Great Britain and France to develop the Concorde should not be dismissed as a waste of human effort and resources. They had contributed to advancements in aeronautical science and technology that, though not financially rev/arding, represented a store of scientific knowledge that would be available for future development. (Aerospace Historian, Mar/85, 10)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B landed at 1:33 p.m. Pacific time today on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base before 6,700 spectators, the NY Times reported. NASA selected the concrete runway because a week of rain had left scattered puddles on the usually dry lake bed runways. 'Atlantis looks beautiful," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said after the landing. Apart from "a few dings" around the ship's nose and landing gear, he added, there appeared to be "no unusual damage." It was the second mission for the Atlantis, the newest in NASA's fleet of four orbiters. The crew described all aspects of the flight as highly successful. (NYT, Dec 4/85, B6)
NASA announced selection of 150 research proposals from small business high-technology firms under a program established by the Small Business Innovation Development Act of 1982 (PL 97-219) to stimulate technological innovation in the private sector, strengthen the role of small businesses in meeting NASA's research and development needs, and contribute to the growth and strength of the nation's economy. NASA selected proposals on the basis of their technical merit from the 1,164 submitted and expected to award contracts in four to eight weeks. Contractors funded under the program would conduct work in two phases: first, a six-month fixed-price effort to explore the feasibility of the small business-proposed innovations and, if the results warranted, a second phase effort of up to two years in duration to proceed further with the technological innovation. Commercial firms or government agency programs would fund any work beyond the second phase. The selections resulted from NASA'S third solicitation for Phase I proposals in areas of research and development of interest to the agency. NASA's FY 85 budget included approximately $7.5 million for Phase I, managed by the Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release 85136)
NASA researchers were continuing detailed analysis of all data, and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would produce additional documents when results were finalized for the Spacelab system, payload integration, and the Spacelab-2 experiments managed by MSFC. Principal investigators would produce separate documentation for their experiments. (NASA MOR M-977-51F-03 [postlaunch] Sept 30/85)
Naval Observatory astronomer Richard Walker proposed a simple explanation for the inclination of a descending passageway in the Great Pyramid of Cheops in Egypt, the Washington Post reported. Walker had first examined the suggestion of John Herschel, an early 19th-century astronomer, that the 337-foot passageway was at an angle of 26.5230° to point at the North Star, allowing the pyramid to serve an as astronomical observatory as well as tomb for the pharaoh. Walker noted, however, that due to the wobble of earth's axis in its orbit around the sun, no prominent star could have been seen from the base of the passageway in 2800 B.C. Walker suggested the angle resulted from the construction technique. By placing three stones of equal length horizontally and another of equal size on top of the 3rd horizontal stone, the angle from the top stone to bottom stone at the other end was 26.5°. (W Post, Jan 15/85, A10)
In his "National Security Launch Strategy" directive, President Reagan told NASA and the U.S. Air Force to begin a study leading to joint development of a bigger and more powerful space shuttle that could begin flying missions just before the year 2000, the Washington Post reported. In a major policy change, the Reagan Administration indicated that the Air Force should share with NASA the cost of designing and acquiring the second-generation space shuttle; NASA had borne the $10 billion cost of developing the current Space Shuttle, although the Air Force used it one third of the time. The directive also covered an agreement by the Air Force to use NASA's Space Shuttle at least eight times a year for the 10 years after 1988 and approved an Air Force decision to buy an improved version of its Titan rocket to supplement the Space Shuttle for military launches starting in 1988 and ending in 1993 [see Feb. 27]. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in the directive that the Air Force had decided to buy 10 Titan 34D7 single-use rockets for $2.09 billion between then and September 1993 from Martin Marietta Corp. The directive did not resolve the dispute between NASA and the Air Force over Air Force plans to sell at bargain rates obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch three weather satellites for NOAA [see Feb 25]. NASA was disappointed in the Air Force decision to buy the Titans, as it had tried to persuade the Air Force to buy an upgraded version of the solid-fuel rocket booster that helped put the Space Shuttle into orbit. Present rocket power limited Space Shuttle cargo weight, flying height, and its crossrange (limiting landings to Kennedy Space Center, Edwards AFB, and the White Sands Missile Range). The permanently manned space station planned for 1993 would require loads up to 75,000 lb. carried into polar orbit and at least 100,000-lb. loads into near-equatorial orbit at altitudes of at least 500 miles. (W Post, Mar 3/85, A12)
NASA announced that it had selected Rockwell Shuttle Operations Co. for negotiations leading to award of the $685 million four-year space transportation system operations contract (STSOC) at Johnson Space Center (JSC). Follow-on awards could result in a total contract period of 15 years at a value of about $5.5 billion. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract that included incentive fee on sound cost management and an award fee on the basis of performance. Other team members included Bendix Field Engineering Corp., System Development Corp., Omniplan Corp., RMS Technologies, Inc., and System Management American Corp. Under the contract, Rockwell would have responsibility for six major STSOC functions: project management; maintenance and operations; sustaining engineering; flight preparation requirements and analysis; flight preparation production; and direct mission operations, testing, and support. Work would be done for such facilities as the mission control center, shuttle mission simulator, shuttle avionics integration laboratory, software production facility, central computing facility, and the mockup and integration laboratory. The selection represented NASA's consolidation into one contract of work previously performed by 16 firms under 22 contracts. Other firms submitting proposals were Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Space Information Systems Division, Grumman Space Operations Corp., and Lockheed Space Flight Co. (NASA Release 85-128)
NASA announced that Sultan Salman Abdelazize Al-Saud, an Arabsat payload specialist scheduled to fly on the 51-G 7-day Space Shuttle mission in June, would conduct 70mm photography over Saudi Arabia, 35mm photography of a fluids experiment, and would participate in the French posture experiment. Al-Saud's flight was part of a reimbursable agreement with the Arab Satellite Communications Organization covering the launch of the Arabsat 1B communications satellite. Al-Saud would use the 70mm camera to take pictures on daylight orbital passes over Saudi Arabia and the 35mm camera to document such phenomena as surface tension effects on mixed fluids in the absence of gravity. His other activities would include photography of the new moon in a lunar crescent observation and assisting the French payload specialist as a test subject in the French experiment. At a May 28 news conference at Johnson Space Center, Al-Saud said his flight was bound to improve diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Islamic world, the Washington Post reported. "You will have 800 million Moslems and 155 million Arabs glued to their TV sets watching an American spaceship carrying an Arab into space," he commented. NASA selected Al-Saud, nephew of Saudi's King Fahd, from hundreds of Saudi applicants. He had logged more than 1,000 hours in jet aircraft. Other crew for the mission were Daniel Brandenstein, commander; John Creighton, pilot; Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel, mission specialists; and Patrick Baudry, French payload specialist. Backup payload specialist for Arabsat was Abdulmohsen Hamad Al-Bassam. (NASA Release 85-69; WPbst, May 29/85, A12)
NASA announced that a Scout vehicle launched the Air Force AF-16 satellite [see U.S. Air Force/NASA and U.S. Air Force, Nov. 20] at 9:35 p.m. EST today from the Wallops Flight Facility. The Scout launch vehicle, S-207C, performed satisfactorily and placed the spacecraft into an orbit with the following parameters: 418 km, apogee; 170 km, perigee; and 37.05°, inclination. The U.S. Air Force, in a brief statement released that same day, announced that NASA launched aboard a single booster from Wallops Island two instrument test vehicles, or ITVs, into low orbit, the Chicago Tribune reported. "The satellites will be checked out and maintained in orbit for an unspecified time as part of the U.S. antisatellite program," the Air Force said. An Air Force official commented later that it was "safe to assume there will be another [antisatellite] test during the first quarter of 1986." (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [postlaunch], Jan 10/85; Chi Trib, Dec 14/85, A4) U.S. Science and Technology
Goddard Space Flight Center announced that a team from its Wallops Flight Facility completed studies of the atmospheric ozone profile at Natal, Brazil. The team acquired data from 9 to 40 miles above the earth at an equatorial site using the improved "A" version ROCket OZonesonde (RO-COZ-A). The team took seven profiles during ozone-measuring satellite overpasses to compare the ROCOZ-A data with other satellite data for the same time and place. Although the primary mission was to support the SAGE II ozone measurements acquired by the ERBS/SAGE II satellite, the team would also compare the data with that from the solar backscatter ultraviolet spectrometer on the Solar Mesopheric Explorer (SME) satellite. Each ROCOZ-A launch included the supporting launch of a super-loki datasonde dart (a small meteorological rocket) to collect temperature data from 9 to 43 miles in the atmosphere and an electrochemical concentration cell (ECC) balloon-launched ozonesonde to collect lower-atmospheric (below 18 miles) ozone, temperature, and pressure data. The team would use the supporting data to define the atmosphere at the site for comparison with the appropriate satellite. The team provided ROCOZ-A coverage during five dual and two single satellite overpasses. There were at least two ROCOZ-A profiles for each satellite with four profiles for the NOAA-9. (GSFC Release 85-17)
Soviet and French scientists would soon launch into orbit a space observatory, the Gamma 1 Project, that would carry a large gamma-ray telescope to help determine sources of cosmic rays, streams of highly charged particles that bombarded the earth from space, the NY Times reported the newspaper Izvestia as saying. Researchers hoped to obtain a detailed picture of the sky in gamma rays in order to understand the mysterious nature of gamma stars and their possible relationship with known astrophysical objects. Izvestia had gone on to say that testing was underway on the observatory but did not report a launch date. The Izvestia article said the two countries had cooperated in designing a special spacecraft, to be placed in an orbit 216 miles above earth, capable of carrying nearly two tons of scientific equipment for the Gamma 1 experiment, including main, small gamma-ray and X-ray telescopes. Franco-Soviet space cooperation dated back to an agreement signed in 1966; France was a major partner in the Vega missions the Soviets had launched in December to examine Venus and Halley's Comet and, in June 1982, the French cosmonaut Jean-Loup Chretien had been the first and was the only man from a country outside the Soviet block to go into space aboard a Soviet spacecraft, the Soyuz T-6. (NYT, Mar 12/85, C3) The IUE findings of coexisting dust and gas clouds were consistent with scientific theories of planetary system formation, noted Dr. Yoji Kondo, IUE project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center. In general, theories predicted that planets evolved from large stellar clouds of dust and gas that gradually condensed into orbiting planetary bodies. Observations with the IRAS strengthened this theory by suggesting that planetary disks surrounded a number of nearby stars. Also, astrometric measurements of the movement of several stars indicated the possible presence about each star of a planetary body several times more massive than Jupiter. Kondo and his associate Dr. F. C. Bruhweiler of Catholic University, Washington, D.C., used the IUE telescope to obtain the ultraviolet spectra of Beta Pictoris to determine the manner in which ultraviolet light was absorbed by the gas cloud and the extinction of the light by the dust cloud. The ultraviolet spectra showed an absence of selective extinction of the light at shorter wavelengths, evidence that the star's light was being blocked evenly at all wavelengths by dust particles greater than one micron (millionth of a meter), as infrared data had reported. "The IUE observation," Kondo said, "indicates the gas is either clumpy or is varying under the pressure of the stellar wind and radiation. If so, this would tend to complement IRAS and ground-telescope observations that a substantial dust cloud of protoplanetary material exists around Beta Pictoris." Kondo cautioned that the lack of observed extinction could also be due to viewing the star just a little off-plane, so that the telescope's line-of-sight was not aligned directly through the disk of orbiting dusty matter. However, Bruh-weiler added, "that would be unlikely. All evidence seems to point to a belt too thick around Beta Pictoris for the line-of-sight to be missing the dust belt." (NASA Release 85-52)
Scientists from China's Ministry of Astronautics announced the previous week plans to improve the design of their existing rockets so they could launch heavier satellites into geostationary orbits, thus challenging the western nations' domination of commercial exploitation of space, the New Scientist reported. China had a rocket that could put 750-kg communications satellites into geostationary orbit, which they used the previous year to launch their first such satellite. Jean Vandenkerckhove of the European Space Agency (ESA) said the rocket made "Chinese launch capability equivalent to Europe's Ariane 3 rocket." China's rocket, the Long March 3, had two liquid-fuel stages and one cryogenic stage fuelled by liquid hydrogen and oxygen. Chinese engineers said they planned to add extra boosters to allow them to put heavier loads, possibly two satellites, into space. The engineers also spoke of plans to develop a cryogenic upper stage for the rocket that could launch 2.5-ton satellites 35,000 km high into geostationary orbit. That would give China a capability close to that of Ariane 4, Europe's newest rocket. However, Wu Ke Li, in charge of Chinese interest at the Paris Air Show where China for the first time had an exhibit, would not confirm or deny the plans. Western engineers were impressed by China's existing ability because Long March 3 placed their satellite into correct orbit without flight tests, since China could not afford such tests. Instead, the Chinese relied on elaborate space simulators for checking satellites and launch components. Vandenkerckhove said China's launch facilities were at a disadvantage compared with Ariane because the compartment for satellites on Long March 3 was smaller than on Ariane 3, measuring 2.3 m rather than 2.9 m. However, Yi Zluo Hyang, one of the Long March 3 designers, said, "Our launch costs will be lower than any other service, partly because we have lower labor costs, but also because we will be supported by the government." During the past year, China had signed cooperative agreements in space science and technology with the U.S., W. Germany, France, and Britian; and they were pursuing an interest in remote-sensing satellites. (New Scientist, June 6/85, 4)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) requested proposals for a 12-month study of an advanced high-thrust, high-performance liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engine that could be used for the advanced launch vehicles being examined in NASA/Air Force Space Transportation Architecture Studies (STAS), which included heavy lift launch vehicles, Defense Daily reported. NASA considered the advanced LOX/hydrogen cryogenic engine and a new LOX/hydrocarbon engine to be key elements to advanced transportation systems. MSFC said it planned to award up to three parallel firm-fixed-price contracts for the study of the Space Transportation Main Engine (STME). During the study, the contractors would prepare parametric trade-off data for engine requirements and configurations that might be employed in future launch vehicles. NASA would compare these engine configurations to the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) for application to new launch vehicles. The contractors would identify candidate engine configurations, compare their features, and then recommend engine configurations that would best satisfy the requirements of future launch vehicles. The three principal contenders for the STME study were Rockwell's Rocket-dyne Div., prime contractor for the SSME; and Aerojet Technologies and United Technologies's Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, who conducted component improvement studies for the SSME. (D/D, Nov 21/85, 105) Military Applications
Approximately 200 NASA management officials and contractors met June 12 and 13 at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to discuss initiatives to improve quality and productivity in NASA/contractor operations, the Marshall Star reported. The first NASA/Hardware Contractors Productivity Conference was at MSFC in April 1984. Attendees at the 1985 conference heard an interim report on the status of activities implemented as a result of the 1984 meeting and related recommendations. NASA and contractor panels discussed topics such as quality in relationship to productivity; productivity and quality initiatives and incentives; efforts toward implementing participative management techniques; and improvement in specification, preplanning, and measurement. The conference was part of NASA's continuing effort to provide national leadership in the development and application of advanced technology and management practices. During fiscal year 1984, about 85% of NASA's $7.2 billion budget was placed with contractors. "It's very important,'' said William Reynolds, associate director for management in MSFC's science and engineering directorate, "that NASA's productivity effort include an improved relationship with the NASA hardware and service/support contractors.'' (Marshall Star, June 12/85, 1)
NASA Administrator James Beggs told Congress that the new version of the Centaur rocket designed for Space Shuttle-launched planetary missions would cost about $110 million more ($90 million for NASA; $20 million for the Air Force) than expected [see NASA/Budget, Feb. 28], the Washington Post reported. Wider and shorter than the old-model Centaur to fit in the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, the new rocket would launch in 1986 two spacecraft toward Jupiter. An even shorter version starting in 1987 would launch from the Space Shuttle two classified missions for the Air Force. Beggs told the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications that "We underestimated the job of integrating the Centaur into the shuttle and General Dynamics underestimated the cost of changing the configuration of the rocket." The new estimates raised Centaur program costs from $755 million to $865 million. (W Post, May 24/85, A16)
NASA announced it had signed a memorandum of understanding for its materials processing in space research program with Grumman Corp. to experiment with directional solidification of gallium arsenide and other semiconductor materials and various metals and alloys. The process would apply to production of semiconductor crystals and magnets for electrical motors, with initial emphasis on semiconductor materials. Directional solidification would use precisely controlled temperatures to melt and solidify a material, during which the material's crystalline structure would align in a fashion that should virtually eliminate any compound imperfections. Flawless semiconductor crystals would yield a greater quantity and quality of microcircuit chips, leading to higher-speed electronic devices that would consume less power and to greater miniaturization. The agreement called for an information exchange, with NASA and Grumman Corp. designating personnel for the program. NASA would put up no funds for the program; Grumman expected to spend $6 million in the first three years. (NASA Release 85-23; W Times, Feb 13/85, 8B) NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION During October: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) announced that its university programs, primarily involving undergraduate students, combined futuristic space concepts with realistic engineering design challenges. The first program, cosponsored by NASA Headquarters and Ames Research Center (ARC) and Johnson Space Center (JSC), required students to design a spacesuit glove that would allow astronauts maximum flexibility at eight lb.-per-sq-in., the pressure planned for future extravehicular activity. Ten universities responded to a request for proposals, and a team from Kansas State University won the design competition. The second broader program, entering its second phase of a two-year pilot effort, required universities to adopt NASA advanced space design projects for senior design classes. Each university received a grant and was aligned with a NASA center that provided guidance, data, and lecturers during the academic year and 10-week summer work assignments for three students. The initial group of centers, schools, and projects were: ARC/University of Wisconsin/manned Mars habitat; ARC/University of Colorado/geosynchro-nous space station; Langley Research Center; (LaRC)/Virginia Polytechnic Institute/orbital servicing center; LaRC/Massachusetts Institute of Technology/ lunar base-manned Mars mission; Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)/ Georgia Institute of Technology/lunar site preparation; Lewis Research Center (LeRC)/University of Washington/space manufacturing facility; LeRC/Univer-sity of Michigan/lunar space transportation system; and JSC/University of Texas and Texas A & M/manned Mars mission. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 10)
The Mutual Broadcasting System announced plans to use its excess satellite space to deliver messages at rates low enough to compete with the postal service, the Washington Post reported. The company estimated that telecommunications business from the new Mutual Satellite Services division would generate 50% of its revenue by 1990. Mutual's principal business was the Mutual Radio Network, which owned receiving dishes at more than 700 locations nationwide. Mutual planned starting in mid-1985 to send audio and data transmissions over a little-used portion of the FM radio spectrum to specially tuned radios in clients' offices. Cassette tape recorders attached to the radios would receive voice communications and send them to high-speed printers. Called MultiComm, the system would allow any organization to create its own private network for sending encrypted audio, data, printed material, or computer software to a number of locations simultaneously. Senders could relay a 300- to 450-word message to 500 receivers for 25 to 30 cents per recipient, compared to a first-class letter at 22 cents. Other electronic mail systems use a wire hookup between the company providing the satellite link and the preceding page blank not filmed PACT. % Ih ...INTENTION ALLY BLAKE message recipient; Mutual would provide the first system in which the signal was transmitted by radio. (W Post, Jan 25/85, D2) During January. A six-man Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) team at the South Pole on December 14, 1984, had taken turns talking to colleagues in Greenbelt, Maryland, using one of two unprecedented satellite communications links the group had installed over the previous month, the Goddard News reported. "The conversation was amazingly audible," said Tony Com-beriate, a GSFC communications expert and member of the South Pole satellite data-link project team. "The folks at Goddard sounded like they were just a few feet away." Although voice communications capabilities from the South Pole using Ham radio had existed for some time, the systems were weather dependent and usually very noisy. The GSFC group used the 17-year-old Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-3) to establish the two-way voice link. The key breakthrough was installation of the scientific data link, which enabled daily transmittal of information from the Pole, across Antarctica, and to the U.S. Before system installation, scientific data from the pole was stored during the region's winter months and shipped out by aircraft from November through February. The new system permitted transmission of high-quality scientific data by using three existing polar orbiting satellites (a 4th was scheduled soon). Each satellite passed the pole about 14 times daily and relayed data to McMurdo Sound, which retransmitted it to a geosynchronous satellite, which in turn transmitted it to the U.S. Since the Pole signals were too far below the horizon to be acquired by normal communications satellites, the relay route was necessary. Researchers had previously considered a communications link from the South Pole, but decided it was too costly and impractical, perhaps taking several years and costing an estimated $35 million. The GSFC approach had cost about $250,000 and taken nine months, because it used existing satellites, excess equipment, and had support from several organizations. Scientists could receive daily transmission of reliable data on global weather patterns, the magnetospheric cusp, upper atmosphere, and glacio-logical and seismic studies to name a few. The link also could evolve into a data collection network for many of the unmanned observatories (ground-based satellites) scattered throughout Antarctica. (Goddard News, Jan 85, 6)
Vice President George Bush, after meeting with French President Francois Mitterrand and other French leaders in Paris, said the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program and the European French-sponsored Eureka technology program were not incompatible, Defense Daily reported. Seeking to calm concerns that the Eureka program was in competition with SDI for scientific and technology talent, Bush said that after his talks with the French that "I more firmly believe . . . there is no incompatibility between Eureka. . .and SDI. . . "They understand our research program, which is strictly related to strategic defense, and I think we understand much more clearly their concept of collective research on broad technology as far as Europe is concerned," Bush commented. Technology ministers from 16 European countries had scheduled a meeting for July 17 in Paris to discuss projects and areas of cooperation in the Eureka program. Five areas of high technology were identified for joint programs: information technology, robotics, communications, bio-technology, and new materials. (D/D, July 8/85, 1)
Robert Cooper, director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), said in testimony delivered in late March before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee research and development subcommittee that a space plane capable of flying to anywhere on the earth within half an hour to intercept enemy bombers or perform space spy missions might be possible within the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. The U.S. Space Shuttle, which had limited ability to maneuver in space, was put in orbit only after a lengthy and complicated rocket launch. So the U.S. Air Force wanted a "transatmospheric vehicle" that would be able to quickly reach and return from space like an ordinary aircraft. Cooper said a recent breakthrough in so-called ramjet technology might make possible an aircraft capable of taking off from a runway and reaching speeds of Mach 25 (times the speed of sound), the velocity necessary to escape earth's gravity. Cooper noted the plane would weigh about 100,000 lb., take off from and land on a 10,000-foot runway, and probably use hydrogen as a fuel. Only a small amount of rocket power would be required to "deorbit" the plane, he said. DARPA proposed to build two full-scale model ramjet engines for testing on the ground. "There are a number of very interesting technical problems here . . . none of them insurmountable. They're all within our grasp," Cooper said. Cooper explained that the ramjet combustion providing the extra boost took place only when the air flowing through the jet engine chamber was at supersonic speeds. Ordinarily, to get air flowing at this speed through the entire length of the chamber, the aircraft itself had to be moving at Mach 6. However, "a way has been found/' he said, "to use a subsidiary scheme for driving the air through the engine up to supersonic speeds, even though the vehicle on which the engine is attached is sitting on the runway." By slightly varying the geometry of the engine, it might be possible to fly the aircraft from takeoff to Mach 6, and "with slight variations" fly from Mach 6 to 14 and then to Mach 25, Cooper said. The Air Force and Navy were interested in the engine, development of which marked a resurgence in hypersonic speed research that had been "put on a back burner" in the late 1960s, Cooper commented. (W Times, Apr 2/ 85, 3A)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
Members of the U.S. House Science and Technology space science and applications subcommittee questioned Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, office of space flight, on the agency's decision not to request funding for a 5th orbiter in its FY 86 budget, Aerospace Daily reported. Moore restated the agency's position that a four-orbiter fleet was adequate to meet traffic demand for the next five years or so, pointing out a recent decline in commercial and military traffic. NASA had requested $2.1 billion for 14 FY 86 Space Shuttle flights; Moore said NASA planned 17 missions in FY 87, 19 in FY 88, and projected 24 per year after that. Subcommittee chairman Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who had indicated strong support for a fifth orbiter, questioned Moore on the likelihood of increased launch traffic demand, potential schedule impacts of an accident, and the possibility of stretching out orbiter fabrication over a seven-to-eight-year period. Moore responded that NASA's program included adequate funding for structural spares procurement and maintenance of a viable base for initiating orbiter production over the next several years, pointing out that any funds for orbiter construction over a seven-to-eight-year period would be an add-on to NASA's runout budget and could be in competition with other items. He had also remarked on increasingly pessimistic market projections, even considering upcoming yearly launches of 18 to 20 communications satellites. Earlier, NASA Administrator James Beggs, in response to questions on NASA's exploring possibilities of private-sector purchase of a 5th orbiter, had said that no Space Shuttle privitization proposals submitted to NASA would result in a cost savings to the government. (A/D, Feb 22/85, 1)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
NASA announced that on December 26 its Venus orbiting Pioneer spacecraft began six weeks of observations of Halley's Comet during the comet's most active period closest to the sun (perihelion). Near the time of perihelion, the comet, Venus, and Pioneer were located on the opposite side of the sun from earth, making observations difficult from earth (160 million miles away). Pioneer was the only spacecraft close to Halley's Comet during perihelion, and NASA expected that Pioneer's ultraviolet observations would provide valuable insights into the state of the comet in advance of flybys of Halley's by European, Soviet, and Japanese spacecraft beginning March 6, 1986. Pioneer's first phase of observations would end January 4 when both Venus and Pioneer passed behind the sun for almost a month, cutting off effective communications between the spacecraft and ground controllers at Ames Research Center. Observations would resume about February 3, six days before perihelion, and would continue until March 6. NASA scheduled Pioneer to produce two images of the comet in ultraviolet light. One would show the hydrogen cloud surrounding the comet, an image expected to be 20 times larger than a photo of the comet in visible light. The image would come from 20,000 scans of the comet as it drifted for three days through Pioneer's ultraviolet spectrometer's field of view. A second image would show both Venus and Halley's Comet in a single view. (NASA Release Planetary Exploration
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) hosted January 10-11 150 cometary scientists from around the world at a meeting of the Internatl. Halley Watch (IHW), for which JPL was the western hemisphere lead center and University of Erlangen-Nurnberg, W. Germany, the eastern hemisphere lead center, the JPL Universe reported. Lead center representatives at the meeting had joined IHW discipline specialists in such fields as astronomy, photometry and polarimetry, radio science, and spectroscopy; representatives of European, Japanese, and Soviet spacecraft missions to Halley; and IHW steering group members. The IHW organized a group of ground-based professional and amateur Halley watchers worldwide to coordinate their observations with those of airborne, earth-orbital, and spacecraft-flyby observations. Nine hundred professional astronomers from 50 countries and some 300 amateur astronomers had signed on as members of the IHW. JPL expected the IHW meeting would be the last before perihelion, Halley's closest approach to the sun on February 9 at 53.1 million miles. Since its 1948 inbound leg of its 74-year orbit around the sun, Halley would make its closest approaches to earth on November 27 at 57.6 million miles and the following April 11 at 39 million miles. Astronomers had already observed that Halley's coma (the bright halo of dust and gas surrounding the nucleus) had begun developing and questioned why the comet exhibited this feature at such a great distance from the sun. Early observations had also unexpectedly revealed the comet's brightness was fluctuating. Amateur observers with small telescopes would be able to see Halley by fall 1985; naked-eye viewing would be possible by March or April 1986. Halley would appear again in 2061. (JPL Universe, Jan 25/85, 1)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that M. Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, and Ing. Heise, executive vice president and president of the Space Systems Group of Messerschmidt/Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno, signed a contract for the development of the European Retrievable Carrier, EURECA, a payload carrier intended for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle. MBB/Erno would serve as EURECA prime contractor with support from some 24 European industrial firms. The approximately $95 million contract called for delivery of the EURECA flight unit to NASA by the end of 1987 for launch from the Space Shuttle in March 1988 and recovery, by the Space Shuttle, six months later. The first EURECA payload, developed by European national institutes and space agencies, would consist primarily of experiments in the microgravity sciences (life and material sciences) and a limited number of experiments in space science and technology. Work on the payload would proceed in parallel with the development of the carrier, and plans called for delivery of all payload elements to MBB/Erno by spring 1987 for integration onboard EURECA before shipment to the U.S. The EURECA payload carrier incorporated the more attractive features of Spacelab and in addition provided for relatively long duration flights (up to eight months), higher power and mass capability for the payload, and lower costs compared with Spacelab and many conventional satellites because the system occupied only about 2.5 m of the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay. ESA also envisioned EURECA's eventual use in association with the proposed U.S. space station, with the EURECA operating either in a free-flying mode (co-orbiting with the space station or in polar orbit) or as a man-tended, semipermanent payload carrier with modified docking facilities. (ESA release July 1/85)
NASA announced that it signed a 21-month agreement with Scott Science and Technology, Inc. (SST) to provide technical expertise to SST in the development of a commercial liquid-fuel upper stage for boosting Space Shuttle-deployed satellites to geosynchrous orbit. SST, whose president was former astronaut David Scott, had worked for two years on developing the upper stage, called the Satellite Transfer Vehicle, which would be able to boost satellites ranging from 2,000 to 19,000 lb. On some missions, the stage would be recoverable. Engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center would monitor the stage's development and consult with SST staff on technical problems. SST would reimburse NASA for the use of any test facilities and the salaries and travel of JSC personnel working on the project. (NASA Release 85-143)
NASA announced that its Administrator, James Beggs, and Canadian Minister of Science and Technology, The Honorable Tom Sidden, signed on April 16 a memorandum of understanding to conduct a cooperative program for detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned Space Station. Under the memorandum, the countries for the next two years would conduct parallel Phase B studies and exchange information on their work. Canada, which had approved $8.8 million for the first year of Phase B, would study a space construction and servicing system, a solar array for a platform or as a potential auxiliary power source for the Space Station, and a remote sensing facility. At the signing, Administrator Beggs said that "we are pleased Canada has become an international partner in [this] phase of the Space Station's development. We look forward to working with our friends in Canada, Europe, and Japan in building a firm foundation for future cooperation on a permanently manned Space Station to serve the needs of the free world in developing the peaceful uses of space well into the next century." Separate agreements would cover cooperative efforts during development, operation, and use phases of the Space Station. (NASA Release 85-58)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced award of $5 million 26-month contracts to Boeing Aerospace Co., General Dynamics, Martin Marietta, and Rockwell Internatl. to perform studies on space transportation architecture—the total transportation system of flight elements, ground and orbital support systems, and their operational interactions. NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) awarded and would manage the General Dynamics and Martin Marietta contracts; the Air Force Space Division in Los Angeles, the Boeing and Rockwell contracts. The two agencies and four companies would maintain close coordination throughout the award period. Broad objectives of the studies were to determine the nation's overall space transportation system architectures, including transportation and support systems needed to simultaneously meet mission and operational requirements, while substantially reducing total life-cycle cost; to identify the technologies required for the architectures; and to refine the resulting transportation and support system concept(s) for the mid-1990s if firm requirements were identified. After the agencies first analyzed and provided projected mission/payload/ operational requirements for the mid-1990s to 2010, the companies would analyze mission requirements, develop and analyze architecture approaches, define future transportation system concepts, and identify technologies applicable to transportation system options. Transportation system architectures and concepts would include launch and upper-stage flight systems, mission control concepts, ground support systems, logistics support systems, and on-orbit operations for both manned and unmanned systems. The resulting transportation architecture and vehicle concepts should outline and define the most promising concepts for improved cost-effectiveness and mission need accommodation for the specified period. (NASA Release 85-126)
NASA announced it had rescheduled for July 29 launch of Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger and delayed by as much as two weeks the previously scheduled September 19 maiden voyage of the orbiter Atlantis that was to carry a secret Pentagon payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. The July 12 Challenger launch abort forced NASA to design a new schedule that maintained a Discovery blastoff for August 24, delayed another Challenger mission from October 3 to early November, and kept a November 27 Atlantis flight and a December 20 Columbia mission. Kennedy Space Center (KSC) work crews had removed three parts from Challenger's No. 2 engine that engineers suspected could have triggered computers into ordering all three engines to shut down on the launch pad. One was a valve that failed to close when it should have, a second was a hydraulic actuator that ordered the valve to close, and the third was a controller that sent commands to the actuator. "We still suspect the actuator, and nothing we've found suggests anything else," KSC spokesman Hugh Harris said. "We are replacing all three parts and continue to analyze and test the parts we remove." NASA would test fresh parts on the pad, leading to a July 23 flight readiness review. This included electronics and leak checks of parts like pumps, turbines, and valves, not a test-firing of the engines. The delay meant a July 30 flight readiness firing test for Atlantis would take place September 12, which would delay Atlantis's maiden flight from September 19 to late September at the earliest. (WPost, July 16/85, A4)
Langley Research Center announced that John Langford of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology would speak February 11 on the MIT Monarch, a human-powered aircraft that had won first prize May 11, 1984, in the Kremer World Speed Competition. An all-volunteer team had designed and built the craft in 88 days during the summer of 1983 and had flown it 29 times before disassembling it. With an improved version, the team had made 35 flights in spring 1984, culminating in the record flight. Langford would discuss design consideration and construction details of the Monarch, including propulsion and avionics. (LaRC Release 85-5) Supersonic Transport
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
NASA officials confirmed a schedule calling for the next Space Shuttle orbiter to land at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Aviation Week reported, as a result of the successful hard-surface runway landing December 3 at Edwards Air Force Base by the orbiter Atlantis on mission 61-B. The landing was the first on a concrete surface since the orbiter Discovery damaged its brakes and tires while landing April 19 at KSC. NASA scheduled the orbiter Columbia on mission 61-C to land at KSC following its planned December 18 launch. Columbia was equipped with the necessary nosewheel steering system upgrades and would use steering instead of brakes as a primary control method for the KSC landing. During the December 3 landing, control inputs by mission commander Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, Jr. appeared to cause Atlantis to float slightly just before landing on the 15,000 ft. runway. The orbiter's wheels touched down approximately 2400 feet from the runway threshold, and Shaw applied only light braking during a 17,759-ft. landing roll. NASA slightly altered the Space Shuttle post-landing processing in an effort to remove Atlantis from the runway as soon as possible to allow the Air Force to reopen it for aircraft use. Normally personnel removed the orbiter's brakes in parallel with other close-out tasks before towing the vehicle back to NASA's Ames-Dryden Space Shuttle processing area at Edwards. They left on the brakes so that Atlantis could be moved to an apron area at the end and off to the side of the runway. H.W. Widick, chief of the Space Shuttle Integration Div., said a preliminary inspection of the brakes did not reveal any damage and that overall condition of the orbiter was good. (AvWk, Dec 9/85, 23)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)
Dr. Raymond Colladay, NASA's associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, said in an interview that NASA was developing a set of "technology roadmaps'' that would provide the framework for the government, military, and industry to implement programs that would allow the U.S. to meet the national aeronautics research and development goals proposed in a White House report, "National Aeronautical R&D Goals," Aerospace Daily reported. Dr. Colladay said the report, written by the White House Office of Science and Technology, had charged NASA with developing the quantitative performance levels and technology steps that would be required to achieve three major goals in subsonics, supersonics, and transatmospherics. NASA hoped to have the roadmaps, being developed in cooperation with the Defense Department and industry, completed in July for review at the next planned interagency meeting. The roadmaps "will represent a national consensus" on what needs to be done to achieve the aeronautics goals outlined in the report, Colladay said, although they would not spell out specific programs or funding levels. The report had three goals: to advance technology for a new generation of fuel-efficient, affordable U.S. subsonic aircraft; to develop the technology for efficient, long-range supersonic cruise capability for military and civil aircraft; and to develop options in aeronautics and space technology for routine cruising and maneuvering into and out of the atmosphere with takeoff and landing from conventional runways. A fourth major national R&D goal, Colladay noted, was to maintain the basic research and technology that supported those three goals. Colladay singled out the transatmospheric vehicle and hypersonic speeds as developments that would be “the biggest driver" with the "biggest payoff." Observers had identified hydroglen-fueled scramjets as holding greatest promise in producing substantially improved propulsive efficiency over current rocket technology. Colladay added that both NASA and the Defense Department were "very interested" in the hypersonic area. Vehicles of that type depended on further technological developments in propulsion, materials, and intelligent integrated flight controls. Colladay pointed out that NASA had made substantial progress in all those areas over the last decade. When questioned about future funding, Colladay indicated NASA might not face problems such as those created by the Office of Management and Budget when reportedly it had attempted to delete part of the NASA's aeronautics budget. Colladay said, "I think that the content of the program, when we focus on these national goals, will not be subjected to the same policy disagreements that we have had in the past," which centered primarily on the role of NASA in support of "civil aviation oriented research. In the case of supersonic cruise research and transatmospheric vehicles, there is no longterm commercial driver . . . that industry would do on their own . . . it's a clear example of where the government needs to take the lead to make it happen," Colladay concluded. (A/D, June 19/85, 1) During January: NASA announced it was testing a concept, called laminar (air)-flow control, which removed the layer of air molecules nearest an aircraft's wing surface to increase transport-aircraft flight efficiency. Since air/ skin friction during a subsonic flight's cruise phase caused about one-half of the total drag on an aircraft, the laminar-flow control would use suction through porous wing surfaces to remove the turbulent air, reducing drag and fuel consumption. NASA contractors had designed and fitted two laminar flow-control systems on the leading edge of each wing of a JetStar four-engine light transport. Cloves, perforated either by more than a million tiny suction holes or by narrow slots, encased the systems. Lockheed-Georgia Corp. had designed the test article on the JetStar's left wing; Douglas Aircraft Co. the one on the right wing. Lockheed's construction was a sandwich of nomex-honeycomb core and graphite epoxy-face sheets, covered by a thin sheet of titanium bonded to the surface. Slots in the titanium sheets, .004 in., ran the length of the section and were the openings that drew air through the surface, directing it down ducts in the wing into the fuselage. The Douglas test article, instead of slotted, was perforated by an electron beam that drilled 800 precise, nearly microscopic holes per sq. inch of wing surface. Both concepts had built-in systems to keep the wing surface insect and ice free. The Lockheed system pumped a cleansing fluid through the slots to the surface, making it too slippery for insects to adhere. The Douglas concept used a retractable insect shield deployed in front of the leading-edge panel during takeoff, climb, descent, and landing. After tuning the leading-edge systems for best performance, NASA would flight test the airplane at various locations around the country at different times of year to record effects of weather and insect conditions. Langley Research Center (LaRC) researchers managing the project pointed out that one energy-saving transport configuration, already efficient by today's standards, would be 22% more efficient with the addition of laminar-flow control. (NASA announcement, Jan 85, 7) NASA announced that up to 20% of all fatal light-airplane accidents might be preventable with a LaRC- and ARC-developed wing modification, a carefully designed "glove" placed over the outer portion of a wing's leading edge and covering about the first 6 in. of the upper surface and first 18 in. of the lower surface. The glove was lightweight, had no moving parts, and required no maintenance. Wind-tunnel and flight tests of reshaped wings had revealed greatly increased resistance to airplane spins, which could result in aircraft stalls. Before modification, three test airplanes would enter a spin about 18 of every 20 times pilots stalled wings and applied pro-spin controls. With LaRC's wing leading-edge design, the same planes had entered a spin only once in every 20 attempts. The spins that did occur had required improper airplane loading or extremely aggravated pilot inputs. And the pilot usually had three to four times as long (measured in seconds) to make a correction before the plane entered a spin. NASA hoped ultimately to provide airplane designers with the ability to incorporate the modification as an integral part of a wing, rather than as an add-on, and the analytical tools to determine amounts of spin resistance for new planes. NASA was expanding the research beyond the series on unswept, low-wing airplanes to include high-wing planes and those with different airfoil shapes. (NASA anno Jan 85, 12)
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) issued a request for proposals to LTV, Martin Marietta, and TRW to compete for a contract to design, develop, and manufacture an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). The three companies worked previously on OMV definition studies and had until December 20, 1985, to respond. NASA expected to award the contract in June 1986 and planned the first OMV flight for early 1991. The contract would include provisions for testing and hardware flight testing before the OMV's actual operational missions. The company selected would build one vehicle, with NASA having an option to request construction of a second. Often called a "space tug," the OMV would transfer satellites and other objects between earth orbits and would extend the reach of the Space Shuttle by about 1000 miles. It would have the ability to retrieve satellites from high orbits, bring them back to the Space Shuttle for maintenance and repair, then return them to their operational orbits. The OMV would also be able to reboost satellites as their orbits gradually decayed. The OMV would be an unmanned spacecraft, 15 feet in diameter and approximately 4 feet long. Its life would be about 10 years with refurbishment and on-orbit maintenance included in the design. NASA expected initially to deploy the OMV from the Space Shuttle for short duration missions; later the OMV would remain in orbit for extended periods for use in both Space Shuttle-based and space station-based modes of operation. (NASA Release 85-151) Civilian Programs
NASA and United Technologies's United Space Boosters Inc.'s Booster Production Co. officials would break ground January 30 for Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) assembly and refurbishment facility at KSC, the Marshall Star reported. The company had designed and would build the 238,000-sq.-ft. facility, scheduled for completion in 1986, that would employ about 700 people to perform most of the Space Shuttle's SRB refurbishment previously done by the company at various locations at the center and adjacent Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Refurbishment, performed under an MSFC contract, would include replacement of insulation on booster components, addition of electronic and guidance systems, and reinstallation of parachutes and ordnance. The refurbished booster components, including forward and aft skirts and frustum, would then undergo computerized checkout in the facility before delivery to NASA for booster stacking. The new facility would process up to 24 flight sets of solid-fuel rocket boosters yearly and would offer maximum efficiency with extensive use of robotics and computer-controlled production techniques developed in MSFC's Productivity Enhancement Center. (Marshall Star, Jan 30/85, 1)
In a study important to the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) missile defense program, Space Shuttle crew aboard Challenger on mission 51-F briefly fired the orbiter's rocket engines while scientists in Australia attempted to analyze the effect on the ionosphere, the Washington Post reported. Challenger's engines burned 600 lb. of fuel as the spacecraft passed over an observatory in Tasmania where telescopes measured the effect of the rocket exhaust on the charged gas particles, called plasma, that made up the ionosphere. A second shorter rocket firing took place over observatories in Massachusetts. (W Post, Aug 5/85, A4)
Michael Burch, assistant secretary of defense for public affairs, said beginning in 1987, two years earlier than planned, two Space Shuttle flights a year would carry experiments for President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research program, with initial experiments testing the ability to detect, track, and aim against targets in space, the Washington Post reported. The tracking and targeting tests, developed in a Pentagon research program that antedated the Reagan Administration, would include a mounting device for attaching the telescope-like sight to the Space Shuttle and sensors that could pick up at a distance equal to the width of the U.S. the "signature of objects" such as the booster plume of a missile. The Department of Defense had canceled a Space Shuttle test of the system's main telescope, though sources said it would continue land-based tests to develop a more capable telescope. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the previous year's congressional SDI program budget cuts would delay by one year an integrated-system demonstration. (W Post, Feb 20/85, A5)
Los Angeles's Cedars-Sinai Medical Center announced development of a new surgical tool, using JPL's excimer (excited "dimer") laser technology, for one of medicine's most difficult and long-awaited procedures—a means to clean out clogged vascular passages without surgical intervention, the JPL Universe reported. The lasers would be a significant alternative to existing treatments—that of angioplasty, in which a balloon catheter squeezed blockage out of the way, or by-pass surgery. A JPL research team with Cedars-Sinai colleagues had developed the new laser technology, which used glass-magnetic switches in which a xenon chloride-excimer laser produced a uniform beam of energy controlled and pulsed to extremely short periods, to overcome the problems of lack of precision and control and high heat of current medical lasers. The JPL/Ce-dars/Sinai procedure would allow a fiber-optic catheter, placed nonsurgically in the brachial and femoral arteries and threaded to the site of the obstruction, to transmit the laser's energy to the clogged vessel. The fiber-optic imaging system would enable doctors to view the artery on a TV screen as the laser cleared the material forming the blockage. The speed of the laser's delivery—10 to 200 billionths of a second bursts of ultraviolet light—allowed the laser to cut through arterial plaque with precision and little damage to surrounding tissue. Although researchers were cautious in predictions of the laser's medical potential, they believed results of experimentation, though not yet done on living human patients, signaled additional future medical applications, ranging from removal of kidney stones to changing the eye shape of patients with myopia. (JPL Universe, Feb 8/85, 1)
Officials at Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Research announced that today Japan launched from the Kagoshima Space Center in Kyushu its second spacecraft to observe Halley's Comet the following March, the NY Times reported. The spacecraft, Planet A, was on a trajectory that would take it within about 60,000 miles of the comet. The USSR had two craft bound for Halley and the European Space Agency had one. Planet A had a solar-wind analyzer to measure the distribution and direction of high-energy particles from the sun as they encountered the vicinity of Halley's Comet and an ultraviolet telescopic camera to examine the cloud of atomic hydrogen, glowing in the ultraviolet, that extended tens of thousands of miles out from the comet. (NYT, Aug 20/85, C3)
NASA announced it had selected Grumman Data System Corp. for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for a high-speed (Class VI) computer system for Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The fixed-price contract would require Grumman to provide hardware, software, documentation, and services for installation and maintenance of a scientific- and engineering-computations system in support of MSFC's programs in thermal, electrical, load, and structural-design characteristics that influence flight-vehicle and payload performance. The five-year contract, to begin no later than August 1985, would cost about $42 million and provide for a total lease period, with renewal in periods of one to 12 months, not to exceed 60 months. (NASA Release 8515)
During NASA's general management status review, the office of space flight reported on the agency objective to undertake a pricing and marketing strategy that would capture for the STS a dominant percentage of the planned free-world, commercially launched payloads, as measured yearly by payments for launch reservations, through the end of CY 88. R. Wisniewski, assistant associate administrator, noted that a NASA recommendation for full-cost recovery sent to the White House would likely undergo close scrutiny. He anticipated strong competition as NASA marketed the Space Shuttle capability, with 28 to 36 STS launches of the approximately 58 planned payloads through 1988; Ariane would capture a sizeable portion of the remaining launches. Wisniewski reported $140 million in Space Shuttle receipts in FY 84 and predicted $188 million in Space Shuttle revenue in FY 85. (GMSR Report, Jan 15/85, 35)
The National Academy of Sciences' Astronomy Survey Committee, the NASA Solar System Exploration Committee, and the NASA Committee on Solar and Space Physics made recommendations for future NASA space exploration and science programs, which Rep. Wyche Fowler, Jr. (D-Ga.) was asking the U.S. House to endorse in concurrent resolutions, Defense Daily reported. Advisory committee recommendations were often the basis for programs NASA sought to implement. The Astronomy Survey Committee recommended the following major new programs "in order of priority" for total funding of up to $950 million (in constant 1980 dollars) over the next ten years: (1) the advanced x-ray astrophysics facility (AXAF) to be authorized in FY 87, (2) a very-long baseline (VLB) array of radio telescopes, (3) a new technology telescope (NTT) of the 15-m class operating from the ground at optical and infrared wavelengths, and (4) a large deployable reflector (LDR) in space. The Solar System Exploration Committee recommended a program funded at a sustained annual level of $300 million per year (in FY 84 dollars). Its four initial core program recommendations were the Venus radar mapper (authorized in 1984), the Mars observer (authorized in FY 85), a comet rendezvous/ asteroid flyby to be authorized in FY 87 for a 1990-92 launch, and the Titan probe/Saturn orbiter to be authorized for a 1988-92 launch as a joint NASA/ European Space Agency mission. Other committee recommendations included the Mars aeronomy orbiter, the Venus atmospheric probe, the lunar geoscience orbiter, the Mars surface probe, the comet atomized sample return, the multiple mainbelt asteroid orbiter/flyby, the earth-approaching asteroid rendezvous, the Saturn flyby/ probe, the Uranus flyby/probe, the Neptune flyby/probe, and the Pluto flyby. The Committee on Solar and Space Physics recommended an average annual funding of $400 million (in FY 84 dollars) "which would be sufficient to achieve the highest objectives in solar and space physics between the year 1988 and the year 2000." Major missions recommended were the upper atmosphere research satellite (authorized in FY 85), solar optical telescope for launch in 1990, the international solar terrestrial physics program for launch between 1989 and 1993, a solar probe for launch in 1995, and a solar polar orbiter to be launched in 2000. The committee also endorsed a series of moderate Explorer-class missions of about one launch per year. (D/D, Oct 8/85, 197)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
NASA announced that it had scheduled for March 27 the first government flight in the joint Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)/U.S. and the Air Force/NASA X-29 flight research program. The X-29 was a high-performance research aircraft incorporating a wide variety of advanced technologies, each aimed at producing a better fighter-type aircraft. As a technology demonstrator, the X-29 was intended to provide engineering data for future design rather than to serve as a prototype for production. The flight research program followed four recently completed contractor demonstration flights flown by Grumman Aerospace Corp., builder of the experimental craft for DARPA. All flights were at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). NASA, Air Force, and Grumman pilots would fly the first phase or initial concept evaluation of the government flight research program and then would gradually increase the performance of the forward-swept wing aircraft to speeds of about Mach 0.6 (almost 400 mph) at altitudes of about 30,000 ft. That phase would include as many as 30 flights and would conclude during the summer. The first three flights would concentrate on handling qualities and stability and control aspects of the aircraft in its backup flight control mode, one of three different modes of the X-29's computer-controlled flight. These flights would also provide pilot familiarization and allow smooth program team transition from the contractor to the government. NASA test pilot Stephen Ishmael would pilot the first flight. Following the three flights, NASA would reconfigure the DFRC control room from its functional flight monitoring mode to a research mode that would allow the team to expand the aircraft's flight envelope for the second flight research phase scheduled for early fall 1985. Prior to start of the second phase or full envelope concept evaluation, the contractor would modify the aircraft's flight control system to incorporate full envelope flight control system capabilities. The second phase, lasting through October 1986, called for as many as 100 research flights by NASA and Air Force pilots and should extend the X-29's flight envelope to Mach 1.5, about 1,000 mph, and to 50,000 ft. in altitude. (NASA Release 85-40) During May: Dr. George Keyworth, II, the President's science advisor, released a report of the Aeronautical Policy Review Committee that proposed national goals for research and development in aeronautics, NASA reported. The report stressed that, in the face of strong and growing challenges from foreign interests, the U.S. would maintain lasting aeronautical leadership only by vigorous application of the country's traditional strength—innovative technology. The report also pointed out that there were aeronautical opportunities that could make virtually all of that day's operational military and civil aircraft obsolete before the end of the century. The report reaffirmed the government's role in supporting research and technology in aeronautics. "From our viewpoint, aeronautical research and technology remain an important investment. Our national interests, in particular our national security interests, dictate continued federal support." The first goal outlined in the report addressed advancement of technologies applicable to a variety of subsonic aircraft including short-, medium-, and long-range transports; rotorcraft; high-speed turboprop engines; all-composite primary structures; high-lift aerodynamics systems, as well as new flight control and guidance improvements. The second goal concerned higher-speed regimes of supersonic transports. The report noted that the Reagan Administration had made no commitment to supersonic transports, but was laying the groundwork, both in NASA and the Department of Defense, in the fundamental technologies essential for any future efforts in supersonic flight. The third goal called for capturing the potential payoffs available from super high-speed flight—hypersonic speeds and transatmospheric vehicles. These vehicles would operate from conventional runways, maneuver at the fringe of the atmosphere, and ascend into space orbit when required. The report concluded that the government could only provide part of the technological base and support to achieve those goals and that private industry must share in the development of new technology and in its application to new projects. (NASA Activities, May 85, 9)
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it awarded a three-year, $35,181,700 contract to the Space Transportation Systems Division of Rockwell International for Space Shuttle systems integration work at MSFC, Kennedy Space Center, and Vandenberg Air Force Base. The contract called for provision of management, personnel, equipment, materials, and resources from July 1, 1985 to June 30, 1988. (MSFC Release 85-34)
NASA announced that 1986 would be its most productive year ever in space science activities, including a variety of "space firsts" and several major scientific studies that would be started or continued. To increase the public's knowledge and understanding of NASA's scientific programs, NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications and the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum would work together in a yearlong program entitled "1986—A Year for Space Science." The two organizations planned exhibits, audio-visual presentations, publications, and a lecture series at the Air and Space Museum and several other locations throughout the U.S. In addition, the National Air and Space Museum would carry NASA mission events on TV at designated locations in the museum. Major space science activities in 1986 would include the Voyager 2 encounter in January with Uranus; the culmination of several scientific investigations of Comet Halley; launch in May from the Space Shuttle of Galileo toward Jupiter; and also in May launch from the Space Shuttle Challenger of the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft to conduct comparative studies of the sun and its heliosphere. In addition, NASA scheduled for launch in late summer the Hubble Space Telescope, the largest telescope to be placed in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-159)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B celebrated Thanksgiving in space today, saying it was one of the best Thanksgivings they ever had, the Washington Times reported. It was the first U.S. manned spaceflight during that holiday since the third Skylab flight in 1973. The crew's main job for the day was deployment of the 4,144-lb. SATCOM KU-2 satellite owned and operated by RCA American Communications (RCA Americom). The uninsured $50 million satellite was the last of three KU-brand domestic communications satellites that operated in the 12 to 14 gigahertz range. It had 16 operational transponders and six spares, each transmitting 45 watts of power, more than the 12 to 30 watts used for C-Band transponders. The payload assist module (PAM) on the satellite was instrumented with radio frequency telemetry that would downlink data to ARIA (advanced range instrumentation aircraft) during burn of the solid-fuel rocket motor, a mission requirement for this first flight of a PAM-D2, the Kennedy Space Center Spaceport News explained. The uprated upper stage was identical to the PAM-D, except for size and weight. The spinup would be noticeably slower due to the larger mass and inertial components of the payload. NASA designed PAM-D2 to place up to 4,200 lb. in geosynchronous orbit, compared to the 2,800-lb. PAM-D version. The crew's dinner menu—chicken consomme, smoked turkey, cranberry sauce, green beans, corn, pasta, butter cookies, and lemonade—sounded traditional, but the turkey was preserved before launch by irradiation, sealed in foil, and had to be heated in a device similar to a toaster oven. Crew added warm water to the consomme, vegetables, and pasta to make them edible. (IV Times, Nov 29/85, 3A; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
NASA announced that a Pepsi-Cola dispensing technology would fly aboard Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for launch on July 12, provided time permitted completion of NASA qualification procedures at the Johnson Space Center. The container, developed by Pepsi-Cola USA and Enviro-Spray Systems (a subsidiary of Grow Group) at their own initiative and expense, was capable of dispensing carbonated beverages, as well as other liquids in space, because pressure within the can was automatically renewed, whenever necessary, to maintain a steady flow of liquid. Pepsi-Cola had granted NASA a license for unrestricted use of the dispensing technology for testing carbonated beverages in space, and NASA would receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. (NASA Release 85-97)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
NASA announced that its first Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-1), after more than 18 years of service, failed to respond to commands to correct its eastward drift from geostationary position over the Gilbert Islands in the western Pacific. Robert Wales, ATS project operations director at Goddard Space Flight Center (GFSC), said that the ground control station in Hawaii could no longer keep ATS-1 at its present location and it would likely drift out of useful orbital position during the next six months. ATS-1, launched in December 1966 with an expected lifespan of three years, most recently had provided a voice and data communications capability to several information networks in the Pacific basin. The pan Pacific education and communications experiments by satellite (PEACESAT) program, the major user of ATS-1, would dissolve with the loss of the satellite. Program participants had transmitted educational, health, research, technology, and community services through ATS-1 to 23 autonomous terminals located in Hawaii, Cook Islands, the Mariana and Caroline Islands, Western and American Samoa, the Marshall Islands, Melanesia, New Zealand, and Australia. Some of ATS-1's notable achievements were the first transmission in 1967 of full-earth, cloud cover pictures from geosynchronous orbit; first transmission in 1967 of real-time TV pictures (Apollo 4 splashdown); two-way communication tests with commercial airliners to determine aircraft orientation effects on satellite communications, a cooperative venture with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the airlines in 1967 and 1968; link-up between U.S. and USSR scientists during an atmospheric, sea, and ice condition experiment in the Bering Sea in 1971; transmission of electrocardiographs from Hawaii to New Zealand and from Alaska to the University of Washington; and presentation of medical conferences over the PEACESAT network. The medical world had praised the Alaskan "doctor call" service provided by ATS-1 as the first innovative approach to rural medicine in the U.S. In the program, Public Health Service physicians could communicate daily through ATS-1 with trained health aides in the remote Alaskan bush country. Loss of ATS-1 would leave one other comparable satellite, ATS-3, launched in November 1967, in operation. Positioned in geosynchronous orbit over the Pacific Ocean south of Mexico, ATS-3 covered the U.S., most of the Atlantic Ocean, and a large part of the eastern Pacific including Hawaii. (NASA Release 85-45)
NASA announced it had submitted to the U.S. Congress today a report by its Advanced Technology Advisory Committee (ATAC) that said automation and robotics would be significant elements of the NASA Space Station program and that the initial Space Station design should accommodate evolution and growth in these technologies. The report, required under Public Law 98-371 that appropriated FY 85 NASA funds, noted that all Space Station elements, including the core station and associated unmanned platforms, vehicles, and ground facilities were candidates for the technologies, necessitating accelerated R&D in automation and robotics. The Automation and Robotics Panel, which assisted the Advisory Committee in a six-month study led by the California Space Institute, said that a desired level of funding for automation and robotics research would be 13% of the total Space Station costs; a minimum acceptable level was 7%. An augmented research program, the report said, would result in improved productivity from the initial station and much greater productivity from later versions of the Space Station. The report also said successful incorporation of automation and robotics into the Space Station program could lead to deployment of a new generation of flexible and adaptable space systems, which could provide the U.S. with new methods of generating and exploiting space knowledge in commercial activities and thus preserving U.S. leadership in space and industrial systems. Other report recommendations included: development of criteria for incorporating automation and robotics technology in the Space Station; verification of automated equipment performance, including terrestrial and space demonstration to validate technology for Space Station use; use of automation techniques to enhance NASA's management capability; establishment of measurements to verify inclusion of automation and robotics in the Space Station; development of a program for technology transfer to U.S. industries; and design of satellites and payloads accessible from the Space Station to accommodate service and repair by robots. NASA would incorporate report recommendations into the Phase B definition and preliminary design contracts [see Mar. 14] it was negotiating with industry teams. The Advisory Committee, made up of personnel from NASA Headquarters and centers, would continue to monitor automation and robotics developments and would report semi-annually to Congress. (NASA Release 85-46)
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched January 25, 1983, worked almost perfectly for 300 days until it depleted its liquid helium coolant and that it had achieved mission objectives, which were to produce an unbiased all-sky survey using a number of broad infrared photometry channels, to study selected galactic and extragalactic sources, and to map extended sources. For infrared astronomy, IRAS represented as great an improvement over ground-based telescopes as the Palomar 200-in. telescope had over Galileo's telescope. Because fewer than 1,000 infrared sources were cataloged before the IRAS launch, the sensitivity of IRAS produced a survey of a large unexplored area in the electromagnetic spectrum. The IRAS All-Sky Survey catalog contained about 250,000 sources, including some 20,000 new galaxies and 16,000 small extended sources. IRAS surveyed more than 96% of the sky, 16% more than was required for mission success. Information in the IRAS databased revolutionized the infrared study of the sky and provided a rich data source to observers in other wavebands. The IRAS program resulted from a cooperative effort among the U.S., The Netherlands, and the United Kingdom in the areas of operations, spacecraft design, infrared technology, and scientific collaboration. During the next four years, scientists would continue to examine and analyze the more than 200 billion data bits in the IRAS database and, by developing specialized processing techniques, possibly increase the sensitivity of the survey. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85) During October: NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSRC) awarded a 14-month $140,000 contract to Perkin-Elmer Corp. to study concepts and technologies needed fora next generation telescope with ten times the capability of the Hubble Space Telescope. This study, the first step toward preparing to launch a space telescope array in the first decade of the next century, would define a technology development plan for the array and provide NASA with cost and schedule data. Perkin-Elmer would initially examine the probable science such a telescope would perform as well as the concept of an array of telescopes working together as one. Perkin-Elmer said it would develop two telescope concepts based on the best use of the proposed space station and technology advancements needed to implement them. The first would emphasize assembly and optical alignment in orbit using the space station as an assembly base. The second concept would focus on modularization, ground assembly and checkout, and minimal on-orbit assembly. The study would also explore the possibilities of adapting, for visible light purposes, interferometer techniques used by radio astronomers to obtain high-resolution maps of deep space objects. In addition, Perkin-Elmer would define and recommend technologies needed for maximum use of the space station for assembling, testing, and servicing the next generation facility for optical astronomy. Perkin-Elmer built the Hubble Space Telescope scheduled for launch August 1986 on Space Shuttle flight 61-J. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 14)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it launched at 11.23 hours GMT July 2 Giotto, ESA's interplanetary space probe that would after a 700 million km voyage encounter Halley's Comet in March 1986. ESA launched Giotto by an Ariane 1 launcher from the Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, the ninth straight success for the agency's unmanned Ariane 1 rocket. The rocket placed Giotto into a geostationary transfer orbit with parameters of 35,966 km, apogee; 199.2 km, perigee; and 7° inclination. Following separation from the launcher's third stage 22 minutes after liftoff, ESA's Space Operations Centre (ESOC) at Darmstadt, West Germany, took control of the spacecraft. During the following 32 hours, ESOC spacecraft controllers worked around the clock to reconfigure the spacecraft in its geostationary transfer orbit and carry out spin-up and attitude maneuvers. After Giotto made three revolutions in its transfer orbit, ESOC at 19.24 hours GMT July 3 injected the spacecraft into an earth-escape trajectory. Giotto, named for the 14th-century artist Giotto de Bondone, who in 1301 witnessed what probably was Halley's Comet, should come within 310 miles of the comet's five-mile-diameter nucleus. When the spacecraft reached its rendezvous, ESA scientists expected it to be destroyed by billions of highspeed dust particles pouring off the comet's nucleus. Before its destruction, Giotto would perform approximately 10 experiments examining the image, chemistry, magnetism, and other aspects of the comet and its tail. Other spacecraft participating in the Halley's Comet investigation were the USSR's Vega 1 and 2, launched December 15 and December 21, 1984, respectively, to encounter the comet at a distance of 62,000 miles; Japan's Sakigake launched January 8, 1985, and Planet A, scheduled for launch in August 1985 to photograph the comet's tail at a distance of 160,000 miles; and NASA's International Comet Explorer, ICE (formerly ISEE-3), launched December 22, 1983, and diverted from its previous earth orbiting position for the Halley's Comet encounter. (ESA release July 2/85; ESA release July 4/85; W Post, July 3/85, A3)
NASA's Inventions and Contributions Board awarded the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Dr. Robert Nathan a plaque and a check for $20,000 for his work in planetary image processing, the JPL Universe reported. Nathan received the award for his "combined technical contributions to planetary and biomedical image processing and scientific data analysis techniques." Nathan invented digital image processing, a technique in which computers remove noise, correct distortions, and enhance different images such as planetary objects or biomedical images. Nathan joined JPL in 1959 to manage scientific data analysis for the upcoming Ranger moon missions. The Ranger spacecraft used the best available cameras, but they were subject to distortion and noise contamination. Nathan devised techniques to eliminate extraneous patterns from the images. His processes and the creation of the image processing laboratory (lPL) established JPL as an important center for planetary image processing. In 1969 Nathan launched JPL into biomedical imaging with a $2 million grant from the National Institutes of Health, which later led to formation of the JPL biomedical image analysis facility. In 1976 Nathan developed a system at the IPL to handle large amounts of data by means of a large array filter using very-large scale integration (VLSI) system silicon chip technology. The microchip reduced computer time by a factor of 100. He was currently working on another microchip design that would perform high-quality geometric image manipulations and filter chips that would perform pattern recognition functions. (JPL Universe, Nov 15/85, 1) During November: NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center (LeRC) received four of Research & Development magazine's IR—100 awards to honor the 100 most significant new products developed during the past year. A panel of technical judges selected the winners from more than 1,000 entries. The award-winning products were servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, transmit module, communications traffic processor, and rotary power-transfer device, all of which LeRC and private firms under contracts to the center developed jointly. LeRC researchers Stuart Loewenthal and Bruce Steinetz with General Electric engineers developed the servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, which could accurately control the propeller blade angle of large (10,000 kw) turboprop aircraft propellers over the complete spectrum of flight operating conditions. With certain modifications, the product should be adaptable for applications as aircraft wing pivot mechanisms, tank turret aiming actuators, and other heavy mechanisms, requiring very accurate pointing and tracking control. The transmit module, developed by LeRC researchers Thomas Kascak, Godfrey Anzic, and Denis Connolly along with Rockwell Internatl. engineers, provided rf signal amplification and phase shifting at a frequency of 20 gigahertz. The device was of monolithic design in which all module functions were contained on a single 6.4 by 4.8 millimeter semiconductor chip with the smallest circuit feature about 40-millionth of an inch. This development made possible the production of weight- and cost-effective phased array antenna systems for future communications satellite systems. LeRC engineer Russel Jirberg along with electronics engineers from Motorola Corp. developed a communications traffic processor for the next generation of communications satellites. The system provided the capacity and routing flexibility needed to handle the nation's growing demands for telephone and computer message traffic. When used aboard satellites having multiple narrow beam antennas, the device enabled more than 60,000 individual voice messages, video pictures, and computer data to be routed directly to users throughout the U.S. equipped with low-cost ground terminals. LeRC engineer David Renz in cooperation with Sperry Flight Systems engineers developed a rotary power-transfer device that transferred electrical power through a rotating joint. It had a low loss space-type design capable of transferring high power (hundreds of kilowatts), AC or DC, to frequencies such as 20 kilohertz. One of its outstanding features was loss of only 22 watts per circuit while transferring 100 kilowatts. Renz and his colleagues said the roll-ring assembly device had the potential to be one of the major components of the proposed space station and other spacecraft where large amounts of power are required. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 10)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) researchers were working on improvements in the National Airspace System (NAS) air-traffic control system to provide more efficient air transportation in the U.S. and to maintain the U.S. position of leadership in civil aviation, the Lewis News reported. A major NAS requirement was accurate upper-air wind information, necessary for efficient movement and control of aircraft. Dating back to 1982, LeRC recognized this need and proposed and developed, in cooperation with the Environmental Research Laboratories of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), an interactive data management and enhancement system (MERIT) to improve significantly the accuracy of upper-wind forecasts in the U.S. To evaluate the potential of MERIT, the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) formed an aviation weather task force of a dozen experts from NOAA, NASA, and universities that was led by Dr. John McCarthy of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. Over 18 months at a cost of half a million dollars, the task force would examine all aviation weather forecast products concurrently with MERIT. If the MERIT system could provide improved upper-level wind information (initial tests at NOAA showed a 20 to 30% reduction in wind error compared to the existing system), it was possible that MERIT could become an important contribution to the NAS of the 1990s. (LeRC News, May 2/85, 2)
Robert Cooper, director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), in testimony before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee's research and development subcommittee, said the U.S. had developed a secret graphite coating that could shield spacecraft, satellites, and missiles from Soviet laser beams, the Washington Times reported. The new material could be highly effective at a modest weight penalty, perhaps 10% of a spacecraft or missile's payload, and could withstand as much as 100 times more laser energy deposited on it than the typical aerospace material. The CIA estimated that the Soviets could have a space-based laser capable of shooting at U.S. satellites by 1988 and one capable of shooting at targets on the ground possibly by 1990. The development added a new dimension to the controversy over President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. Critics had argued that it would be difficult if not impossible for a space-based laser to destroy an ascending missile in its early and vulnerable boost phase before its multiple warheads had been launched. Development of the new class of lightweight shielding materials appeared to bolster this argument, increasing the possibility of missiles as well as spacecraft and satellites being made impervious to laser destruction. When questioned about the Soviets using such a material to thwart a U.S. space-based defense system, Cooper replied, "I don't know what implementation it has for a Soviet space or missile system. I'm not sure they have the technology, or even could achieve it in the near term." (W Times, Mar 29/85, 1 A) April23: Anthony Battista, the U.S. House Armed Services R&D subcommittee senior staff adviser, said on April 3 that a "reasonable" funding effort for the Reagan Administration's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program would be between $2.2 and $3 billion for FY 86, Defense Daily reported. Battista noted that the reductions in SDI should be taken from surveillance, acquisition, and targeting, which represented about $1.5 billion of the $3.7 billion requested by the administration and that "the one troublesome part about SDI, from a command and control point of view right now, is that there is not enough emphasis on the hardening of detectors to live in the thermo-nuclear environment. I'm worried about the ability of missiles to live in that environment." However, in testimony before the Senate defense appropriations subcommittee, Under Secretary of Defense Fred Ikle said on April 23 that a reduction in the FY 86 SDI budget would be extremely harmful to the program and a poor policy decision. SDI "is not some optional experiment, to be continued or curtailed depending on short-term budgetary or arms control considerations," he said. "It is a vital long-term effort to strengthen our ability to prevent nuclear war. ". . . If we slow down the SDI in this early phase, we would not have the answers in the next decade that we need to chart our long-term strategy and arms control policy." The Administration planned to spend $4.9 billion in FY 87 and $16 billion in FY 88-89 on the program. (D/D, Apr 3/85, 185, 24/85, 305)
The successful landing test on October 30 of a new nose-wheel steering system on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A meant that the orbiter Columbia would resume Space Shuttle landings on the concrete runway at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) when it returned following mission 61-C, the Washington Post reported. All Space Shuttle landings since April had been at Edwards Air Force Base, where the long desert runways allowed pilots to roll to a stop without excessive brake use. At KSC crosswinds tended to push the orbiter toward the edges of the narrow runway after the spacecraft touched down, which pilots countered by making "preferential" use of brake assemblies on the landing gear under the Space Shuttle's wings. By braking on one side or the other, pilots kept the orbiter on the runway. But a landing in April shredded three of the orbiter's tires and burned out a brake assembly. NASA built the new nosewheel steering mechanism into the orbiter so the pilot could steer the spacecraft without using his brakes. Challenger Commander Henry Hartsfield said after the Challenger landing that he was "very pleased" with the assembly, but recommended one more test on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. (W Post, Nov 22/85, A21)
Researchers in the Workload and Ergonomics Branch of the Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory were working to adapt machines to pilots rather than the traditional other way around, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "The success or failure of a modern Air Force aircraft and mission depends on whether the pilot has the ability to handle the unpredictable situations typical in a wartime environment," said Maris Vikmanis, supervisory industrial engineer for the lab. He explained that laboratory researchers studied how pilots performed in different environments, including combat, to provide information to aircraft designers so that future aircraft would be better adapted to pilots. But he pointed out there was more to it than simply assessing new aircrafts' cockpit designs. "Not only do we have to observe how the pilot performs in the aircraft cockpit, we also have to tap into the pilot himself," Vikmanis explained. "We must know how much effort the pilot is expending, his mental capability, and his workload limitation." In analyzing cockpit design, researchers checked into how well a pilot could see and reach cockpit controls and displays. Only in existence as an aerospace research field since 1979, workload research measured both the pilot's performance and his internal state of wellbeing. By combining experiments in the laboratory and in flight, lab researchers measured human performance/workload using three different methods. First, researchers used a computer-based performance test to measure a pilot's physical and mental action. By having the pilot perform up to 11 different tasks, researchers could characterize various aspects of human behavior. Second, pilots answered, after flying a simulator or an actual aircraft, subjective questions about their experience. A third method measured human performance/workload from a physiological viewpoint by collecting and analyzing variable responses of the human brain, heart, muscles, and visual system. Lab scientists and engineers used the test data to prepare a workload scale, which focused on problems the pilot, aircrew, and the aircraft itself might encounter in the future. NASA was applying similar methodology to the Space Shuttle and its crew, particularly to examine the effects on astronauts of microgravity as an element of stress. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 7)
NASA announced that Robert Nunamaker, formerly chief engineer at Ames Research Center (ARC), became Langley Research Center's (LaRC) space director with responsibility for advanced space transportation, planetary entry, space station and large space antenna research, and for LaRC's atmospheric science program. Nunamaker began his NASA career at Lewis Research Center in 1958, where he acquired extensive experience with Project Mercury; he joined ARC in 1963. Nunamaker received a B.S. degree in mechanical engineering in 1957, followed by graduate work at Case Institute of Technology and the University of California at Los Angeles. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/85; LaRC Release 85-8)
NASA announced that U.S., French, West German, and United Kingdom scientists completed preliminary findings from the September 11 [see Astronomy, Sept. 11] encounter of NASA's International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft with comet Giacobini-Zinner, which took place 44 million miles from earth and was the first comet intercept in history. In the precedent-setting encounter, ICE, traveling at 46,000 miles an hour, entered at approximately 6:50 a.m. EDT, September 11, the 14,000-mile-wide tail of the comet 4,900 miles behind the cometary nucleus and emerged from the tail about 20 minutes later. Midpoint of the tail encounter came at 7:02 a.m., when the spacecraft passed through a narrow region called the neutral sheet. ICE was then on its way to its fourth space exploration assignment to record on October 31 and March 28, 1986 solar wind measurements upstream of Halley's Comet. (NASA Release 85-138)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. personnel fitted the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) wide-field/planetary camera (WFPC) into the Hubble Space Telescope, the JPL Universe reported. They then removed and returned it to JPL for modifications and testing. "Everything went fine," Dave Rodgers, JPL's WFPC project manager, said. "There were no problems with any of our equipment." The WFPC consisted of two complete camera systems with different focal lengths. There were four cameras in each system, all sharing the same housing and electronics. The wide-field camera would obtain a wide perspective of a region in the sky, while the planetary camera would make high-resolution studies of individual objects. "It's called a planetary camera, but you can use it for any object that you want to study in detail," Rodgers explained. Besides planets in earth's solar system, the planetary camera would study galaxies and star-like objects such as quasars. Astronomers could also use the camera system to search for clues suggesting the presence of other planets orbiting nearby stars. Because the space telescope would be above the earth's obscuring atmosphere, it would be able to detect objects 100 times dimmer than those visible from earth with about 10 times greater resolution. The orbiting observatory was a major part of NASA's astronomy effort through the end of the century. Space Shuttle crew would service and replace in orbit the space telescope instruments, keeping the telescope operating for at least 15 years. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1)
Soviet scientists from the Interkosmos Institute in Moscow together with scientists from the European Space Agency (ESA), the Universities of Utrecht (Netherlands), Birmingham (Great Britain), and Tuebingen and the Max Planck Institute for Extra-terrestrial Physics in Garching, West Germany were planning to launch in spring 1986 an observatory to investigate X-rays in space, the magazine Geo reported. The observatory would carry four instruments intended to investigate the X-ray stars of the Milky Way, the remnants of dying stars (supernova), and nuclei of other active galaxies. They called the project "Salyut-Hexe," in which Salyut referred to the Soviet space station and Hexe to the English abbreviation for high-energy X-ray experiment. The magazine noted that Dr. Claus Reppin of the Max Planck Institute said it was not clear whether the observatory would be coupled to the existing Soviet Salyut 7 space station or to a new space station, Salyut 8. Reppin confirmed that the German scientists would not, for reasons of secrecy, be present at the installation and assembly of the instruments. Soviet scientists had spent two weeks in West Germany to familiarize themselves with the instruments so that they would be able to assemble and install them. Reppin also said the West European scientists did not know whether they could be present at the launch, which would probably be at Baykonur, but he indicated it was probably more important that they be at the ground control center in or near Moscow by a few days after launch, when measuring instruments would begin operation. The experiment, the magazine added, was part of the Soviet effort to set up a permanently inhabited large space station. At the beginning of 1986, the Soviets planned to launch the new station with several coupling connections for attachment of various modules. In this way, a settlement in space would grow gradually according to a building block principle; up to 30 cosmonauts were in training to serve as crew on the new station. (FBIS, Hamburg DPA in German, Dec 14/85) C UNITED KINGDOM
NASA and the National Science Teachers Association announced continuation for the sixth year of the Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program, which provided an opportunity for secondary school students (grades 9-12) to write proposals for space science experiments that would develop their awareness of space and stimulate interest in science and technology. During the next year's competition, the association would select up to five students from each of eight geographic regions who, along with their teachers, would receive all-expense-paid trips to a Space Shuttle symposium at a NASA center. Later, one semifinalist selected from each region would attend a national Space Shuttle symposium at Kennedy Space Center, during which the association would award scholarships to the three students submitting the most outstanding proposals. (NASA Release 85-70)
U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Donald Kutyna said today that the Defense Department had decided to proceed with a $500 million program to design a hypersonic plane capable of flying around the globe in less than two hours and of flying in the highest reaches of the atmosphere and to provide a low-cost method for launching satellites and other equipment critical to President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, the NY Times reported. Speaking at a Colorado Springs symposium on space technology, Kutyna said construction of the plane itself could cost $2 to $3 billion. "It is something we are very serious about, and we think the technology is now within reach," said Kutyna, who coordinated the Air Force's research and development of space systems. "We have been examining the principles for some time, and now we are ready to head into the next phase." However, in Washington an aide to George Keyworth II, the President's science advisor, said, "Funding for the project's next phase is not assured." He noted Congress would have to approve the program. "This is all a little premature," the aide noted. "We have not yet presented the plan to President Reagan." But on November 20 Keyworth and top officials on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and NASA presented details of the plan to members of Congress interested in aerospace issues. Unlike the Space Shuttle, which was launched vertically with rocket boosters, the aerospace plane would take off like an ordinary airplane, but would not have jet engines with heavy compressors, making the aerospace plane a light-weight vehicle. "Once you reach about Mach 3," or three times the speed of sound, Kutyna said, "the air streaming through the engines begins to compress itself. Some studies indicated that the plane could attain speeds of Mach 20, although there were experts who said half that speed would be more reasonable. If successful, the project could solve a key problem for the military: drastically reducing the cost of placing satellites and defensive space weapons in orbit. (NYT, Nov 22/85)
Discovery and its five-man crew on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 landed at 9:16 EDT today at Edwards Air Force Base after a seven-day mission [see Aug. 27], the Washington Post reported. During the mission, the crew deployed AUSSAT-1 for the Australian government, ASC-1 for the American Satellite Corp., and Leasat 4 for Hughes Communications (reports indicated Leasat 4 had lost its UHF communications link). In addition, the crew successfully retrieved and repaired the Leasat 3 originally deployed on STS 51-D. Later Hughes issued a statement saying "Leasat 3 is under full control by Hughes' ground command, and telemetry data continued to confirm the good health of the satellite. The liquid propulsion systems are intact and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures appear to be rising gradually toward acceptable levels," the JSC Roundup reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said after the mission that "1 would have to characterize this mission as near to perfect as you can get. It was a perfect mission from the outset, one that shows America's space program at work." Moore added that he hoped there would be only two more Space Shuttle landings in California before pilots could resume landing in Florida. NASA switched to Edwards Air Force Base landings after brakes failed and a tire blew out in an April landing on Kennedy Space Center's concrete runway. (IV Post, Sept 4/85, A7; JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that experiment teams for the Spacelab 3 mission had begun analysis of the 250 billion bits of data obtained during the mission, and preliminary results were excellent. In the area of materials science, two of the three experiment teams had begun to examine crystals grown during Spacelab 3. In one experiment, a mercury iodide crystal the size of a sugar cube grew from a seed crystal in the vapor crystal growth system; via the vapor transport technique, the crystal grew at a carefully controlled rate over a 104-hour period. Researchers would remove the crystal from the glass ampoule within the next few weeks for analysis to determine its quality and properties as an X-ray and gamma-ray detector for applications in scientific research, medicine, and industry. Two fluid mechanics experiments ended successfully; the geophysical fluid flow cell experiment completed more than 102 hours of experiments designed to provide information for the first time on convention in spherical rotating shells with a radial gravity field. Co-investigator Dr. Fred Leslie said of the experiment, "The films of one of the Jovian (Jupiter) scenarios indicated the formation of a 'Red Spofi similar to that present on Jupiter. This data should be useful to meteorologists and astrophysicists in modelling the large-scale circulations of fluids under the influence of rotation, gravity, and convection." Three atmospheric and astronomical observations were completed during the Spacelab 3 flight. The atmospheric trace molecules spectroscopy experiment operated for 50 hours providing 19 sequences of more than 150 independent atmospheric spectrally resolved measurements. Researchers would use these to analyze the earth's atmospheric composition chemically and physically for the stratosphere and mesosphere between 10 and 150 km. The information also would provide extremely detailed measurements of the minor and trace components of the atmosphere, which was crucial to understanding the evolution of earth's climate, and would aid in the analysis of pollution causes and effects. The experiment also provided the first high-resolution infrared spectrum of the sun, which indicated some surprising evidence about its molecular constituents. Four of the six life sciences experiments completed successfully were part of the Ames Research Center's life sciences payload. The research animal holding facilities proved a suitable animal habitat in which the two squirrel monkeys and 24 rats adjusted to spaceflight and demonstrated their suitability for research in orbit. One primate apparently developed symptoms of space adaptation syndrome but recovered in a manner analogous to human experience. "In addition to the successful results from each of these experiments," said Dr. George Fichtl, Spacelab 3 mission scientist at Marshall Space Flight Center, "the overall success of the mission has proven the importance of the Spacelab concept. During this mission, we have proven that a microgravity environment is an important environment for the growth of crystals, the study of fluid mechanics, and measurement of the effect man is having on this environment. We have also proven the need for man's presence in performing these tasks." (MSFC Release 85-28)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) was developing a liquid droplet radiator intended to solve the problem of dissipating heat that builds up inside a spacecraft, allowing a livable temperature for astronauts. Heat removal was currently accomplished through a heavy, bulky, rigid metal heat transfer system, which added considerable weight to the spacecraft. The LeRC system would use the surface of a liquid coolant to radiate away excess heat and save as much as 90% of the current hardware weight. The system entailed exposing a moving stream of hot droplets, the diameter of a human hair, directly into space, allowing the heat to radiate from the droplets' surface. In the process, a generator would eject the droplets into a collector where they would rejoin to form a liquid; the system would then recirculate and reuse this coolant. Selection or development of a heat transfer fluid with proper vapor pressure and a sufficiently long life was essential to the project. Also crucial to system feasibility was development of a micromachining capability to produce holes with 0.002-in. diameters for use in the liquid droplet generator. "This is a very advanced concept," Alden Presler, LeRC program manager, said. "The technology we're developing here at Lewis will result in a very lightweight and compact piece of hardware." (NASA Release 85-53)
NASA announced that its National Space Technology Laboratories, working with the University of Colorado at Boulder, uncovered information using remote sensing techniques suggesting a civilization existed before the Incas in subtropical Peruvian jungles. The university's anthropology department requested NSTL collaboration on the investigation because of the laboratories' expertise in satellite remote sensing and image analysis. After remote sensing by satellites and aircraft permitted mapping and determining priorities for field investigation sites, Tom Sever, NASA principal investigator, and Tom Lennon, an archaeologist and co-director of the university's Rio Abiseo National Park project, completed a five-day expedition into the jungles of Peru's Rio Abiseo National Park. Remote sensing had discovered Cerro Central, a site including more than 350 buildings. The previous major point of interest was the ancient site Gran Pajaten, which included only 30 buildings. "We now know that Pajaten is probably the smallest and least important of the sites," Sever explained. "We are fairly confident that we have approached the very edges of a new civilization, and we believe that the farther in we go, the higher and more complicated the elevation and architecture and civilization will be." Sever added that the investigation represented in his opinion the best example of a remote sensing application to archaeology and perhaps the only known means by which to obtain his project's objectives. (NASA Release 85-160) During November. Gene Gilbert, a technician in Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Laboratory for Oceans was searching for a way to measure rainfall at sea by using an oil rig, Goddard News reported, in order to assist in the development of a system called the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM). TRMM could take the form of a satellite or space station attachment operational in the mid-1990s to improve upon rainfall sensors that flew aboard Nimbus satellites. But developing better sensing capabilities first required accurate ground truth measurements to test the accuracy of remote observations. Over the years, meteorologists had developed a good picture of weather over land masses. But they still needed to know what happened over the remaining two-thirds of earth. When putting a collection bucket on a ship, Gilbert explained, different locations on deck gave differing results depending on whether the bucket was sheltered from the wind. In addition, the ship's movement gave angular measurement of the rain, not a true vertical one. And a buoy was not an improvement. "It may look stationary" Gilbert said, "but it really is not." Even the largest ones, which were 50 feet across, tossed in a storm, splashing and spraying and negating results. "What is needed," Gilbert pointed out, "is a surface that is stationary, vibration free, and splash-proof. I think oil platforms could satisfy all those conditions." GSFC's Microwave Sensors and Data Acquisition Systems Branch in July placed the first rain gauge on a oil producing platform in the Gulf of Mexico off Lafayette, Louisiana. "The very next month a hurricane knocked out our data transmission antenna," Gilbert recalled. "But we repaired the damage easily, and we have been getting good data since then." The rain gauge was a teeter-totter with a shot-glass sized cup at each end. The cups filled successively with 1/100th of an inch of rain and then dropped the measure back into the ocean. Each count was transmitted to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) and then back to GSFC via NOAA's data processing facility in Suitland, Maryland. "The goal is to demonstrate that using a gauge on an oil rig gives us our most accurate ocean rainfall data to date," Gilbert said. "If it does, we may expand to include other oil rigs. Then we will finally have good ground truth data for measuring rainfall over the ocean by satellite, at least for those oceans that include oil rigs." (Goddard News, Nov 85/ 2) SPACE STATION PROGRAM
Goddard Space Flight Center announced the Wallops Flight Facility would celebrate its 40th anniversary on June 29. The events planned were in recognition of the scientific and technological achievements at Wallops, which had conducted rocketborne experiments since July 4, 1945, when researchers first launched a 17-foot Tiamat. Since that original flight, Wallops had launched approximately 13,000 rocket-propelled research vehicles and conducted thousands of aeronautical and aircraft tests to obtain information on aircraft and spacecraft flight characteristics and to increase knowledge of the upper atmosphere and the nearspace environment. This research led to major contributions to the U.S.'s aeronautical and space programs. The breakthroughs to supersonic flight by aircraft and to hypersonic flight by rocket systems were largely attributed to fundamental aerodynamic research conducted at Wallops by means of aerodynamic models propelled by multiple-stage rocket systems. Using sounding rockets Wallops personnel developed the technologies for measuring atmospheric structure and the space environment, such as temperature, pressure and density, micrometeorite densities, electric fields, energetic particles, and radiation levels. These measurements formed the basis for developing design criteria for scientific satellites and manned spacecraft. Wallops's researchers also pursued technology development for the manned space program, such as manned capsule-escape techniques and maximum dynamic pressure tests for the Mercury Program. Most recently Wallops was known as a center for the NASA suborbital program. Sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft conducted space science and aeronautical research missions. The island obtained its name from John Wallops, appointed deputy surveyor of Virginia in the 17th century by Col. Edmund Scarburgh. Wallops received a Crown Patent to the island in 1672. At present, the facility, in addition to the island, included the mainland area in back of the island and the main base (formerly the Chincoteague Naval Air Station) about seven miles northwest. In addition to an open house, the day's anniversary events would include an Air Force F—15 aerial demonstration and demonstrations in crash/fire/ rescue, space sciences, model rocketry, and radio controlled model airplanes. (GSFC Release 85-16) Office of Inspector General
NASA announced it had selected Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Western Development Laboratories, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) that would include three spacecraft (GOES-1, J, and K) and a two spacecraft option (GOES-L and M). The contract had a proposed cost of $221 million and would provide for a series of GOES satellite systems, each with a five-year design life, that would contribute to continuation of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) GOES program in the 1990 to 2000 era. NASA had scheduled a late 1989 launch for the first GOES satellite in this new series. The contract statement of work covered the satellite bus; imaging, sounding, and space-environment monitor instruments; and flight-support equipment and services to accomplish deployment of the spacecraft into geosynchronous orbit from the Space Shuttle. The contract also included operations ground equipment and support to ensure compatibility of the spacecraft systems with established ground systems operated by NOAA. NASA assigned Goddard Space Flight Center responsibility for project management. (NASA Release 85-80)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Materials Science Laboratory would make its first spaceflight on Space Shuttle 61-C, scheduled for launch on December 18, the Marshall Sfarreported. Using a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS) in the payload bay, the Materials Science Laboratory-2 (MSL-2) would provide accommodations for three experiments in materials processing—the MSFC-managed Electromagnetic Levitator (EML) and Automated Directional Solidification Furnace (ADSF) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory-Managed Three-Axis Acoustic Levitator (3AAL). The electromagnetic levitator experiment would allow scientists to study the effects of materials flow during solidification of a melted material in the microgravity environment. Six samples would be suspended in the electromagnetic field of a coil and melted by induction heating from the coil's electromagnetic field. The ADSF consisted of four furnace, or sample, units. The experiment would investigate the melting and solidification process of four different materials for later comparison to samples of the same materials processed on earth. In the 3AAL experiment, 12 liquid sampies would be suspended in sound pressure waves and rotated and oscillated in a low-gravity nitrogen atmosphere. Investigators would study the degree of sphericity attainable and small bubble migration similar to that having to do with the refining of glass. The standard switch panel in the orbiter aft flight deck would provide activation, deactivation, and status monitoring capability. (Marshall Star, Dec 18/85, 2) During December. NASA scheduled for launch on December 18 the Space Shuttle Columbia, making its first journey into space in two years, on mission 61-C, the 24th flight of the U.S. Space Transportation System. Robert Gibson would command the flight, his second trip into space. Charles Bolden, on his first spaceflight, would pilot; mission specialists would be Franklin Chang-Diaz, a physicist born in Costa Rica and the first American of Hispanic origin to fly in space, and Steven Hawley and George Nelson, both making their second spaceflight; and payload specialists would be Robert Cenker of RCA and U.S. Rep. Bill Nelson of Florida, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications and the second congressional observer to fly in space. During the mission, the crew would deploy RCA's Satcom KU-2 communications satellite, the second in a series of three, with its payload assist module D-2 (PAM D-2) upper stage. The crew on mission 61-C in November deployed Satcom KU-1. Also onboard Columbia in the payload bay would be the Materials Science Lab-2 (MSL-2) [see Space Transportation System/Scientific Research, Dec. 18], the first Hitchhiker (HHG-1) payload, the RCA Infrared-Imaging Experiment (IR—IE), and 12 Get Away Special (GAS) experiments in specialized canisters mounted to a GAS beam attached to the payload bay. Hitchhiker G-1, a more sophisticated version of the GAS concept, consisted of a baseplate on which small payloads were mounted directly or enclosed in canisters. The carrier for the first time provided small payloads with access to the orbiter's 1400-watt power supply and to ground communications. Hitchhiker G-1 experiments would study experimental capillary pumped loop heat transport systems (sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center-GSFC), provide film images of the environment around the Space Shuttle (Air Force Geophysics Laboratory), and study the effect of the Space Shuttle environment on coated mirrors (Perkin-Elmer Corp.). The GAS Bridge was a beam supporting 12 GAS canisters that were mounted across the orbiter's cargo bay. The beam consolidated the canisters into a single easy-to-load and unlead unit. Experiments in the GAS canisters would:
Hans Mark, former NASA deputy administrator, Ames Research Center director, and Secretary of the Air Force, on April 9, during part of an MIT dinner lecture series, disparaged government attempts to commercialize space, the Space Commerce Bulletin reported. "Now that I'm out of government, I can say that I found nothing funnier than bureaucrats wringing their hands in town around here about how to commercialize something where most of them, myself included, don't have the slightest idea on how to make investments, how to judge markets, how to do all those things that are important for commercialization," Mark said. He characterized commercial space efforts as being politically popular but backed with little substance, with much of his criticism directed at private sector remote sensing and expendable launch vehicle operations. He said he didn't believe either technology would be a commercial success in the U.S., and he predicted private Space Shuttle operation would never work. Mark considered true commercial space activity to be technology transfer programs and government-industry relations as set up in the 1950s to build hardware for government programs. He added, however, that government couldn't take credit for technology transfer as being space commercialization because that was not what "intellectuals think commercialization means and we need to do other things. So we need to hire 50 people in NASA headquarters to do commercialization." Regarding the impact of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) on commercial space, Mark said, "There's no doubt in my mind that important commercial ventures will follow from SDI simply because of the nature of the contractor systems that we use. We will build high-intensity lasers and the first commercial application of those lasers will surely be in welding or in something like that . . . That's what I like to call the commercialization of space," Mark concluded. (Space Commerce Bulletin, Apr 26/85, 1)
NASA expected the Space Shuttle's nose wheel steering capability, previously used only on an experimental basis, would achieve operational status by the fall, the Space News Roundup reported. NASA had attributed brake damage to the orbiter Discovery following the STS 51-D mission in part to crosswinds at KSC, which required the orbiter's commander to use the main gear braking system for differential steering. Nose wheel steering would allow Space Shuttle commanders to use the brake system for stopping orbiters rather than for braking and steering combined. A nose wheel steering capability was in the Space Shuttle design, but used only on an experimental basis. NASA had spent the last year upgrading the system to operational status. In addition, NASA instrumented the Challenger to provide better landing condition data and planned to add instrumentation to the landing gear system of the Discovery. In the 17 Space Shuttle missions to date, NASA had used 68 individual brake systems with 27 receiving no damage, 27 receiving slight damage, and 14 receiving significant damage in which either one or more stators or rotors overheated or suffered other problems. Until the nose wheel steering capability became operational, NASA intended to choose on a flight by flight basis between Kennedy Space Center and Edwards Air Force Base as the primary end of mission landing site. (JSC Space News Roundup, June 14/85, 2)
The orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F landed at 12:46 p.m. PDT today on Edwards Air Force Base's Mojave Desert lake-bed runway, the Washington Post reported. During the flight, Challenger circled the earth 127 times, a distance of a little over three million miles. Technicians stood by at the runway to remove immediately the heat sensors from Challenger's main engines to check a NASA theory that the sensors caused the premature shutdown of the center rocket engine during the July 29 launch. NASA was confident enough that the sensors would be found at fault that it had equipped Discovery's engines with redesigned sensors before moving it August 5 to the launch pad. During the mission, Challenger became an orbiting astronomical observatory with more than $72 million of telescopes and other instruments to study the sun, stars, and distant galaxies. The NY Times reported that Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator, said, "We met more than 80 percent of all science objectives of this mission. We're absolutely delighted." Dr. Eugene Urban, chief mission scientist, added, "Everyone has collected tantalizing new data. It's going to take a long time before this data is analyzed and really fully appreciated. We've made some interesting new observations, and some have been very spectacular." Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, commented that the orbiter appeared to be in good shape after the landing, the eighth for the Challenger. "It was a beautiful landing," he said. "The tiles looked very good. The brakes look excellent. The orbiters continue to be magnificent flying machines." (W Post, Aug 7/85, A3; NYT, Aug 7/85, A1)
NASA successfully launched today an Aerobee liquid-fueled, sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, marking the end of that rocket series, which was the oldest continuous rocket-firing program. NASA's Sounding Rocket Division had launched 536 Aerobees with a 94% success rate. The Aerobee's reliability made it the workhorse vehicle for high-altitude studies. Commenting on the program, Maury Dubin, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) physicist, said "virtually everything that's been done in space research can be attributed to sounding-rocket technology. The Aerobee and other sounding-rocket research precipitated the rise of many disciplines, from astronomy to the upper atmosphere." The Aerobee program began in 1946 when Aerojet Engineering Corp. received a U.S. Navy contract to build the rockets, and the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) had supplied technical direction; Dr. James Van Allen had been project director. The Aerobee name, the Bumblebees, derived from a combination of Aerojet and APL's series of Navy missiles. NASA had used Aerobees extensively during the Internatl. Geophysical Year (July 1957 to December 1958) to gather information on the atmosphere, cosmic radiation, auroras, and geomagnetism. The Aerobee rockets consisted of a series of five with each rocket carrying as many as six experiments that included equipment such as cameras, vacuum bottles, mirrors, grids, sensing devices, lenses, and other mechanical PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	„ units. Most rockets recorded data and simultaneously transmitted it via telemetry to ground stations. The final Aerobee payload tested a new spectrograph that would be flown on NASA's Astro mission to record extreme ultraviolet Dayglow emissions in earth's upper atmosphere. George Kraft, GSFC flight support section director, said that, although the demise of small liquid-fueled sounding rockets was imminent, "sounding rockets would continue to be an important element in NASA's support of the scientific community. They're virtually the only vehicles that can conduct studies in the 40 km (25 miles) to 200 km (125 miles) high zone of the atmosphere." Balloons could travel only about 50 km (31 miles) high and satellites were ineffective below 200 km (125 miles) high. GSFC's Wallops Flight Facility managed the NASA sounding-rocket program. (GSFC Release 85-6)
NASA announced a new Space Shuttle manifest for 41 Space Shuttle missions through December 14, 1987 that included nine flights for the remainder of 1985, 15 flights in 1986, and 17 flights in 1987. Highlights for 1985 included the first Atlantis flight in late September for a Department of Defense mission; a Spacelab 3 flight in late April, Spacelab 2 with extensive European Space Agency participation in July, and another Spacelab flight in October dedicated to W. German scientific investigations. Also during 1985 NASA would deploy communications satellites for Hughes, AT&T, RCA, Mexico, Australia, Canada, and the Arabsat consortium. In 1986 the first launch of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base would occur. The first liquid-hydrogen-powered Shuttle Centaur upper stage would be used to deploy Ulysses (formerly the International Solar Polar Mission), and the Galileo mission to Jupiter (also using the Shuttle Centaur) and the Hubble Space Telescope flight would be launched. NASA said launch dates of missions to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and to retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF-1) were under review. Also, NASA assigned Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce McCandless as mission specialists for the Hubble Space Telescope flight on mission 61-J in August 1986. (NASA Release 8550)
Effective today Lockheed Corp. reassigned six officers of its Lockheed Space Operations Co. at Kennedy Space Center after a six-month corporate investigation of the management practices and work procedures used to process the Space Shuttle for launch, Aviation Week reported. E. Douglas Sargent replaced A.R. Schroter as president of Lockheed Space Operations Co. and became program manager of the Space Shuttle processing contract, David Owen replaced W. John Denson as deputy program manager and became executive vice president of the space operations company, and David Dickenson replaced Ronald Petersen as vice president and director of Kennedy Space Center operations. Although the replaced Lockheed managers had previously received unfavorable management evaluations, the management realignment came as NASA completed a report on its investigation of a March 8 incident in which a work platform fell in the Orbiter Processing Facility, damaging the orbiter Discovery and injuring a workman [see Space Transportation System, Launch Schedules, Mar. 8]. The report would assign a large part of the responsibility for the accident to Lockheed safety and quality control procedures. However, a NASA official said the platform incident did not precipitate the realignment. He said a Lockheed Corp. investigating team, which had analyzed Lockheed's performance at KSC since the previous October, had made detailed recommendations on how to streamline and improve performance. Also, after receiving a grade of excellent in the award fee evaluation during the transition period when Lockheed took over Space Shuttle processing work previously done by 15 separate contractors, NASA gave Lockheed a low score in the next evaluation period of April 1 to September 30, 1984. Lockheed's basic space processing contract with NASA ran through September 30, 1986, and there was a priced option period for three more years. The two priced contracts were worth $2.5 billion; three additional unpriced three-year options could bring the contract life to 15 years and value to more than $6 billion. NASA said it had no plans to recompete the Space Shuttle processing contract. (AvWk, May 13/85, 14)
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), Washington, D.C., announced its scientists devised a precise timing system that used highly efficient and relatively small hydrogen maser clocks that the laboratory expected would enhance timing in the Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS). GPS, a navigational system based on synchronized clocks (accurate to billionths of a second), would permit users to pinpoint their position within a 30-foot radius by measuring differences in the arrival times of radio signals received from NavstaPs satellites. And GPS would disseminate the Naval Observatory's master clock time to fleet units for their command, control, communications, and intelligence. Maser clocks were considered the most accurate clocks available; however their bulky size and weight (lighter ones weighed over 500 lb.) prevented their use aboard GPS satellites. Also, the massive, tuned cavity where the maser action took place required temperature control and magnetic shielding, which made masers impractical for use in satellites. The research team at NRL led by Ron Beard reduced the size of maser clocks by a factor of 16 and their weight to 50 lb. And by making the cavity smaller, using different resonant structures, and dielectric (sapphire) loading to produce the effect of a larger cavity, NRL "passive" masers (so called because they did not oscillate on their own) proved to be as accurate as the larger versions. Beard noted that NRL's involvement with masers and the subsequent idea to reduce cavity size came about only after two astro-industrial companies were unsuccessful in meeting GPS's timing demands. NRL built and tested two experimental maser development models and two advanced development models. An additional NRL project with Hughes Research Laboratories used a Q-multiplier approach to offset the inherently higher signal losses in small cavities. Research in the NRL maser program included advances in small loaded-cavity properties, beam optics, dissociator reliability, quadropole state selection, thermal/mechanical design, magnetic shielding/design, and vacuum design for space applications. The NRL-developed technology formed the basis for a $12 million contract awarded to Hughes Aircraft Corp. to produce two types of engineering development models of hydrogen-maser clocks. One clock type was for use in satellites; the other, for GPS ground stations and possibly ships. (NRL Release 58-85 R)
The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) approved plans of a Florida-based undertakers and engineers' consortium to orbit in 1986 or early 1987 a mausoleum [see U.S. Space Policy/Commercialization, Jan. 25] with the announcement that the plan represented "a creative response to the president's initiative to encourage the commercial use of space," the Washington fast reported. The approval was the first granted by the DOT'S new licensing authority for commercial space activities and followed checks with the Department of Defense, the State Department, and NASA. The mausoleum's 1,900 mile-high orbit would place the spacecraft in the Van Allen radiation belts, a region of space rarely used by other spacecraft. The mausoleum would be in the nose cone of a rocket, Conestoga 2, designed and built by Space Service Inc. (SSI), a Houston firm headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original Project Mercury astronauts. Conestoga 1, a one-stage rocket, had made a successful test flight in 1982. The Celestis Group, Melbourne, Florida, would pay SSI $14 million to put the 300 lb. cargo into orbit and charge $3,900 per cremated body. A Celestis spokesman said that since announcement of its plans, the group had received hundreds of calls from people wanting to sign up. Slayton said seven or eight other companies had approached him about setting up similar businesses. (WPost, Feb 13/85, A2)
NASA announced that, during mission 51 —L scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986, it would release from the Space Shuttle a free-flying payload called Spartan-Halley to observe Halley's Comet. Scientists believed that comet exploration was a search for the beginnings of earth, because comets were the most unaltered samples of the early solar system. Spartan-Halley was the only NASA satellite dedicated solely to observing Comet Halley. During these observations, January 24 through 31, the comet would be in its most active period as it headed towards its closest approach to the sun on February 9. The objective of the Spartan-Halley mission was to measure from earth orbit the ultraviolet spectrum of Comet Halley using twin spectrographs designed and built by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. Spartan-Halley's cameras and instruments would analyze the active comet, looking for hydrogen and oxygen atoms and carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur molecules. If the spacecraft detected these elements, it might indicate more complex compounds could be present in the ice and dust that made up the comet's nucleus. Goddard Space Flight Center developed Spartan-Halley, a modified Spartan-2 spacecraft, to be a research carrier. The spacecraft consisted of the spectrographic instrumentation, attitude control cameras (which also provided science photography), a microprocessor, associated electronics, a sunlight baffling system, and a service module. The January mission would be the first for the Spartan-2 type carrier, a completely reusable spacecraft to be reflown later on several other missions. Following completion of the January mission, the Space Shuttle's robot arm would retrieve Spartan-Halley and store it in the cargo bay. (NASA Release 85-161)
NASA announced that its Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded a research grant to Tuskegee University to research possibilities of growing food in outer space. In the project, the researchers would select several sweet potato varieties that looked promising and research nutrient delivery and hydroponic systems that appeared best suited to development of the crop. The sweet potato project was part of NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support Systems (CELSS) program to search for methods to supply a continuous food source and to regenerate waste during long-duration spaceflights or for proposed lunar colonies. Dr. William Knott, manager of KSC's Life Science Support Facility and technical monitor for the project, said that, if the sweet potato could deliver enough energy conversion efficiency and productivity, NASA would incorporate it into a nearly full-scale "breadboard" of a working CELSS that it was developing. Other plants previously chosen for the CELSS breadboard project included sugar beets, lettuce, snap beans, wheat, soy beans, and white potatoes. The sweet potato research would focus on three systems: plant growth, food processing, and waste management. The program would begin by studying the plants in a sealed 24 by 12-foot growth chamber with controlled light, food, water, and temperature. Plants would receive food in the chamber by recycling the atmosphere and water that passed through the nutrient system. NASA expected the chamber, once used to test the Mercury spacecraft for flight, might produce enough food for two to three people. A waste management system would treat leftovers from the recycling process, converting the waste products into a nutrient source for the plants. Knott said a major challenge of the project was to harvest the highest yields possible while using a minimum of space and water to deliver nutrients to the plants. "We will take the edible seeds and fruit out of the chamber for processing and storage. The leaves, stems, and parts of the plant normally not consumed also would be converted into a food material." Calling the CELSS program "a beyond the year 2000 endeavor," Knott said NASA would test some of the concepts of the program on the proposed space station "just to see if they work." However, he pointed out, "resupply on a long-duration spaceflight, a lunar base, or on a Mars mission . . . would make the 'space farm' . . . much more attractive." (NASA Release 85-180)
NASA announced that in a two-and-one-half-year effort costing $15 million it had lengthened and improved its Aircraft Landing Dynamics Facility at Langley Research Center. The track, used to test aircraft wheels, tires, and landing gear, used a high-pressure water jet system to propel the test carriage along the rail/track system where researchers conducted experiments under simulated runway conditions. Track testing options included choosing between concrete or asphalt runway surfaces and among a full range of weather-related surface conditions, including dry, damp, or flooded runways or slush- or ice-covered surfaces. Even before the expansion, NASA believed the track to be the only facility in the world capable of testing full-size aircraft landing gear systems under closely controlled conditions simulating takeoffs and landings. Lengthening the track to more than one-half mile increased the facility's maximum test speed from 120 to 250 mph and made possible, for the first time, simulated landing tests of all modern aircraft and the Space Shuttle. Other facility improvements included a higher capacity water jet system and a newly designed high-speed test carriage. The improved catapult system produced a 1.7-million-lb. thrust on the carriage, resulting in a 17—g (gravity force) acceleration that pushed the carriage in only 400 feet from zero to 250 mph in two seconds, and the new carriage had a 20-by-40-foot test bay to accommodate larger test articles. NASA used ten thousand gallons of water in maximum speed run. Initial research at the modified facility would study the cornering forces and spin-up characteristics of the Space Shuttle main gear tire, which spun up from zero to landing speeds almost instantly at touchdown. NASA would mount a tire-wheel-brake assembly on the carriage for tests of tire wear and applied loads and would run these first tests on the facility's existing smooth concrete surface. Later runs would require the touchdown area of the track altered to simulate the roughness and grooving of the Space Shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center. NASA would then paint smooth the relatively rough runway to determine the best KSC runway characteristics to lessen Space Shuttle tire wear. Later tests would include a variety of aircraft landing hardware tests, averaging about 75 to 100 runs each. NASA estimated the facility could accomplish 300 runs a year with as many as six a day during the height of a test program. One test program, for example, would compare the performance of radial tires, not commonly used on aircraft, to that of conventional bias ply tires. NASA would run these tests in conjunction with a Federal Aviation Adminis-tration/NASA program to gather information on runway surface traction. NASA had scheduled over the next several years test programs that included track tests to develop a data based for the National Tire Modeling Program, an analytical computer model to aid in design of new tires, and a tire failure study. (NASA Release 85-109) Lewis Research Center
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
NASA announced it had presented at a ceremony at NASA Headquarters its 1984 inventor of the year award to Dale Kornfeld, Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), and John Vanderhoff, Mohammed El-Asser, and For-tunato Micale, all of Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, for their "process for preparation of large-particle size monodisperse latexes." The monodisperse latex reactor processor, an experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle, had produced microspheres in zero gravity in sizes ranging from 5 to 30 micrometers. The maximum size particles produced on earth, with the required standards of quality and uniformity, were about 2 to 3 micrometers. Researchers used microspheres in calibrating sensitive scientific instruments such as microscopes, filters, and particle counters. Medical uses included identification of cancer and glaucoma and the study of the transport of materials inside living organisms. Industrial applications included the production of finely ground products such as paint pigments, inks, toners, explosives, and other powder materials. NASA took an important step toward making the microspheres commercially available when it presented 15 grams of 10-micrometer particles to the Commerce Department's National Bureau of Standards for certification as "standard reference material." (NASA Release 85-44)
In its aerospace forecast and inventory issue, Aviation Week reported that aerospace sales would continue to expand in 1985 as a result of business that was already on the books, with reviving commercial transport orders expanding on earlier rebounds in the military and space segments of the industry. However, as strong as the expansion was, sales were not as robust in some markets as had been predicted the previous year. Among the factors affecting the sales picture was Congressional trimming of military funding in the FY 85 budget. But Aviation Week predicted that to trim outlays the Pentagon would go after operating funds rather than hardware money that was spent over periods longer than a year. Thus the aerospace industry experienced moderately slower but still firm growth. Also international and domestic competition was intensifying, particularly because the Pentagon sought to use competition as a primary tool to hold down weapons costs. The magazine forecasted that total aerospace sales in 1985 would reach $99 billion and over $100 billion in 1986. Military aircraft would produce $32 billion in sales, compared with $27.5 billion in 1984; missile sales would rise to $15.7 billion from $13.8 billion in 1984; space technology, rebounding from weak sales in the 1970s, would reach $14.8 billion compared with $12.5 billion in 1984; commercial transport orders would revive from the $6-billion level in 1984 to $9.2 billion in 1985; and business flying sales would remain flat at about $1.8 billion. Both transport and corporate aircraft had a common problem: the high cost of relatively small increments of new technology and the drop in fuel prices that had placed a premium on modest improvement in fuel efficiency. However, all-composite turboprop aircraft for the business market were flying and might begin to change that situation in 1986 and 87. Also, new ultra-high-bypass engines (in some situations a euphemism for propellers) were under test and might hit the commercial transport market in the early 1990s, as would increased use of composites, lighter and simpler subsystems, and more flexible cabins in terms of seating, galley, and lavatory layouts. Military sales levels depended on what happened to President Reagan's defense budget in Congress. Although orders on the books would carry industry sales for 1985 to forecasted levels, a stalemate in Congress would affect the longer term outlook. (AvWk, Mar 18/85, 10)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that on February 4 technical/scientific teams from Australia, India, Finland, and the U.S. had begun a six-week meeting at Wallops Flight Facility, Va., to compare radiosonde instruments used worldwide. Measuring only a few inches square and weighing less than 2 lb., the radiosonde was a low-cost, mass-produced instrument for measuring atmospheric pressure, temperature, relative humidity, and wind while ascending on a small balloon up to about 25 km (15 miles), or more frequently 30 km (18 miles), above earth. Worldwide weather services used radiosonde data for forecasts to aid aviation and for research. There were currently 17 radiosonde manufacturers in a number of countries, resulting in occasional differences in instrument measurements and the need to make periodic comparisons. A working group on the quality of meteorological data meeting in 1982 at the World Meteorological OrganizaPRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	71 JNIgHTlOKAUr BLANK tion's (WMO) headquarters, Geneva, Switz. had agreed that two phases of tests were required. The United Kingdom's Meteorological Office had hosted the 1st phase in 1984, when researchers released 106 ballons. Phase-2 participants at Wallops launched four balloons a day, five days a week, weather permitting, for an anticipated total of about 100 flights, each balloon carrying four or more instruments. Researchers would then correlate Phase-2 data with Phase-1 results. (GSFC Release 85—8)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)
NASA announced that Inorganic Coatings, Inc. was providing interior corrosion protection to the refurbished Statue of Liberty by means of a primer coating known as K-Zinc 531, an aerospace spinoff product developed at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) to protect gantries and other structures at NASA's primary launch site, Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Because KSC was located on Florida's Atlantic Coast, its launch facilities required greater corrosion protection due to constant exposure to salt spray and fog. GSFC undertook a research program to develop a coating that would not only resist salt corrosion, but also protect KSC launch structures from very hot rocket exhaust and the thermal shock created by rapid temperature changes during a space launch. The GSFC research resulted in an inorganic water-based potassium silicate binder, a compound that provided long-term protection with a single application. NASA granted in 1981 a license for the coating to Shane Associates, which signed an agreement with Inorganic Coatings to allow it to become the sole manufacturer and sales agent under the Shane license. Inorganic Coatings assigned the trade name K-Zinc 531 to the compound, which was nontoxic, nonflammable, and had no organic emissions. The high ratio silicate formulation bonded to steel in 30 minutes and created a hard ceramic finish with superior adhesion and abrasion resistance. It required no straining before application and could be mixed on site. (NASA Release 85-64)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) were pursuing a 10-year program scheduled for completion in 1991 to improve Space Shuttle engine performance, reduce operational costs, and develop advanced engine technology for future space travel. Although the Space Shuttle propulsion system had performed well for a number of space missions, it incorporated state-of-the-art technology at the time of its development some 15 years before, so NASA believed the engine's operational life and performance levels could be improved. According to Stanley Marsik, LeRC's Space Shuttle main engine technology program manager, "The current engine represents the first generation of reusable engines. In a way, the first reusable space engine can be compared with the Model-T automobile. Now that we have experienced numerous flights with this engine, we have learned how to improve its life and performance. We now are working towards advancing the technologies necessary to support those improvements." In the age of reusable Space Shuttle engines, demands would increase for higher performance with lighter weight components, resulting in higher operating pressures and temperatures and increased mechanical vibrations and fuel flow turbulence. The system also severely taxed engine components such as turbine blades, bearings, seals, fuel ducting, and combustion chambers. Engineers were studying new high-temperature, high-strength metal alloys and other advanced materials such as new protective coatings and combustion processes. Researchers using advanced computer modeling techniques studied loads on turbine blades and fuel flow, and examined the use of hydrostatic ball bearings where a film of gas would separate the bearing from metal surfaces, resulting in no metal-to-metal contact. Engineers were developing new methods of measuring wear and deterioration, so parts would be replaced only when necessary, and studying ways to monitor engine health by means of a series of computer-connected diagnostic sensors on the engine to signal deviations from normal performance and to facilitate more economical on-the-ground maintenance. The two centers had formed ten disciplinary groups to work with some 130 different technology elements of engine design. Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Internatl., engine manufacturer, and other NASA contractors and several universities were supporting the program. (NASA Release 85-122)
Some high school student semifinalists in the Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program, sponsored by NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, would meet at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) March 25 and 26 to present before a panel of LeRC scientists and engineers their proposals for candidate experiments to fly aboard future Space Shuttle missions, the center announced. LeRC personnel would evaluate and suggest improvements to the experiments. The program was a nationwide competition to stimulate the study of science and technology by engaging students in projects to develop actual payload experiments for upcoming Space Shuttle flights. The 37 students from Ohio, Michigan, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, and Wisconsin would hear a presentation by NASA astronaut Robert Springer (Lt. Col. USMC), slated to fly aboard Space Shuttle mission 51-H scheduled for launch in late 1985, and a discussion by Brian Vlcek, a previous year's finalist from Parma, Ohio, on his winning experiment entitled "inducing a geotropic-type reaction in radish roots with chemical stimuli." The meeting would close with a tour of LeRC where the students would see such facilities as the 500-foot deep, zero-gravity facility and a propulsion systems laboratory where researchers tested full-scale aircraft engines under actual flight conditions. Initially students from 10 geographical regions around the country had proposed over 2,000 biology, chemistry, and astronomy experiments. Interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers had evaluated the proposals to select each region's semifinalists. As of the Space Shuttle 51-C mission in January 1985, NASA had flown 10 student experiments in space. (LeRC Release 85-17)
