A House Science and Technology Committee issued a report stating that Congress and the White House shared the blame for the launch schedule pressure that led to the January 28 Challenger accident. The report agreed with many of the findings laid out by the Rogers Commission, but differed by stating that the accident was not a result of poor communication through NASA management, but "poor technical decisionmaking [by them] over several years." The report concluded that NASA's management lacked the expertise needed to operate the Space Shuttle and warned the Agency not to succumb to similar pressure concerning future flights. The National Research Council, in an independent study requested by Congress, urged NASA on October 9 to limit its Shuttle flights in the 1990s to 11 or 13, not the 16 annual flights proposed by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. (Investigation of the Challenger Accident: Report of the Committee on Science and Technology, House of Representatives, Oct 29/68; W Post, Oct 8/86; Oct 10/86; W Times, Oct 8/86; NY Times, Oct 8/86)
The Soviet Union recently had their version of the Space Shuttle on a launch pad for tests. Photos of the incident were taken by a U.S. satellite, and Government officials predicted that the country would begin human space flight in 1988. (B Sun, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics was selected for negotiations leading to the award of a threeyear contract, with another threeyear option, and a sixyear price tag of $327 million, to perform Payload Ground Operations for Kennedy Space Center activities, both in Florida and elsewhere inside and outside the United States. The work was being done by five different contractors, and NASA hoped to obtain a single, longterm contract. Responsibilities included payload/cargo processing and integration, Spacelab operations and integration, support to experimental integration activities, payload/cargo deintegration, NASA/Vandenberg payload operations, payload related facilities, systems and ground equipment operations, maintenance and sustaining engineering, customer accommodation and launchsite support functions, and payload related support operations and services. (NASA Release 86167)
Richard G. Smith, Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, announced his retirement. He plans to join the private sector with General Space Corporation. His achievements span 35 years in the space program and include work with the rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal; management of',0*the Saturn Rocket program at Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Headquarters, Director of the Skylab Task Force, and he is the recipient of awards for his contributions to Apollo, Skylab, and Space Shuttle programs. Smith had earlier warned that investigation into the Challenger accident would result in a mass exodus from NASA and later added that the investigation damaged the reputations of many officials. (NASA Release 8689; W Times, Jul 11/86; W Post, Jul 11/86; NY Times, Jul 11/86; LA Times, Jul 11/86
Al Louviere, who headed a team of engineers at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, recommended to Shuttle Program Director Arnold Aldrich that an escape system be built into orbiters. Equipped with pressure suits and an oxygen supply, astronauts could bail out of the aircraft while it was in gliding flight below 100,000 feet. Although no specific plan was given, Louviere stressed the fact that no escape system could have saved the Challenger crew. (p Inq, Jul 2/86)
A fullscale Spacehab module mockup intended to double the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle middeck was delivered to NASA's Ames Research Center by Spacehab, Inc. The mockup was intended as a test bed for artificial intelligence, robotics systems, and human performance. Spacehab planned to build three of the modules over the next three years. Another corporation, Sverdrup Technology, was chosen for a $45 million support services contract in which they would provide test complex services for Space Shuttle main engines and engineering and laboratory and data work for NASA and 18 other Government agencies. NASA also planned a program that would develop software tools for writing computer programs in ADA, a language used by the Department of Defense for missioncritical computers. The project was expected to run for three or four years and cost $200 million. (Def News, Jul 7/86)
Lawrence B. Mulloy, a manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, in charge of the solid rocket motors that were held responsible for the Challenger accident, announced his retirement after more than 30 years of Government'-0*service. He was among those who opted for liftoff of the illfated Shuttle and was repeatedly faulted for this judgement by William P. Rogers, chairman of the commission investigating the accident. He was the third Marshall manager to retire since the accident, following William R. Lucas and George B. Hardy. (W Post, Jul 17/86; P Inq, Jul 17/86; B Sun, Jul 17/86)
Space Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to be ferried atop a modified Boeing 747 and transported to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California where it was expected to remain until early November. Testing would closely parallel that done at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), in Florida, in preparation for the first West Coast Space Shuttle launch. Upon arrival, Columbia would be moved to the launch pad and mated with a set of solid rocket boosters and an external tank for integrated vehicle testing, including the loading of cryogenic propellants in a "wet" countdown demonstration test. Prior to the move, processing at KSC would include installation of the main engine, auxiliary power units, and orbital maneuvering system pods, in parallel with structural inspections, approved modifications, and ferry flight preparation. (NASA Release 8640)
A device conceived by Donald Young of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for aiding scientists in treating bone loss resulting from extended space flights spawned hope among the medical community. The vibrating analyzer is placed in the center of a limb and the ratio of force applied to the bone and the bone's displacement indicate the stiffness of the bone. The device, it was thought, would offer earlier0*detection of osteoporosis and take guess work out of cast removal. (WSJ, Mar 3/86)
The Peoples Republic of China announced that it was nearing human space flight and was in the process of choosing astronauts for its planned Space Shuttle. It had built and was using an extensive training center and had solved many of the problems space has to offer, such as maintaining life support. No date was given as to when a craft would be built. (W Post, Sep 1/86; W Times, Sep 1/86)
NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting debris left from nuclear powered satellites and wreckage from antisatellite weapons testing. Considering the high speed of orbiting craft, scientists reported that even a fleck of paint could be dangerous, the probable culprit that caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S. Shuttle flight. Because slightly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct 13/86)
The Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, announced plans to build, and open by 1989, a $40 million visitor's center near its complex. The center would include a large geodesic dome, two hightech movie theaters, a simulated lunar landscape, a Mission Control Center simulation, and an exhibit hall featuring past achievements. (LA Times, Oct 23,86)
A House panel, the Science and Technology Committee's subcommittee on space science and applications, approved a $7.6 billion NASA budget request. The authorization bill still needed review by the full Committee before being sent to the House floor. No funds were allotted for a new Shuttle, but supporters in Congress hoped that NASA would request a supplemental $500 million as first payment for "Challenger II." The physics and astronomy portion of NASA's budget, including $27.9 million for the Hubble Space Telescope, had not yet been reviewed. (B Sun, Apr 18/86)
NASA looked ahead to the launching of four new generation space observatories that promised a new era for astronomy. The Gamma Ray Observatory, providing a greater wavelength range, could determine if arriving gamma radiation originated in quasars and pulsars or from other sources. The Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility would study highly energetic environments found in nearly every object in the universe, including stars, planets, neutron stars, black holes, quasars, and cores of active galaxies. The Space Infrared Telescope Facility could span the infrared part of the spectrum with a 1000fold increase in sensitivity, enabling it to search for planets around stars. The Hubble Space Telescope, penetrating the universe in visible and ultraviolet light, was predicted to expand the observable universe by hundreds of times, see objects with ten times the clarity of ground observatories, and detect objects 1,000 times dimmer than those observed by previous spacecraft. (NASA Release 86168)
Thomas L. Moser, Director for Engineering at NASA's Johnson Space Center, was appointed as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8616)
The United States and the European Space Agency were pursuing an agreement aimed at preventing Japan from dominating small satellite launches in the same way it had taken over the small car industry. The United States hoped to reach assent with the European Space Agency concerning employment schedules, insurance standards and rates, Government subsidies for research and development, and the leasing costs of Governmentowned launch facilities to private firms. (W Times, Nov 6/86)
NASA and the Space Telescope Science Institute announced that U.S. amateur astronomers would be given a small'20*amount of observing time with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Amateur astronomers have made significant contributions to astronomy, and, at this point, there are at least a quarter million of these astronomers. With a 941/2inch mirror, the HST would be the largest astronomical telescope ever placed in space; it serves as an example of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 86108)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which operates the Nation's weather satellites, announced that its polar orbiting satellite NOAA8 was apparently lost. NOAA was informed by the Air Force that its tracking instruments detected "what appeared to be pieces of the satellite" in the vicinity of NOAA8 orbit. (NY Times, Jan 7/86) 0** Dr. William R. Graham, who was appointed Acting Administrator of NASA on January 3, 1986, stated in his first interview that he was the "acting administrator in every sense of the word" and that he felt very comfortable in his new position. He apparently made that statement to put to rest suggestions that the Agency would really be run by NASA Associate Administrator Philip E. Culberston while Graham learned the ropes. Graham was promoted to his new position, from the post of Deputy Administrator of NASA, when NASA Administrator James E. Beggs took a leave of absence to prepare his defense for a trial. Beggs had been charged with defrauding the Federal Government when he served as a top executive of General Dynamics NASA's acting administrator received his master's and doctoral degrees in engineering from Stanford University. He began his professional career at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico and then moved to the Rand Corporation in California. In 1971, he founded R&D Associates, a think tank in Marina Del Rey, California. He was a consultant to the Secretary of Defense and had served on an advisory committee on undersea warfare and human assisted strategic Air Force systems and on nuclear weapons panels. Prior to his appointment as Deputy Administrator of NASA in November 1985, Graham headed, for three years, President Reagan's advisory committee on arms control and The then 48yearold native Texan expressed great optimism in his assessment of the future of NASA and of space exploration in general. He said that "the agency in the coming decade would broaden mankind's understanding of Earth's environment, expand the reach of manned exploration, and extend scientific vision to the far edges of the universe." Stating that space exploration was limited only by "imagination," Graham promised to pursue vigorously President Reagan's mandate to make space more accessible to the ordinary citizen and free enterprise. (W Times, Jan 6/86; 7/86)
A study by NASA scientist Linwood B. Callis concluded that the recently discovered thinning ozone layer might have been a result of increased sunspot activity. Other scientists, however, were hesitant to accept the theory and remained steadfast in their belief that manmade chemicals were responsible for the depletion. (LA Times, Oct 30/86; C Trib, Oct
East Coast winter storms in the form of cyclones were studied by scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Concentrating their efforts on costal regions of North and South Carolina, where these storms develop and move northward, NASA scientists analyzed the upper atmosphere conditions using moisture and wind sounding balloons and the Nimbus 7 satellite to collect data. Another criterion for understanding these storms was the analysis of the transfer of moisture from the ocean into the atmosphere. NASA flew its fourengine Electra aircraft, outfitted with a combined laser/telescope (Lidar), to detect salt spray and aerosols as it fired a lazar beam that allowed the telescope to measure rising moisture and convection patterns. NASA's ER2 aircraft was used in higher altitudes for the same purpose; it carried microwave radiometers able to detect water vapor and cloud liquid water content. (NASA Release 8630)
NASA and the Pentagon announced the award of $5000*million in contracts to seven different defense contractors for research into the development of the aerospace plane, seen by many as a successor to the Shuttle. The craft was envisioned as one that could take off and land like an airplane, but have the added capability of achieving orbit where it could then travel at 25 times the speed of sound. (WSJ, Apr 8/86; USA Today, Apr 8/86; W Post, Apr 8/86)
NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station, established in March 1984 and chaired by Stanford University Professor Peter M. Banks, released its second major report for planning the scientific utility of the Space Station. The report pointed out that spacebased scientific progress had been slower than planned because of short time in orbit, rigid time lines, long periods between flights, and that the Space Station had the obvious potential of overcoming these Two major conclusions noted that Space Station facilities must be operated with the goal of producing outstanding scientific results; the station would be judged with respect to cost and research capability and the need for wellequipped, permanently habitable laboratories able to support a broad range of fundamental research in space. 0*The task force recommended that the Space Station emulate the adaptive science methodology used in terrestrial laboratories, introduce "telescience" (the ability to conduct research remotely), review safety standards to achieve a reasonable state of personal and system security, work with a crew size of 10, and develop "space mail" for delivering small samples of materials to ground laboratories. Other recommendations: (1) Attached payloads are an important part of the core Space Station, and NASA needs a more productive plan for converting observation experiments developed for Spacelab to Space Station; (2) freeflying platforms are essential for conducting many important scientific endeavors for the Space Station era (i.e. several platforms operating in different orbits); (3) NASA should enhance biological research activities in the preinitial orbit configuration period using Spacelabs and other attached payloads on the Space Shuttle to gain experience for conducting biological science research programs; (4) development of a humantended mode of scientific activity aboard a Space Station would be of little value and a need exists for a truly longterm, human capability; (5) it is essential that NASA look ahead to the activities that are anticipated over the 2530 year life span of the core facility and its associated elements; (6) the Space Station will facilitate development of a new type of research termed "science in space"; (7) the science operations of the Space Station should be separated from the operational management of the overall facilities; (8) and NASA must be prepared to change many of its nationally oriented selection, funding, and management procedures because of the important hardware and scientific contributions that will be made by international partners. (Written Statement to the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Committee on Science and Technology from Peter M. Banks, Apr 9/90; NASA Release 8643)
White House officials announced that top members of President Ronald Reagan's cabinet were in favor of halting commercial launches aboard the Space Shuttle, a move that would cost NASA $850 million in revenue. White House spokesman Larry Speaks argued that eliminating the launches would stimulate the private aerospace industry, reluctant to compete with NASA in the past, to quickly fill the void. Another reason for the reduced number of launches, he noted, was the increasing backlog of scientific and military payloads. Focus on those two types of missions exclusively would ease the immediate need for a fourth At the same time, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge said that he intended to ask Congress for $2.6 billion in order to acquire a fleet of rockets that would reduce both the backlog of 21 payloads and the Pentagon's dependance on the Space Shuttle. He added that no Space Shuttles would be launched from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base until 1992, a saving to tax payers of $1 billion. (W Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug 1/86; W Post, Aug 1/86; B Sun, Aug 1/86; NY Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug
Bernard M. Oliver, Chief of the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, received the National Medal of Science from President Ronald Reagan. The award recognized his accomplishments while working for Bell Telephone Laboratories, where he helped establish standards for television transmission, worked on automatic radar tracking, and advocated pulsecode modulation for the telephone system; and his accomplishments at HewlettPackard, where he developed the first handheld calculator with scientific functions and SETI, a program designed to search the stars for radio signals. (NASA Release 8627)
NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space Station that Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher predicted would be finished by 1994. The new design cut the amount of space walks during construction in half, increased the amount of living and laboratory space, and kept all human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The Space Station, according to plans for assembly, would need 17 Space Shuttle flights between 1993 and 1994. In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a
The Delta 178 rocket accident that occurred on May 3, 1986, was caused by mechanical damage to wiring caused by vibration during flight. The rocket's first failureafter 43 flights since 1977was attributed to a design change, a shift from polyvinylchloride (PVC) insulated wiring to Teflon insulated. Unlike PVC, which is overwrapped for greater abrasion protection, Teflon wiring bundles are overwrapped in only a very limited number of locations; the abrasion resistance of mechanical damping was not adequately considered when making the change. The investigating board recommended a review of the booster electrical control system and possible design changes, verification of the quality of all connectors, and a reemphasis on highly attentive, quality workmanship. Another study released concerned the Titan 34D mishap of April 18; it determined the cause of the accident to be insulation inside one of the two solid rockets being pulled away and allowing "burn through." Neither accident was deemed the result of any major design flaw and, subsequent to minor modifications, the United States planned to resume untended rocket launches. The investigating board also observed potential problems resulting from highhumidity conditions for vehicles stored at the Kennedy Space Center, to instrument limitations, and lack of protection from contamination of the Rocketdyne engine relay box. These problems were not directly connected with the Delta 178 `"rocket accident or the Titan 34D mishap. (NASA Release 8685; W (#Post, Jul 3/86; WSJ, Jul 3/86; NY Times, Jul 3/86; B Sun; Jul
NASA announced that the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the launch of the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the new schedule, the Space Telescope would be launched on October 27, 1986, and the Earth Observation Mission would lift off on August 18, 1986. The change was made to provide additional time for delivery of the Space Telescope from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space Telescope would be deployed into orbit from Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was expected to see 7 times farther and 10 times more clearly than any telescope on Earth. (NASA Release 862)
Parallel contracts for the Advanced Stirling Conversion System were awarded by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, to Mechanical Technical, Inc. and Stirling Technology Company, for $253,385 and $246,576, respectively. Research was to be funded by the Department of Energy, as ground application took precedence over any potential space uses. The system would include a freepiston Stirling engine, a liquidmetal heat pipe receiver, and a means to provide power to a utility grid. The external combustion engine has only two moving parts and works by heating air, or another gas, in a cylinder, with a power source at one end, such as focused solar energy, which expands the gas and moves the piston. Electric power to the utility grid would be transferred from the engine directly, via a linear alternator, or indirectly with hydraulic output to a groundbased fluid pump coupled to a generator. (NASA Release 86156)
Having examined NASA's 1986 schedule of launches, missions into space, and other space science events, U.S. media predicted that 1986 would "open an extensive new chapter in space exploration," and would rival the era of space exploration "that began with Galileo's first peak through a telescope 400 years ago." Predicting 1986 to be "a banner year," the Christian Science Monitor pictured an expanding role for the United States in space exploration because the year promised to put NASA on the cutting edge. Although theLos Angeles Times predicted "a year of spectaculars," it warned that no new starts for planetary missions beyond 1986 were on the horizon. The Times also noted that the projected $8 billion orbiting Space Station would likely take a big bite out of NASA funds and that increased military applications equated to less sharing of knowledge with the public. (CSM, Jan 2/86; LA Times, Jan 2/8)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)
Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said at a Board of'#0*Governors meeting that he expected President Ronald Reagan's approval for a replacement Shuttle. He reiterated what he told the President earlier and averred, "We need a fourth orbiter right away, as soon as we can build it." Fletcher also warned that if it were not built and if we do not begin operating the Space Station by 1994, "that could be very dire, indeed, for the future of American science and technology and the American economy." (Remarks prepared for Delivery: Aerospace Industries Association of America, Board of Governors Meeting, Williamsburg, Virginia, May 22/86; P Inq, May 23/86; W Times, May 23/86; B Sun, May 23/86)
Because of the Challenger accident and the absence of any Shuttle activity, NASA was expected to announce layoffs at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where 800 to 1,000 employees would lose their jobs. For the same reason, Martin Marietta said that 700 to 800 of its workers would be laid off, by October 3, from its plant that produced Shuttle fuel tanks. (W Post, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 5/86)
Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Myers had served as an atlarge member to the NASA Advisory Council and before that as president and chief operating officer for Jacobs Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Energy, vicepresident of Rockwell International, president of North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, and vice president/program manager for both the Apollo Command/Service Module Program and the Space Shuttle Program at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86149)'?0*October 21: Several senior staff changes were made at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to include: Robert C. Goetz, from Deputy Center Director to Technical Assistant to the Center Director; Clifford E. Charlesworth, from Director of Space Operations to Special Assistant to the Director; Henry O. Pohl, from Division Chief to Director of Engineering; William R. Kelly, from Director of Center Support to Director, Administration; Dr. Wayne R. Young was named Deputy Director for Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office to Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86151)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded an $8.9 million fiveyear contract to Calspan Corporation for operation of the Marshall Problem Assessment Center and the Safety Issue Assessment Center. Under the contract, Calspan would receive problem reports and safety issues from the contractors of Marshall's numerous projects, check the accuracy and completeness of the reports, track the closeout of proposed corrective actions, perform trend analysis and special study into causes of problems and safety issues, and appraise Marshall management on a daily basis. (NASA Release 86163)
Pratt & Whitney was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to a contract award for the design, development, test, flight certification, and production verification of alternate'30*highpressure fuel and oxidizer turbopumps. With a proposed cost of about $182 million and a period of performance of five to six years, the turbopumps were intended to be interchangeable with the Space Shuttle's main engine turbopumps, provide extended life capability, and enhance safety margins. (NASA Release 86112)
A student photography experiment, "CAN DO," from the Charleston County School District, South Carolina, scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle Columbia March 6 was rescheduled for April 524. The goal of the experiment was to observe Comet Halley from NASA's highflying Kuiper Airborne Observatory aircraft, a converted C141. The aircraft was scheduled for several highaltitude flights over New Zealand, a part of the southern hemisphere where the Comet would be most visible. Students from other schools, both in the United States and abroad, were to participate in the program by photographing the Comet from the ground and comparing their pictures with those taken in flight. The pictures taken at ground level would assist professional astronomers because most large observatory telescopes are not designed to view large objects, and resolving the fine detail in Comet Halley's tail could be enhanced with the much wider overall view from a standard camera lens. (NASA Release 8635)
Astronaut Joe H. Engle retired from the United States Air Force as a colonel and resigned from NASA. After coming to NASA in 1966, he commanded Columbia and Discovery flights and was named Deputy Associate Administrator, in March 1982, for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 86166; W Post, Dec 3/86)
The Presidential Commission questioned NASA scientists regarding faulty orings as a cause of the Challenger accident. The panel learned that these seals could indeed malfunction in cold weather and also that erosion (not the result of cold0*weather) had occurred in 6 of 171 seals on previous flights. Morton Thiokol, the firm responsible for manufacturing the orings, had raised concerns about launching the Shuttle in cold weather, but NASA engineers concluded that the backup ring would function if the primary seal failed. Released NASA documents also showed concern expressed by engineers, who, three years prior to the accident, concluded that the mechanism for sealing segments of the solid rocket booster could fail and result in "loss of mission, vehicle, and crew." One risk analysis received by NASA from an outside agency estimated the chances for an accident involving the boosters as 1 in 35. NASA's safety advisory board stated in their 1985 annual report that 18 Shuttle flights per year were "very optimistic" because these launches were anything but routine. However, "the requirement to launch has not been a prerequisite," said acting NASA Administrator Dr. William R. Graham, "The prerequisite has been safety." (Official Transcript Proceedings before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 11/86; P Inq, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; B Sun, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; CSM, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; C Trib, Feb 12/86; Feb 14/86; Feb 13/86; WSJ, Feb 12/86; USA Today, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; NY Times, Feb 13/86; W Post, Feb 13/86)
The President's Commission began probing into the Space Shuttle Challenger accident as it took statements from NASA officials Dr. William R. Graham, Acting Administrator; Jesse Moore, Associate Administrator; Arnold D. Aldrich, Space Shuttle Manager; Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager; and Robert B. Sieck, Director, Shuttle Operations. As several possible reasons into the cause of the accident were explored, Moore emphasized0*that space flight would always be dangerous. (NY Times, Feb 7/86)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced assignments to the NASA 51L Data and0*Design Analysis Task Force. The task force was to collect and analyze information to support a thorough review of all aspects and potential causes of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), in Pasadena, California, studied a program that would send a nuclearpowered spacecraft hurling into deep space traveling 225,000 miles per hour. The mission, said JPL Director Lew Allen, could be launched by 2005. The craft was expected to travel 1,000 astronomical units, 1,000 times the distance between the Earth and Sun, sending back data for more than 50 years. The Voyagers 1 and 2 spacecraft were expected to eventually reach deep space, but their slow rates of speed, about 36,000 miles per hour, would put any data gathering activity too far in the future. (LA Times, Sep 16/86)
NASA officials announced that James Kingsbury, engineering chief at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would retire at the end of November. He was one of the high ranking officials who had worked on Challenger's fatal rocket boosters. (USA Today, Nov 5/86)
As of this date, two companies (Boeing Aerospace Operations and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company) had submitted proposals for the Payload Ground Operations Contract, a threeyear costplusawardfee contract with optional extensions of up to 15 years. The selected contractor would be responsible for preparing all payload for launch aboard Space Shuttles and expendable launch vehicles, as well as operations, maintenance, and engineering of the related processing facilities. The contract would consolidate work that was performed under separate, onsite contracts involving about 900 people. Space Station components requiring launch from the Kennedy Space Center and preparation of NASA payloads at the Vandenberg Launch Site in California were to be included. (NASA Release 86109)
Thomas Paine, Laurel Wilkening, George Field, Jack Kerrebrock, Kathryn Sullivan, and Carl Sagan testified before Congress concerning Paine's report, "Pioneering the Space Frontier." (Hearing before the Committee on Science and Technology, July 22/86)
NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down and intercept the other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manufacturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to the company's entry into commercial launches. NASA had two more Delta rockets in its inventory, one committed to a U.S. Government weather satellite identical to the one lost in May and the other to an Indonesian weather satellite. (NASA Release 8632; WSJ, Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; NY Times, Sep 6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86)
Because the ocean surface mirrors the ocean floor as gravity pulls water down into depressions and forces it up around the mountains (looking north from Puerto Rico, for example, the ocean surface drops nearly 60 feet), scientists at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, employed satellites to map the ocean's floor. Data taken from altimeters on the Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and the Sea Satellite were used to generate a computer image of the ocean surface, reflecting the Earth's structure underneath the water. The data, said Dr. James Marsh, also increased knowledge of circulation and current systems. (NASA Release 86172) 'H0*December 9: Fortynine research proposals from 45 small, high technology U.S. firms, totaling about $23 million, were selected for immediate negotiation of Phase II contract awards. These proposals were chosen from 100 submitted to the Small Business Innovation Research program, a program designed to strengthen the role of small business participation in Federal research and development and contribute to the growth and strength of the private sector. (NASA Release 86174)
The scheduled launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed, this time because of inclement weather at landing sights in Spain and the Sahara Desert. The weather situations in these distant areas were of concern to engineers at the Kennedy Space Center because the sites provided emergency landing in the event of an engine failure during the first few minutes of flight. This fifth delay, four in three weeks, raised questions concerning the NASA's ability to launch 15 scheduled Shuttle flights during 1986. (W Post, Jan 8/86; NY Times, Jan 8/86; USA `"Today Jan 8/86; P Inq, Jan 8/86)
NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
The Soviet Union's Vega I spacecraft sent back pictures of Halley's Comet as it passed within 5,500 miles of its nucleus. The photographs, displayed on screens at a Soviet Space Center, were viewed by scientists from around the world and brought the scientific community together behind the Iron Curtain. A host of new data such as the possibility that the Comet contains two nuclei, that the core is three or four miles across, and evidence bolstering the idea that the Comet is leftover debris from the solar system's creation some 4.6 billion years ago was revealed. The presentation also gave American scientists a chance to study Halley's Comet; the United States launched no spacecraft for that purpose. The Soviet's second probe, Vega II, passed 5,125 miles from the comet's core on March 9. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), Mar 7/86; NY Times, Mar 7/86; W Post, Mar 7/86; W Times, Mar 7/86; B Sun, Mar 7/86; C Trib, Mar 7/86; Mar 10/76; CSM Mar 7/86; March
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command and former NASA astronaut, was appointed Associate Administrator for Space Flight. The new position called for Truly to head the Space Shuttle program and to direct NASA's Design and Data Analysis Task Force, which reviewed the Shuttle Challenger's January accident. He succeeded Jesse W. Moore in both of these roles. (NASA Release 8615; WSJ, Feb 20/86; NY Times, Feb 20/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; B Sun, Feb 21/86)
A NASA Aries sounding rocket was destroyed by a range safety officer at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, 50 seconds after liftoff at an altitude of 77,000 feet, when a problem in the vehicle's guidance system was discovered. The rocket carried a 2,300 pound Xray telescope, designed to study distant stellar objects emitting soft Xrays, jointly developed by Dr. Gordon Garmire of Pennsylvania State University and Drs. R. Novick and William HainMin Ku of Columbia University. (NASA Release 86119; W Post, Aug 28/86)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, selected the RCA Corporation and Orbital Sciences for negotiations leading to the award of contracts to build a spacecraft and upper stage booster for the Mars Observer Mission scheduled for launch in August 1990. The first in a series of proposed planetary observer programs, the Mars Observer would study the climate, atmosphere, and surface, using eight science instruments while in orbit around the planet a full Martian year, 687 Earth days. (NASA Release 8634; WSJ, Mar 26/86)
The Air Force was forced to destroy an unarmed Minuteman 3 ICBM over the Pacific Ocean after an undisclosed problem developed during its 30minute test flight. Since February 1995, ten successful minuteman test launches had been done when another rocket had to be destroyed. (NY Times, Aug 29/85; P Inq, Aug
Columbia, flight STS 61C, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a Space Shuttle record of seven postponements. The crew completed their mission of launching RCA's $50 million satellite into orbit, for which NASA received $14.2 million from the corporation. Ironically, after a 25day delay in getting off the ground, the Space Shuttle was told to come down a day early. NASA engineers feared that bad weather might hamper the original landing date. Already behind schedule, NASA wanted extra time to prepare the Shuttle for the next flight in March and its mission of observing Halley's Comet. The needed orbit for studying the comet would leave little room for delays of this launch. Most of Columbia's experiments were completed, but a camera device for photographing Halley's comet failed to work because a light intensifier had been inadvertently left on during the ship's seven launch delays. It was not until January 18, after a twoday delay because of poor weather, that Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California. Engineers had hoped to land the craft at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, from where it was scheduled to be launched on March 6. Therefore, an estimated five days were scheduled to be cut from its preparation time so that the critical date for observing Halley's Comet could be met. (NY Times, Jan 13/86; Jan 14/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 24/86; USA Today, Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86 W Times, Jan 13/86; CSM, Jan 13/86; Jan 21/86 P Inq, Jan 13/86; B Sun Jan 13/86; W Post Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 16/86; C Trib, Jan 13/86)
Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that John W. Thomas, Spacelab Program Officer Manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to assume management responsibility for the Solid Rocket Motor redesign team at the Marshall Space Flight Center on May 12, 1986. The Space Shuttle Challenger accident investigation uncovered several deficiencies in the design of the solid rocket motor joint. An independent group of senior experts would also be involved in all phases of the program; they would report to NASA Administrators and review and integrate the findings and recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8658)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, developed an airborne sensing device, an infrared radiometer, for measuring ocean surface temperatures and charting temperature and wind maps. Tested over southern California's ocean aboard the Goodyear blimp Columbia, the new instrument was unique in that it could distinguish water temperature from the temperature of the air immediately above it. Researchers expected that the device could greatly enhance satellite capability to monitor ocean weather. (NASA Release 86169)
NASA disclaimed an April 2324 twopart article in the New York Times that accused the organization of ignoring audits and safety standards, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle program. According to NASA, some of the examples mentioned in the article "are related to activities of several years ago and have since been corrected or are being corrected." Moreover, "NASA has always considered audits to be a necessary management tool to be used in conjunction with other management processes...during the existence of NASA prior to and since the Inspector General Act, management has used its own internal audits to uncover and correct deficiencies and to strengthen internal controls." In addition, NASA has been responsive to external audit reports through tighter management." Indeed, says NASA, $749.3 million in savings, cost avoidances, and cost recoveries were realized from 19781985 because of internal and external audits. NASA also noted that many of the audit reports dealt with research and development projects into which new technologies had to be figured, making for an uncertain budget Other allegations: Various violations of law and Federal codes have occurred within NASA. The Agency predicted that Shuttle cargo would cost around $100 per pound but actual cost was closer to $5264 per pound; the Shuttle was not equipped with the amount of hardware for test purposes that was available to the Apollo program; in financing a Government guaranteed loan for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System program (TDRSS), NASA wasted $1 billion; NASA lost $2.4 million of equipment in In defense, NASA noted that the original estimate for Shuttle cargo was $160 per pound and the most recent was $615 per poundbesides, cost per pound was only a partial indicator of the Shuttle's utility; the Shuttle program did not parallel the Apollo program in regard to safety test hardware, but introduced longer periods of testing, not substandard safety precautions; the $1 billion said to have been wasted in the TDRSS program was in fact attributable primarily to significant interest cost increases; the lost equipment was a 1950's state of the art computer that by 1983 was so obsolete that no one else would take ithence the machine was dismantled and disposed of; ties to graft at NASA have to do with individual misconduct, such as that by Lewis Research Center and Marshall Space Flight Center officials, who were prosecuted in Federal court, indicating that the internal NASA investigation process was working well. (NASA Release 8652) 0** A statement by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly noted that the remains of the crew of the Space Shuttle Challenger were soon to be transferred, but no positive determination of the cause of the accident had yet been made. The three approaches pursued were the examination of remains, direct examination of the wreckage, and analysis of photography and radar to determine forces imposed on the vehicle. An examination of the remains revealed no new information, and the wreckage examination was hampered by the amount of damage done at water impact. Photo and radar analysis, he hoped, would lead to a determination of the magnitude and the direction of the forces imposed on the cabin during and after breakup. (NASA Release 8653)
The Lunar and Planetary Laboratory at the University of Arizona and NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, planned a Planet Mercury Conference for early August. More than 10 years had elapsed since the last conference and a significant amount of data had developed during the interim. Scheduled topics included Mercury's role in helping scientists understand the origin of planets, Mercury as an endmember planet, groundbased and Earthorbital observations of Mercury, and possible spacecraft missions to the planet. (NASA Release)
NASA extended a $1.32 billion contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by the Challenger accident; the changes would be handled through contract amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five different firms for the study of designs for second generation solid rocket boosters. The companies were required only to submit concepts for a newly designed rocket. (LA Times, Sep 6/86; WSJ Sep 8/86)'80** NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by Space Services, Inc., a new rocket company, to launch its Conestoga rocket. The company planned to put cremated remains of 10,000 people on a satellite that was to orbit the Earth. (P Inq, Sep 9/86)
NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, awarded a $6.6 million, fouryear contract to General Electric for definition, modification, and test of propulsion systems for supersonic short takeoff and vertical landing technology development. In support of next century military aircraft, design and modification of a GE F110 engine would focus on a fan air collection and valving system by taking compressed air from the engine and redirecting it to vertical lift producing devices. (NASA Release 86136)
James E. Kingsbury, director of the Science and Engineering Directorate at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, was named to manage an ad hoc group formed to requalify the motor of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster for flight. The booster rockets, said NASA, could be ready in one year. Kingsbury said that all of the current hardware could be modified and reused, a comment that surprised outside engineers. (NASA Release 8636; W Post, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 30/86)0*April
Lasers on board weather satellites (LIDAR), said Wayne Baker of the Goddard Space Flight Center's Laboratory, promised more accurate forecasting. In the past, satellite data offered only marginal improvements over traditional methods and even deteriorations for some predictions. With the addition of a laser, however, scientists would have access to wind measurement throughout the atmosphere, keys to following the weather that were before limited to ground stations and weather balloons. CSM, Jan 16/86)
The Federal Aviation Administration has become increasingly concerned with the problem of inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 17hourperday schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, commercial jetliners are prone to numerous mechanical breakdowns. Although "modern jets are designed to fly despite even serious defects" and although U.S. carriers employ an army of airline mechanics repairing planes in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by the Federal Aviation Administration last summer for a "series of maintenancerelated transgressions." The National Transportation Safety Board was considering whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 31 people were killed, was caused by poor maintenance. Some airsafety experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious about safety; still, maintenance error ranked third behind pilot error and bad weather as a cause of fatal airline crashes. (WSJ, Jan 3/86) 0*January 6: NASA renamed two planetary missions scheduled for flight in 1988 and 1990. The mission to map the planet Venus, previously known as Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan spacecraft, attached to a CentaurG upper stage, would map the entire surface of the planet Venus for the first time, using a syntheticaperture radar instrument. The spacecraft would orbit the planet about once every three hours, coming as close as 250 kilometers from the The mission to map the planet Mars, previously known as the Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing productionline type of Earthorbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of its surface and to investigate the Martian climate, both present and past. The Magellan and Mars Observer projects were managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 861)
NASA engineers settled on a design for the Shuttle's new booster rockets, and beginning in early 1987, four fullscale tests were planned. John Thomas, manager of the booster design project at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, predicted that the tests would run smoothly and that Shuttle flight would resume in February 1988. (C Trib, Oct 28/86)
In conjunction with its 1986 Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA announced the selection of 172 research proposals from 144 small firms for Phase I Award'@0*Negotiations. Selected from 1628 proposals, about onehalf of the sixmonth, fixedprice contract efforts would be eligible for Phase II followon contracts of up to two years. This program was designed to stimulate technological innovation in the private sector and strengthen small business participation. (NASA Release
NASA announced that James R. Thompson would be appointed Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, in late September. He had been Deputy Director of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory since 1983 and previous to that had spent 23 years at Marshall, where he managed development of the Space Shuttle's main engines, worked in the Skylab Program, and was Associate Director of Engineering for the Center. He was also NASA's manager for the Challenger investigation (NASA Release 86106; NY Times, Aug 6/86)
NASA's Ames Research Center dedicated the $2.3 million, 21,336 square foot Fluid Mechanics Laboratory, a new research facility designed to stimulate basic knowledge of aerodynamic flows. The Laboratory could support multiple, simultaneous smallscale wind tunnel research while having full access to supercomputer resources. The laboratory would concentrate on vortex flows, a major factor in maneuverability and reduced drag by aerodynamic means, for applications ranging from developing fuelefficient aircraft to lowspeed research on the National AeroSpace Plane. (NASA Release 86158)
NASA reported that scientists observed Halley's comet from a University of Arizona telescope aboard NASA's Kuiper Airborne Observatory, a modified C141 aircraft operated by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. It was the first direct confirmation of water in a comet, and the discovery lent new support to astronomers' widely held theory that comets are "dirty snowballs" composed primarily of frozen water. The theory was conceived by Dr. Michael Mumma, head of the Planetary Systems Branch, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, who, together with Dr. Harold Weaver, an associate research scientist at the Center for Astrophysical0*Sciences at Johns Hopkins University, developed a theoretical model leading to this discovery. (NASA Release 864; W Post Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86; NY Times, Jan 10/86)
NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California, modified an F15 jet engine to increase its thrust by 10 percent and fuel savings by 5 to 7 percent. The modification grew out of NASA's Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control program (HIDEC), which lessened unneeded engine stall margins (the amount that engine operating pressure must be reduced to avoid stall). The typical 25 percent stall margin allows for a contingency of any of the worst flight conditions and robs 15 percent of an engine's usable power. The HIDEC created engine and flight control systems that communicate with each other; thus the engine adjusts itself according to actual flight, not assumed constants. (NASA Release 86176)
NASA and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation, Inc. announced plans to build a memorial at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, dedicated to astronauts who lost their lives while flying, training, or awaiting assignment to fly for the space agency. The memorial would honor the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger crewFrancis Scobee, Michael Smith, Judith Resnik, Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Christa McAuliffe, and Gregory Jarvis; the 1967 Apollo crewVirgil Grissom, Edward H. White II,0*and Roger Chaffee; Charles Bassett and Elliott See, killed in 1966, Theodore Freeman killed in 1964, and Clifton Williams killed in 1967all killed in T38 trainer aircraft accidents; and Edward Givens, killed in 1967 in an automobile accident. (NASA Release 8638)
NASA released studies done by Donald Heath, a scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, which reveal that the Earth's ozone layer is thinning at a much higher rate than previously thought, about 3 percent between 1978 and 1984. This data was gleaned from a satellite orbiting 570 miles above the Earth. (C Trib, Oct 20/86; B Sun; Oct 20/86)
outer casing of the solid rocket booster might have peeled, allowing flames to burn through its casing. Although made by United Technologies, the design was identical to that used in the boosters made by Morton Thiokol for the Space Shuttles and raised the question as to whether solidfuel booster rockets in lieu of liquidpropellant rockets were suitable for human space flight. NY Times, June 4/86)
Testing of recently installed weather protection structures was scheduled for August 19 at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida with Space Shuttle Atlantis. The $3.3 million system of sliding and folding doors and seals would cover previously exposed, lower portions of the orbiter and greatly reduce risk to the heat protection tiles, subject to damage from heavy rains, hail, and windblown debris. (NASA Release 8695)
NASA scientists halted design of additional shielding for two nuclear powered satellites. The shield, they ascertained, would help only during the first two minutes of launch and would actually become a detriment after that. The Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel would not give launch approval for the scientific missions until 1999, but NASA officials saw a good chance for approval of launching the radioisotope thermoelectric generator powered satellites from the Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Dec 15/86)
NASA and the Science and Technology Agency of Japan announced an agreement reached on the hardware that Japan will carry into Phase B Space Station definition and preliminary design. According to the agreement, the preliminary design activities were to include: (1) a pressurized module to provide shirtsleeve work space for station crews; (2) an exposed work deck; (3) a scientific/equipment airlock; (4) a local remote manipulator arm; (5) and an experiment logistics model. The multipurpose laboratory called for accommodation of general scientific and technology development research, including microgravity research, as well as control panels for operating the Space Station's mobil remote manipulator system and attached payloads. (NASA Release 8631)
This date marked the 60th anniversary of liquidfueled rocket flight. In 1926 Dr. Robert H. Goddard assembled and launched a gasoline propelled rocket from his aunt's farm in Worcester, Massachusetts. In commemoration of the event, NASA planned to launch a fullscale replica of the rocket from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release
Joseph F. Sutter was appointed chairman of the NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an advisory group to the NASA Administrator. Sutter, in 1986, had a 41year career with the Boeing Company as an aerodynamicist, received numerous awards for development of jetpowered airliners, and was nominated to receive the Wright Memorial Trophy, to be presented in Washington, D.C. He had also been appointed to the Presidentiaal Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86154)
Leaders from the 11membernation European Space Agency (ESA) met with NASA officials to discuss their $2 billion contribution to the Space Station project and to seek a greater management role and benefits from it. One European official noted, "NASA must realize that ESA is a mature space agency that can manage manned space flight alone if necessary." Although the statement appeared to be a threat to withdraw, Richard Barnes, NASA Director of International Affairs, saw no intent on the part of Europe to pull out. Leaders from both sides, however, agreed to a joint statement saying, "While recognizing that differences currently exist, Professor Luest and Dr. Fletcher jointly concluded that these differences are not irreconcilable." (NY Times, Nov 22/86; AvWk, Nov 24/86)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory Successfully tested a new space radioastronomy technique, Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI), that combined data from radio telescopes on the ground with data from an antenna on NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The result was a better resolution of three quasars (among the most distant objects known and designated 1730130, 1741038, and 1510089) than what groundbased radio studies at the same wavelength could provide. It was the first time an orbiting satellite had been used as a radio telescope. (NASA Release 86140; W Post, Oct 3/86; LA Times, Oct
In a part of NASA's strategy to return the Space Shuttle safely to flight, Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator, announced the new management and operations structure for the National Space Transportation System (NSTS or Space Shuttle program). The changes were aimed at establishing clear lines of communication in the information transfer and decision making processes. The management change, which also moved control of the operation to Washington, D.C., was directed by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly and followed recommendations made by the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology and the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. As part of the restructuring, Arnold D. Aldrich, who joined NASA in 1959, was named Director, NSTS, and Richard H. Kohrs and Robert L. Crippen were named his deputies. Truly stated that "the formation of this program management organization is one of the most positive steps NASA has taken in the last several months to strengthen the Shuttle program and return to flight status." (NASA Release 86159; W Post, Nov 6/86; NY Times, Nov 6/86)
The Soviet Union invited foreign correspondents into its mission control center for a conference concerning orbiting cosmonauts and a live television interview with them. The Soviet Union set still another precedent when it allowed coverage of its space program by a large group of foreign press. The invitation followed a pattern of a more open Russian space agency, the televising of the recent liftoff of the cosmonauts on March 13, and the opening of the Soviet Space Research Institute to foreign visitors when the Vega spacecraft approached Halley's Comet were also first time events. (W Post, Apr 8/86; W Times, Apr 8/86)
NASA announced that Lieutenant General Forrest S. McCartney, on assignment from the Air Force, would take over as Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, beginning October 1. McCartney succeeded Richard Smith, who retired on July 31. The press opined that the move would give the military greater control of the space program. McCartney's past Air Force assignments include positions as satellite controller, as project officer in the Titan 3 program, in the Directorate of Space at USAF Headquarters, as monitor for satellite communications programs, and director of range engineering at USAF Eastern Test Range. (NASA Release 86117; W Post, Aug 21/86; NY Times, Aug
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
The results of a study conducted by Geologists Dr. Matthew Golombek and Dr. Laurie Brown suggested that the northwest Mojave Desert had shifted about 25 degrees clockwise because of periodic, violent earthquakes some 16 to 20 million years ago. Golombek reported that "results of magnetic studies of volcanic rocks taken from 19 sites suggested that the movement was caused by shear (the Earth's tectonic plates sliding past or over one another) from the Pacific Plate sliding along the fault past the North American Plate." Magnetic minerals had once lined up parallel with the Earth's magnetic field to the North, but the study found minerals now pointing 25 degrees to the east, and it was determined that tectonic movement had rotated the rocks. (NASA Release 86160; LA Times, Nov 30/86) 'D0*November 26: NASA selected the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), a launch vehicle that fits in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle, to carry three probes for planetary missions. Despite earlier plans for alternative launch vehicles following cancellation of the Shuttle/Centaur Upper Stage and the Challenger accident, NASA felt an urgent need to reestablish its planetary program. The probes scheduled for launch in 1989 and 1990 included the Galileo, a joint mission with Germany that would circle Jupiter and measure electromagnetic fields and plasma particles; the Magellan, which would orbit and map Venus using radar; and the Ulysses, a joint mission with the European Space Agency designed to orbit and study the poles of the sun. These three were the first missions for orbit around bodies other than Earth that would employ the IUS. The IUS boosters were manufactured by Boeing to launch three scientific missions. They were to have launched the General Dynamics hydrogenfueled Centaur rockets, but the highly volatile boosters, thought possibly unsafe for human space flight, were grounded after the Challenger accident. Because of its less powerful rocket, the Galileo needed to slingshot Venus in order to reach Jupiter, as opposed to flying directly to the planet. The added time for the mission was expected to run $50 million. (NASA Release 86161; NY Times, Nov 27/86)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz was named deputy director of the Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include participation in the first astronaut visit to the Skylab, serving as commander of the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC Director. (NASA Release
For the second time in two days, launch of the Shuttle Challenger at Cape Canaveral, Florida, was postponed because of bad weather. Meanwhile, NASA began conducting tests at Edwards Air Force Base in California to determine the effect of rain on insulating tiles and readied a sophisticated instrument landing system, hoping to minimize the weather factor in launches and landings for future orbiter flights at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (W Times, Jan 27/86; USA Today, Jan 27/86; P Inq, Jan 27/86; C Trib, Jan 27/86; B Sun, Jan 27/86)
NASA reported that the United States and the United Kingdom had recently agreed to cooperate in the development of technology for an advanced short takeoff and vertical landing (ASTOVL) aircraft. The ASTOVL aircraft would have the advantages of an advanced supersonic fighter aircraft, but with the added capability of landing vertically. The cooperative research program would investigate four propulsion concepts: vectored thrust, ejector augmenter, tandem fan, and remote augmented lift system. The memorandum of understanding was signed by William R. Graham, NASA Acting Administrator, and Donald A. Hicks, Under Secretary for Research and Engineering, Department of Defense, for the United States, and by Sir David Perry, Chief of Defense Equipment Collaboration, for the United Kingdom. (NASA Release
TRW, Inc. was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for design and delivery of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV's primary uses would be spacecraft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and close proximity visual observation beyond the operating range of a Space Shuttle. The OMV, "space tug," was also to be made to adapt for use in Space Station activities. (NASA Release 8681; WSJ, Jun 26/86; LA Times, Jun 27/86)')0** The first flight of an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility with a modified F15. The integration of engine and flight control (Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control) between the system's computers could increase performance 2 to 10 percent. (NASA Release 8682)
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
Dr. James C. Fletcher released to members of Congress a statement indicating that employment at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, would increase from 12,600 to 14,000 employees during Space Station development, with a potential for another 1,000 jobs should JSC take on additional Space Station tasks. "Another way to look at this," he warned "is that without the Space Station program, JSC's employment level likely will not grow significantly over the next few years." The projected increase notwithstanding, officials at the JSC were concerned with their status because of the recent decision to move the habitation module's development to the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville Alabama. They were assured, however, that the move had to do with coordinating the habitation module and the module structure and that "the Johnson Space Center's role as NASA's preeminent center of excellence in manned spacecraft systems is not changing." (NASA Release 8698; NY `"Times, Jul 26/86; W Post, Jul 26/86)
Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight STS 51L, exploded at about 10 miles above the Earth, killing all seven crew members. It was the worst accident in the history of space exploration and the first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle's main fuel tank, causing engineers to speculate that hydrogen from a ruptured tank ignited upon contact with air heated by the rocket motors or directly by the motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tended spaceflight was halted until a thorough investigation was completed, stunting the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of scientific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY times, Jan 29/86; B Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq Jan 29/86; C Trib, Jan 29/86)
NASA got back tapes from IBM that were recovered from the Atlantic Ocean six weeks after the Space Shuttle accident and revealed that the Challenger crew had no knowledge of events leading to the catastrophe. IBM engineers, who were simultaneously researching tape restoration, were called upon and after isolating the computer zeros and ones, NASA engineers began the job of translating the data into a facsimile of human voice. W Post, Jul 18/86; NY Times, Jul 18/86; B Sun, Jul 18/86)
Hearings before the House of Representatives investigating the Challenger accident began on this date. Testimonies were given by William P. Rogers, Dr. James C. Fletcher, various NASA personnel, various personnel from Morton Thiokol, Inc., and various personnel from the military and industry. The hearings were to take place June 10, 11, 12, 17, 18 and 25, 1986 and July 15, 16, 23, and 24, 1986. (Investigation into the Challenger Accident: Hearings before the Committee on Science and Technology House of Representatives, 1986)
Martin Marietta, in competition for a contract to build the Space Station, unveiled a fullscale model depicting its plans at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. The intended crew module has eight sleeping quarters, each with a video recorder and a computer giving crew members direct access to home and the Space Station's main computer. (C Trib, Nov
Two nearEarth asteroids, composed of nickel and iron and could provide future space mining, were discovered shortly before this date by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. About one mile in diameter, each, one asteroid is inside and one is outside of'%0*Earth's orbit. (NASA Release 8673)
In a statement released by the White House Press Secretary, President Ronald Reagan announced "two steps that will ensure America's leadership in space exploration and utilization." His first target was the building of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary for accomplishments in space (especially the Space Station). He also announced that NASA would ease out of the business of launching commercial satellites by allowing the private sector to assume the responsibility, which, he said, would eventually be done "better and cheaper." NASA, he stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of space. (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President, Aug 15/86)
