NASA named a board to investigate the July 13, 1987, Atlas Centaur 68 accident which resulted in extensive damage to the vehicle. James B. Odom, Director of the Science and Engineering irectorate, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was appointed Chairman of the Board. The Board was expected to report the results of its investigation to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly,h)0*0*0*Associate Administrator for Space Flight, by August 14, 1987. (NASA Release 87112; LA Times, July 14/87; NY Times, July 16/87)
The XWing, a NASA experimental aircraft, made its first brief venture into the air, lifting 25 feet off the runway for about 16 seconds. The XWing concept uses a fourbladed rotor system for vertical takeoff and landing. The first major test flight was expected to follow in about two weeks. (NASA Release 87172; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 19/87)
NASA announced that scientists and researchers from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, would conduct, on March 2326, the first in a series of tests related to development of the mobile satellite communications system. The test in Erie, Colorado, would be part of the Mobile Satellite Experiment program. (NASA Release 8738)
James Elliott, a spokesman for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying an upperatmosphere plasma experiment, detonated when its second stage malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87)
NASA scientists announced that they have direct proof that exploding stars produce most of the 90odd chemical elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. These elements are part of the composition of planets and moons in the solar system and also are found in plants and animals on Earth. The findings came from observations and analysis of the gammaray emissions from radioactive cobalt produced in the Supernova 1987a explosion. The observations were conducted by the Solar Maximum Mission satellite, which had been studying the supernova since August 1987, and two balloonborne experiments flown in October and November from Alice Springs, Australia, as part of NASA's Fall Supernova Observations Campaign. (NASA Release 87185; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 17/87; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 17/87)
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
NASA announced that Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, were studying concepts for designing and building a robot space vehicle for Mars exploration and samplereturn mission. If approved, the robotic space vehicle mission would be launched in 1998 and return with martian samples in 2001. The mission would precede human exploration of Mars. (NASA Release 8744)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers announced that James T. Rose had been selected as Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, effective October 5, 1987. He would be responsible for NASA's commercial programs, the use of space by the U.S. private sector, the use of NASA technology by private industry, and NASA's support of innovative research by small business firms. James T. Rose joined NASA in 1957 as a research engineer for the Vanguard Program experiments. In 1962 he became head of the Manned Spacecraft Center's Mission Planning Office for the Gemini flights. From 1964 to 1974, Rose held a series of key positions at the McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He returned to NASA in 1974 as Director, Space Shuttle Engineering, in the Office of Space Flight. From 1976 to 1986, he was Director of McDonnell Douglas' Space Manufacturing Initiatives. In June 1987, he again returned to NASA to become the Director of Space in NASA's Office of H&Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 87145; Huntsville Times, Oct 1/87)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced NASA had completed negotiations with Rockwell International to build a replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. The new orbiter would contain existing structural spares, but would also feature the latest technology evolving from the current returntoflight activities. The new Space Shuttle orbiter was expected to be ready for use within 45 months. (NASA Release
Five NASA and U.S. Air Force pilots completed the first phase of research flying of the Advanced Fighter Technology Integration F111 aircraft at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During the first phase of research flying, the aircraft's wing was modified so that it could fly with optimum wing curvature at subsonic, transonic, and supersonic speeds. The MAW system was operated only manually, and the pilot selected the aircraft's wing curvature. The aircraft, with its distinct Mission Adaptive Wing (MAW), entered the second phase of research flying where the computers were modified so the wing curvature could adjust automatically. (NASA Release 87118; Def News, Aug 24/87)
NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, announced that more than 400 modifications were planned for the Space Shuttle program. Speaking at a news conference called to discuss NASA's recovery from the effects of the Challenger accident, which killed all seven Shuttle crew members, Truly emphasized the Agency's commitment to "a trueh)0*0*0*enhancement to safety." Included among the safety modifications listed were better brakes, more efficient engines, and eventually an escape system for the Shuttle crew. However, it was pointed out that the escape system probably would not be ready for the next planned Shuttle flight in February 1988. (UPI, Jan 20/87; LA Times, Jan 21/87; NY Times, Jan 21/87; P Inq, Jan 21/87; W Post, Jan 21/87)
NASA announced that on June 15, 1987, Dr. JohnDavid F. Bartoe began a 2year appointment as Chief Scientist of the Space Station program, advising the Associate Administrator on program plans, policies, and userrelated requirements. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Bartoe served with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in a variety of positions, most recently as Head of the Solar Spectroscopy section, Space Science Division. He expected to return to the NRL at the end of the Chief Scientist appointment. (NASA Release 87103)
NASA announced that it, together with the Universities Space Research Association, in Columbia, Maryland, and the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence in Space Data and Information Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new research facility would serve as the nerve center for a network of researchers from leading universities and from industry computer science departments. The emphasis would be on research in areas of potential longterm application to NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 8770)
Willis H. Shapley was selected for NASA's newly established position of Associate Deputy Administrator (Policy), effective March 9, 1987. Shapley held the third ranking position, created in response to the reorganization recommended by the NASA Management Study Group. Shapley began Government service in 1942 with the Bureau of the Budget, Executive Office of the President, where he specialized in research and development, national defense, and space programs. From 1965 to 1975, he was NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator. In July 1975 he was the senior NASA representative in the Soviet Union during the joint USUSSR ApolloSoyuz space mission. Shapley retired from NASA in 1975 to become a consultant to a number of private institutions and Government agencies, including NASA. (NASA Release 8724)
NASA announced that researchers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, had successfully tested a passenger vehicle satellite antenna. The newly developedh)0*0*0*antenna, designed to be mounted on the roof of a passenger vehicle, was expected to play an important role in NASA's mobile satellite experiment program. This program and other technologies were expected to lead eventually toward a mobile satellite communications system. The first success in the program was achieved when researchers, using an antenna on moving passenger vehicle, were able to track an inorbit satellite. (NASA Release
NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, at Headquarters in Washington, D.C., selected 29 life sciences investigators for space flight study. According to Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, Director of NASA's Life Sciences Division, the first phase of the study, the definition phase, which is expected to begin in the early fall of 1987 and last less than a year, would be followed by selection of investigators for actual flights aboard the Space Shuttle. Chosen investigators could participate in future Space Shuttle missions anytime between 1991 and 1994, or even later. (NASA Release 8754)
The Boeing Commercial Airplane Company was selected by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, for major aeronautical flight experiments. NASA tasked Boeing with providing data on the aerodynamic and operational effectiveness of a hybrid system to achieve laminar air flow control at flight conditions, particularly at high subsonic speeds. The tests were to be conducted on both commercial and military transport airplanes. H&(NASA Release 87140; Def News, Oct 12/87)
NASA announced that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle launch had again been rescheduled, this time for June 1988. The 4month delay was caused by the need to perform further tests on the liquidfuel main engines and because of needed redesigning and testing of the Shuttle's rocket boosters. The postponement caused a decrease in the number of crew tended flights planned for 1988 and 1989. NASA said that three Spaceh)0*0*0*Shuttles, instead of the five originally planned, would be flown in 1988 and seven, instead of the ten planned, would be flown in 1989. The reductions in Space Shuttle launches, NASA believed, would further slow U.S. efforts to regain primacy in space exploration and utilization. (LA Times, May 21/87; NY Times, May 21/87; B Sun, May 21/87; W Post, May 21/87)
Officials from NASA and the LockheedGeorgia Company, Marietta, Georgia, announced that flight testing had begun on a new, highly fuelefficient, "propfan" engine. Aircraft equipped with the propfan propulsion system, which was developed as a result of a $56million NASA sponsored research program, was expected to be 1530 percent more fuel efficient than the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990's. (NASA Release 8773)
Pilots from NASA, the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy, and the Grumman Aerospace Corporation completed the first phase of experimental flying of the forwardsweptwing X29 aircraft. During the tests, the X29, with its threesurface pitch control system, reached an altitude of 50,200 feet and speeds of about 1.5 times the speed of sound. After a total of 104 flights, the pilots began the second phase of the flight research program at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During this phase, further flights would test the forward swept wing structure divergence tendencies and the overall aerodynamic performance of the wings and canards. Researchers would also investigate the aircraft's control system and handling qualities, as well as maneuvering characteristics applicable to military use. (NASA Release 87113)
NASA announced plans for three balloon flights to study ray radiation produced by Supernova 1987a. The Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility at Wallops Island, Virginia, which manages NASA's balloon program, would provide launch services and helium. The first launch, from Alice Springs, Australia, was to take place no earlier than May 7, 1987, and the third balloon was to be launched within a month's time. (NASA Release 8760)
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
Five aerospace firms were awarded contracts by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, to develop preliminary advanced solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the awards were Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, Sacramento, California; Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., Brigham City, Utah; and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San Jose, California. The results of the preliminary studies would determine whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of an advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASA Release 87120)
The 10ton Soviet satellite Cosmos1871 plunged harmlessly into the Pacific Ocean west of Hawaii. Soviet news agency Tass reported that the satellite, launched into a polar orbit on August 1, 1987, carried scientific equipment for space exploration. (B H&Sun, Aug 11/87; W Post, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 10/87)
Dr. Lew Allen, Director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), announced that construction of JPL's new Microdevices Laboratory would start January 21, 1987. On the same day, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Dr. Marvin Goldberger, President of the California Institute of Technology, signed a memorandum of understanding for a Center for Space Microelectronics Technology to be established at JPL. The Center would be the successor to the Advanced Microelectronics Program established at JPL in 1983 and headed by Dr. Carl Kukkonen. The Center for Space Microelectronics Technology will be governed by a Board of Governors chaired by Dr. Lew Allen. Dr. Carl Kukkonen was named Center Director. (NASA Release 873; StarNews, Jan 20/87; The Foothill Leader, Jan 21/87)
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had invited industry to develop advanced solid rocket motor designs. The preliminary designs called for both a segmented motor design and a monolithic motor design. Requests for these designs, called Phase B studies, followed completion of "Phase A" conceptual studies of alternative solid rocket motor designs. Those designs were done by five aerospace firms. (NASA Release 8790)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that its Denverbased Space Systems group was one of the companies awardedh) 0*0*0*two NASA contracts to study and design spacecraft for a mission to Mars. A contract to study the techniques of robotic rover to traverse Martian surface was awarded by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA awarded a similar contract to the FMC Corporation of Santa Clara, California. The second contract was awarded by NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. It called on Martin Marietta to study braking methods that would allow a spacecraft to orbit Mars, enter its atmosphere, and descend to the surface of the planet. The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of Sunnyvale, California, was the other company awarded this study contract by the JSC. Martin Marietta was the company that designed, built, and tested the twin Viking spacecraft that landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 and 1977. (AVWK, Oct 26/87; B Sun, Oct 1/87, Rocky Mountain News, Oct 1/87)
NASA released a report, requested by the U.S. Congress, on the extendedduration Space Shuttle orbiter. The report examined key aspects of a program that would allow the Space Shuttle to perform Earthorbital missions for as long as 16 days. An extendedduration orbiter, according to the report, would be of great benefit for space science and technology. It also could prove useful in developing experiments and crew procedures in preparation for the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87174)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Lew Allen announced that Richard P. Laeser had been appointed to manage JPL's new support office in Washington, D.C., for NASA's Space Station Program. Laesar, who until his new appointment had been the manager of the Voyager mission to outer planets, would also serve as Director of the Office of Requisitions and Assessments for the Space Station. Norman R. Haynes was appointed the new manager of the Voyager mission. He formerly was manager of JPL's Systems Division. StarNews, Jan 5/87)
An international panel of scientists selected three experiments submitted by NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission to be launched in early 1990's. The cometary ice and dust experiment (CIDEX) was designed to capture and analyze dust, ices, and gasses evolved from the comet as the coma and tail develop during its pass around the sun. The thermal infrared radiometer experiment (TIREX) would measure the thermal emission and the scattering of solar radiation from the comet. The third experiment would consist of an interdisciplinary scientist for exobiology, the study of chemical processes and physical events leading to emergence of life in the universe. The CIDEX mission was managed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. (NASA Release 8763)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Dr. Lew Allen selected a Virginia site for a Space Station Program office. The 110,000 square feet of leased space in Reston, Virginia, would house NASA's Space Station Program director and some 400 JPL and NASA personnel. Initial occupancy was planned for summer 1987. (NASA Release 8749)
NASA announced that it had established a team to review launch decision processes used for NASA expendable launch vehicles and the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the review, which was to be completed by July 3, 1987, was to ensure consistent approaches and risk evaluations for all NASA launches. Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, and Robert L. Crippen, Deputy Director of the National Space Transportation System Operations, were selected as cochairmen of the team. (NASA Release
The Soviet Union launched a 20ton, selfcontained astrophysical observatory whose mission was to dock with the orbiting Mir Space Station. Viktor Blagov, the deputy mission director, said that the observatory would "open a new chapter" in human space flight and would become a key building block of a permanently habitable scientific space complex. When docked with the Mir Space Station, the 19footlong observatory, with a 13.6 foot diameter, would double the working space available and would create a sort of a "high rise" structure in space. (P Inq, Apr 1/87; W Times, Apr 1/87) h)0*0*0*During March: India failed to launch an augmented satellite launch vehicle, developed by the Indian Space Research Organization, when the vehicle malfunctioned and fell into the Indian Ocean. The launch from Sriharikota, India, was the first of four such planned launches, and was to have placed a stretched Rohini series scientific satellite into a low Earth orbit. (AvWk, Mar 30/87)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
The world's two largest wind tunnels became fully operational at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The two tunnels, the upgraded 40by80 foot wind tunnel and the new, open circuit, 80by120 foot wind tunnel, are housed in the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex. Both tunnels are used for fullscale and largescale testing of advanced aircraft. They offer new capability for testing of rotorcraft and vertical and shorttakeoff and landing aircraft (V/STOL). (NASA Release 87180; P Inq, Dec 12/87)
Dr. Robert Watson, NASA Chief Scientist for the Airborne Antarctic Ozone project, reported that, midpoint of the project, both aircraft involved were performing very well and that mission scientists were very pleased with the quality of data being returned by the instruments. The Antarctic Ozone Project employed two NASA aircraft, a modified flying laboratory DC8, and an advanced highaltitude ER2. The goal of the project was to study the cause and nature of the ozone layer depletion. (Untitled release from NASA Headquarters, Sept 17, 1987; NY Times, Sept
The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz TM4 from Baikonur Space Center in Soviet Central Asia. The spacecraft, scheduled to dock with the Soviet space station Mir on December 23, 1987, carried three Soviet cosmonauts: mission commander Vladimir Titov, flight engineer Musakhi Manarov, and research scientist Anatoly Levchenko. They were expected to work together with the crew already aboard Mir for about a week, then Levchenko would return to Earth with Yuri Romanenko, who had been in the space station for 322 days. The new crew aboard Mir was expected to remain for a year, breaking Romanenko's record. (B Sun, Dec 22/87 & Dec 29/87; CSM, Dec 30/87; LA Times, Dec 26/87; NY Times, Dec 22/87, Dec 27/87, Dec 29/87; P Inq, Dec 22/87, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87)
Despite the efforts of Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin, who had tended the space station since February 7, 1987, the first attempts to dock the Soviet Union's Kvant space module with the space station Mir failed. The Kvant, a selfcontained astronomical observatory, was to be the first experimental module to link with Mir. (NY Times, Apr 10/87; W Times, Apr 9/87)
Pioneer 12, which had been orbiting the planet Venus, was directed, by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to begin tracking the newly discovered Comet Wilson. This would be the fourth time that Pioneer 2, orbiting Venus since 1986, interrupted observations of the planet H&to study a comet passing Venus on its way to the Sun. (LA Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Silver Spring, Maryland, to negotiate a contract for systems, engineering, and support services. The services provided by the contract would be in support of the Mission Operations and Data Systems Directorate, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8739)
NASA announced that beginning March 14, 1987, the Pioneer 12 spacecraft, orbiting Planet Venus, would study the newly discovered Comet Wilson. The Comet was to be tracked by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, from March 1421,h)0*0*0*and again from March 31 to April 30. (NASA Release 8725)
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
NASA announced that the allowable endofmission landing weight for Space Shuttle orbiters would be increased from 211,000 to 230,000 pounds. The increase means that roughly 19,000 pounds more payload can be carried aloft. The new capability was made possible by structural analysis and additional review of forces encountered by the orbiter during maneuvers shortly before landing. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly said that this new capability would add considerable flexibility and efficiency to NASA's Space Transportation System. (NASA Release 87168; AvWk, Nov 9/87; W Post, Nov 10/87)
NASA reported that an 18inch telescope, aboard a nineyearold orbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite, was monitoring the intense emissions of ultraviolet radiation from recently discovered supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a neighbor galaxy of our own Milky Way. (NASA Release 8720) During February: NASA's latest space technology led to new discoveries about ancient civilizations. Using Earth Observation Satellite and Earth Resources Observation Systems imagery and the Landsat 5 satellite, which has an advanced multispectral sensor Thematic Mapper, NASA's Ames Research Center scientists made first attempts to study Maya civilization settlement patterns, environmental settings, and natural resource use. (NASA Release 8715)
NASA awarded a contract to the Computer Sciences Corporation, El Segundo, California, for operations support to the Mission Support Directorate of Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. Under the contract, Computer Sciences Corporation would provide maintenance, operations, and sustaining engineering of institutional ADP facilities, networks and work stations, and user support. About 30 percent of the work would be performed by two Computer Sciences Corporation subcontractors, International Business Machines Corporation and Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation, a unit of Ford Motor Company. (NASA Release 87148; WSJ, Oct 7/87)
NASA announced reopening, after major modifications, the wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Constructed in 1944, the 40by80foot wind tunnel was used for fullscale testing of civilian and military aircraft. Modifications to the tunnel included increasing power from six 6,000horsepower electric motors generating airspeeds of up to 230 mph to six 22,500horsepower motors generating top airspeeds of 345 The modified 40by80foot wind tunnel represented the first phase of the creation of the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex, which included the Outdoor Aerodynamics Research Facility, at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The second phase, including the new "straight through" leg with its 80by120foot test section, was expected to be completed in late 1987. (NASA Release 8798)
NASA officials declared that Space Station deployment, scheduled for 1994, could be delayed up to two years or the Station could be scaled down. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher said that the cost of the Space Station, once estimated at $8 billion, was now estimated at between $13 and $14.5 billion. Fletcher, who said that the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union in human space flight, predicted that a U.S. crewtended Space Station would help the country catch up to the Soviets. Testifying before the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Dr. Fletcher stressed that the Space Station program retained high priority with the Reagan administration. (LA Times, Feb 4/87; USA `"Today, Feb 4/87; NY Times, Feb 5/8)
NASA reported that two techniques were being used to monitor the Supernova SN 1987a. In the first case, the Supernova was observed by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN) located at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and connected by microwave with Australia's CSIRO Parkes Radio Telescope 200 miles away. Dr. Robert Preston of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which operates the DSN for NASA, said that the second technique, called Very Long Baseline Interferometry, consisted of an even wider network of four antennas: Tidbinbilla, Parkes, a Landsat ground station in central Australia; and a 26meter dish at Hobart on Tasmania, an island southeast of Australia. The supernova, an exploding star whose emissions were just arriving on Earth at the time of this report, was detected in the neighboring Large Magellanic Cloud galaxy. It was about 163,000 light years from the Earth. Supernova 1987a was the first such detectable star explosion close to our own galaxy since 1604. (NASA Release 8764)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Chairman ofh)0*0*0*France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales JacquesLouis Lions signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint satellite oceanographic mission. The mission, called TOPEX/POSEIDON, which would chart ocean topography and observe ocean circulation on a global scale, was scheduled for a late 1991 launch. The TOPEX/POSEIDON mission would be part of the international World Climate Research Program. (NASA Release 8741)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Canadian Science Minister Frank Oberle approved the agreement on Canadian participation in the U.S. Space Station program. The terms of the preliminary agreement were spelled out in a memorandum of understanding worked out by negotiators from NASA and the Canadian Ministry of State for Science and Technology. The agreement called for cooperation between the two nations in the detailed design, development, operation, and use of the Space Station. The agreement would then be submitted for approval to the governments of the two countries. (NASA Release 87182; NY Times, Dec 12/87)
NASA announced that it would begin, in late March, a new aircraft flight research program at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility, in Edwards, California. The aim of the program was the study of super maneuverability and prevention of dangerous spins and related crashes. (NASA Release 8737)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
NASA selected Lockheed Engineering and Management Services Company to negotiate an engineering support contract for Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The contract would consolidate work currently performed by Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and Northrop Services, Inc. (NASA Release 8742; WSJ, Mar 27/87; H Chron, Mar 27/87)
NASA and the ESA announced solicitation of scientific investigation from the United States, European Space Agency member states, and Canada, for two missions. The four spacecraft CLUSTER mission would study basic plasma processes in the Earth's magnetosphere. The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission consisted of a spacecraft studying solar processes and solarterrestrial relationships. (NASA Release 8722)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
A spokesman at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that NASA's Deep Space Network station near Canberra, Australia, configured with Australia's Parkes Radio Observatory, was observing radio wave emissions from Supernova 1987a, first detected by astronomers in the large Magellanic cloud on February 24, 1987. (NASA Release 8731)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the promotion of Dr. John M. Klineberg, Deputy Director of Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, since July 1979, to Director of the Center, effective immediately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis from NASA Headquarters, where he had served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. An internationally recognized expert in the field of transonic flow, he first joined NASA in 1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 8786)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced thath)0*0*0*Isaac T. Gillam, NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, would retire effective September 1, 1987, and that Lawrence Herbolsheimer, Deputy Assistant Administrator in the Office of Commercial Programs, would serve as the Acting Assistant Gillam had served in a number of positions at NASA. In June 1978 he was appointed director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center in Edwards, California. Prior to that appointment, he was Dryden's Deputy Director and Director of Shuttle Operations. He subsequently served at NASA Headquarters as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and then moved on to head the Office of Commercial Programs. (NASA Release 87126)
NASA announced that its Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) supercomputer system, the world's most advanced, had become fully operational. The NAS system will make possible a wide range of aerospace vehicle technologies and capabilities and will ensure the Nation's preeminence in aeronautical research. By the end of 1987, the operational system was expected to be capable of a billion calculations per second, and within a decade its capability should reach 10 billion calculations per second. The 90,000squarefoot NAS building, located at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and containing a 15,000squarefoot central computer room was equipped with an array of systems for the optimal functioning of the computers. (NASA Release 8721; NY Times, Mar 10/87; CSM, Mar 10/87; SF Chron, Mar 10/87)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a contract for continuation of maintenance and operations of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN). The DSN provides tracking and data acquisition for planetary spaceflight missions and for NASA's crewtended and untended space programs. The fiveyear contract, with an option for an additional five years, was expected to begin April 2, 1987. (NASA Release 879)h)0*0*0*February 5: Jesse W. Moore resigned from NASA, effective February 8, 1987. Moore joined NASA in 1966. Among the varied positions he held included Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science (19781979); Director of Space Flight Division (19791981); Director of the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (19811983); Acting Associate Administrator of Space Flight (April 1984August 1984); and Associate Administrator of Space Flight (August 1984January 1986). He was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in January 1986, and in October 1986 he moved to Headquarters as a Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Policy and Planning. (NASA Release 8710; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87)
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
The Soviet newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya reported that two Soviet cosmonauts grew taller while in space. According to the paper, cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko grew fourtenths of an inch taller during his record ten and a half months in space, and his crewmate Alexander Alexandrov grew sixtenths of an inch. The gain in height was because of lack of gravity in space. (NY Times, Dec During December: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher reviewed Agency activities during 1987 and declared that "NASA is on the road to recovery." He believed, "the United States can maintain a leadership role in space,...but only if the Nation stays truly committed to the space program." (NASA Release 87184) Industry officials said that the U.S. aerospace industry recorded the most profitable year in its history in 1987. (P Inq, Dec 17/87)
Officials at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, reported that NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory would leave on October 31, 1987, for New Zealand on a monthlong mission to study the supernova SN1987a. Scientists aboard the Kuiper would make eight research flights to study the supernova, located 170,000 light years away. Supernova SN1987a is the closest supernova to Earth since the invention of a telescope some 400 years ago. (NASA Release 87162; AvWk, Nov. 9/87)h)#0*0*0*November 3: NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs James T. Rose announced new program initiatives to encourage and expand commercial space activity. Rose told some 270 executives from across the country, meeting for a threeday workshop in Nashville, Tennessee, that the new programs will build on earlier NASA commercial development policies. According to Rose, the agency already had awarded $50,000 grants to 206 small businesses for feasibility studies in this area. One of the program initiatives announced by Rose called for 28 percent space allocation for commercial secondary payloads aboard the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 87/165; NY Times, Nov 5/87; Tennessean, Nov 4/87; W Times, Nov 5/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an accord on cooperation in space exploration. The accord culminated a three day visit to Moscow by Secretary of State George P. Shultz. The accord formalized the ongoing exchange of information between NASAh)0*0*0*and the Soviet Academy of Sciences. It provided for no dramatic joint venture in space. Rather it called for coordination of projects in solarsystem exploration, space astronomy and astrophysics, earth sciences, solarterrestrial physics and space biology, and medicine. (NY Times, Apr 16/87; P Inq, Apr 16/87)
According to a news release from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, NASA would manage a major international experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, part of the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, would employ over 100 scientists from more than 25 institutions to study the interaction between the land system and climate system. Over 25 ground measurement stations would be set up on the Konza Prairie in Kansas for the experiment. Six research planes and five Earthorbiting satellites would also be used. (NASA Release 8795)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel Hinners would replace Dr. Frank McDonald as Chief Scientist, effective August 24, 1987. At the same time, Dr. Hinners would retain his position as NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator(Institutions). NASA also announced Dr. Frank McDonald would return to the Goddard Space Flight Center as Associate Director/Chief Scientist. (NASA Release 87121)
Flight controllers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, reported that the untended spacecraft Voyager 2 was on course for a rendezvous in two years with the planet Neptune. Launched on August 20, 1977, Voyager 2, travelling at a speed of 41,600 miles an hour, was 642 million miles away from its target. It was expected to come within 3,000 miles of Neptune on August 24, 1989. (NY Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA's Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology selected five proposals for the development of space flight technology experiments as part of its Industry/University InSpace Technology program. (NASA Release 87164)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
NASA announced that within hours of its discovery on February 24, 1987, NASA scientists were monitoring the Supernova 1987a with the Earthorbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and the Solar Max Mission (SMM) spacecraft. Subsequently, as previously announced, NASA began monitoring the supernova with a network of ground antennas. The major supernova science program mounted by NASA and the intense, worldwide scientific interest in the supernova resulted from the fact that the discovery of Supernova 1987a provided scientists the opportunity to study not only the death of the star, but also the resultant rebirth of matter. The explosion, shock waves, and tremendous energies of Supernova 1987a were expected to provide direct evidence of the creation of heavy elements such as silicon and nickel. This marks the first time a supernova has been so close to the Earth and so bright since the 1604 supernova, when the telescope had not yet been discovered. The advantageous circumstances allowed scientists to study the supernova in all radiation wavelengths from nearly the moment of its explosion. Scientists expected that the array of instruments and the variety of NASA'sh)0*0*0*methods of monitoring the supernova would not only yield a new understanding of the chemistry and physics of the comet, but also potentially would provide a better understanding of the creation of The supernova program was expected to extend at least over the next 21/2 years. It would consist of multiple, continuous satellite observations, balloon and sounding rocket missions, aircraft flights, and radio observations. A special computer communications network would allow scientists from NASA, American and foreign universities, and other international scientific organizations to analyze the great amount of data generated by the In addition to the IUE and SMM spacecraft, managed and operated by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, a Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the Supernova 1987a. The IUE satellite provided data from ultraviolet observations and monitored the overall brightness of the supernova. It also was expected to help define exactly which star in the Large Magellanic Cloud exploded creating the supernova. The SMM satellite, a sunobserving instrument, was used to monitor the expected gamma ray emissions from the supernova. The Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the supernova for Xray emissions. NASA's Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a C141 jet transport stationed in New Zealand, was also used in supernova observations to measure infrared energy. It was expected to be involved in a number of flights through the spring of 1989, using new and increasingly more sophisticated instruments. (NASA Release
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced the composition of the Atlas Centaur 67 Investigation Board. The Board, chaired by Jon R. Busse, Director, Office of Flight Assurance, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would investigate the loss of the Atlas Centaur 67 mission on March 26, 1987 and recommend corrective action. The mission vehicle was destroyed 51 seconds after an apparently normal liftoff. (NASA Release 8745)
NASA announced that it had chosen the final design for the Space Shuttle's new rockets. Also, the Agency declared it had resolved the problem of Challenger's leaking seals. Hot gasses escaped during launch and the seals failed to close properly because of cold weather. John Thomas, Manager of the rockets design team at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, stated that henceforth the oring seals would be heated in cold weather rather than constructed of new materials. He also said that the new design would contain three oring seals instead of two. Thomas emphasized that up to eight more test firings of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motor were planned before flights resume. (NY Times, July 17/87; W Post, July 17/87; W Times, July
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced that the next Space Shuttle orbiter would be assembled in Palmdale, California. He gave costs and schedule factors as the reasons why this site was chosen over Califonia's Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 87100; H Chron, June 18/87)
NASA scientists successfully ordered the Voyager 2 space probe, which was some 2 billion miles away from earth, to fire its thrusters changing the spacecraft's course for its 1989 encounter with the planet Neptune. The course was altered so that Voyager 2, launched on August 20, 1977, would avoid the debris that might be orbiting the planet. The spacecraft was expected to arrive on August 24, 1989, within 3,100 miles of cloud tops above Neptune's north pole and was expected to pass within 25,000 miles of Neptune's moon Triton. (B Sun, Mar 14/87; P Inq, Mar 15/87)
Astronaut John A. McBride was named acting Assistant Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He would replace John F. Murphy, who was appointed Chief of the Office of External Affairs at NASA's Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 87116)
NASA announced that in the next three years it would reduce Shuttle use by launching only 19 space flights. During the same time, it would launch 49 satellites on untended rockets. About 30 nonmilitary payloads originally planned to be carried into orbit by the Shuttle through 1995, will now be carried on untended rockets. NASA said that it would launch five science missions in 1989, some with international cooperation. Four of these missionsthe Magellan, to map Venus; the Hubble Space Telescope, in cooperation with the European Space Agency; and the ASTRO1 ultraviolet observatory and Galileo, in cooperation with Germany to make a comprehensive survey of Jupiter and its moonswould fly on the Shuttle. A fifth mission, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) toh)"0*0*0*investigate cosmic background noise, was to launch on a Delta. Another scheduled Shuttle launch was the cooperative ESA/NASA Ulysses mission to observe the polar region of the Sun. From 1990 through 1995, NASA expected to accelerate deployment of other space science missions by fully utilizing expendable launch vehicles. For example, NASA anticipated Delta launches of a Roentgen Satellite in February 1990 and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer in August 1991. (NASA Release 87158; LA Times, Oct 23/87; NY Times, Oct 23/87; W Times, Oct 23/87)
In a major organizational shift, NASA announced the adoption of new postChallenger era commercial activity policies. The released decision memoranda, covering the new policies, were signed by Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers. The new policies resulted from the report of the Commercialization of Space Reviewh)0*0*0*Task Force and covered such general activities as joint endeavor agreements, microgravity research, secondary payloads on the Space Shuttle, expendable launch vehicles, and commercial activities. According to the new policies, the Office of Commercial Programs would henceforth determine, in coordination with concerned Headquarters offices, whether NASA should participate in any proposed joint program. Responsibility for programs utilizing the microgravity environment was transferred from the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology to the Office of Space Science and Applications. Secondary payload space would be carefully allocated by the Deputy Administrator and implemented by the Office of Space Flight to accomplish specific NASA objectives. To encourage and facilitate as much as possible the private domestic access to space, NASA's Office of Space Flight would contract private industry for launch of Expendable Launch Vehicles. Finally, the Office of Commercial Programs would, to the fullest extent possible, facilitate the utilization of space for commercial purposes. (NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Responsibility for Programs Utilizing the Microgravity Environment, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Secondary STS Payloads, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV's) Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; LA Times, June 13/87)
