NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
The first direct observation of an atmosphere on Pluto was made by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) astronomers flying aboard NASA ARC's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO). A team of astronomers from MIT, including Edward Dunham, James Elliot, Amanda Bosh, Steve Slivan, and Leslie Young, made the observation during a temporary occultation of a star behind Pluto. The observations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 meters) altitude, approximately 500 miles south of Pago Pago, American Samoa, over the Southern Pacific Ocean. Information about the temperature, pressure, and extent of the atmosphere would be derived from the occultation data, obtained using a solid state video camera attached to KAO's 36 inch (92 cm) telescope. The airborne observations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring shortly after midnight. (ARC Release 8840)
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) departed NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for Guam to study the Sun's atmosphere during the total solar eclipse of March 1718. A team of seven scientists aboard KAO was to make a flight through the shadow of the Moon as it moves across the Pacific Ocean. The scientists were interested in the few seconds at the beginning and end of the solar eclipse when the Sun would be almost completely covered by the Moon and when the edge of' 0*the solar disk would begin to reappear from behind the Moon. The Kuiper would intercept the path of the eclipse about 600 miles northwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C141 jet transport aircraft, is fitted with a 36inch diameter telescope and flies at 41,000 to 45,000 feet. Measurements of the solar atmosphere would be made at the farinfrared wavelengths of 30, 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 micrometers, representing the first attempt to record simultaneously these wavelengths from the Sun on such a narrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 8837; ARC Release
The NASA Administrator appointed Ivan Bekey to be Special Assistant for System Engineering and Planning Integration, Office of Exploration. Bekey would be responsible for overall systems engineering for Office of Exploration studies and formulation of top level architecture. In the previous year, he served as Director of Program Planning for the Office of Policy and Planning. For the preceding six years, he was the Director of Advanced Programs, Office of Space Flight. He was also NASA coordinator for the National Commission on Space. Bekey joined NASA in 1978. (NASA Special Announcement on 066088)
NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project with Germany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescope also maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro1, a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the study of Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS35 in November 1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights for September 1990a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and the first Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS1)0*mission. The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the projected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to study the Sun and its environment remained at the projected
NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
A report released by an international panel of over 100 scientists assembled by NASA showed that the depletion of the Earth's ozone layer over the Northern Hemisphere had increased at a much faster rate than previously believed. The report, prepared over 17 months, provided definitive evidence showing that the ozone layer, which shields life on Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation, had been depleted by an average of about 2.3 percent, since 1969 over most of the United States, and by as much as 5 percent over the South Pole. The observed ozone loss was at least twice as large as scientists had predicted and was attributed primarily to the continued release of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). The NASA study group reexamined years of groundbased and satellite observations of the atmosphere in order to remove the normal biennial fluctuations of many atmospheric characteristics and the effects of the 11year solar cycle. The groundbased observations were limited to midlatitudes in the Northern Hemisphere because there were few stations elsewhere in the world. This was the first effort by scientists to separate the effects of solar and biennial fluctuations from the monthly data at different latitudes. The release of the study results followed ratification by the U.S. Congress of the Montreal Protocol, an agreement endorsed by 46 countries, which calls for a 50 percent reduction in emissions of CFCs by the end of the century. (UPI, Mar 15/88; NY Times, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 16/88; W Times, Mar 16/88; USA Today, Mar 16/88; WSJ, Mar 16/88;CSM, Mar 16/88;B Sun, Mar 16/88; P Inq, Mar 16/88; C Trib, Mar 16/88; LA Times, Mar 21/88)
NASA and the ESA announced the selection of scientific investigations to be conducted on two spacecraft as part of a joint NASAESA solar terrestrial research program. More than 130 U.S. scientists were scheduled to participate in the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster missions. Two spacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instruments supplied by both ESA and NASA. The Cluster mission, involving a set of four satellites, was planned for launch on an ESA Ariane launch vehicle in December 1995. The Cluster would investigate the space plasma threedimensional microphysics phenomena in Earth's0*magnetic field environment, using four identical spacecraft in polar orbits. SOHO, planned for launch by NASA on the Shuttle or on an expendable launch vehicle in March 1995, would be placed at the EarthSun La Grangian point and investigate the physical processes that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to the solar wind. The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of the International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a major international program in solar and space physics organized in 1985 by NASA, the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 8848)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
Using NASA's new supercomputer at the Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility, Dr. Kozo Fujii, a research fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, developed a computer model that simulates the airflow field physics associated with vortex breakdown and provides new insights into its causes. Vortex breakdown is a complex phenomenon that can cause loss of lift and control for highperformance aircraft. Understanding and' 0*eventually controlling vortex breakdown would improve maneuverability and safety for highperformance aircraft. (NASA Release 8813)
NASA announced that an international team of researchers, coordinated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, was using satellites to study how the Earth's tectonic plates move in the Caribbean Sea and Central and South America. The experiment, spanning several years, would allow researchers to chart the motions of dozens of land sites in 16 countries using signals from orbiting navigation satellites. Research teams carreied electronic receivers designed to pick up signals from seven NAVSTAR satellites operated by the U.S. Department of Defense, as part of the Global Positioning System (GPS) program. By locating receiver equipment at established survey markers in South America and the Caribbean, and collecting GPS data from up to four GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers calculated the location of receiving sites on the ground and are planned to compare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portions of the southern Caribbean Sea; the Cocos plate, in the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Central America; the Nazca plate, off the west coast of South America; and the South American plate, upon which lies most of the South American continent. The research was funded by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Earth Science and Applications Division. (NASA Release 8830)
NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract with Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey, California, would be transferred to existing Launch Support Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell's component overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. The move would complete a consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88156)
Thomas L. Moser was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Station by the head of the Space Station Office, James B. Odom. Moser had been serving as Director of the Space Station Freedom program in Reston, Virginia, since October 1986. (NASA Release 88163) During November: NASA continued its multifaceted program of observation of Supernova 1987a, using untended scientific balloons and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO): NASA launched two heavylift balloons from Australia in November to continue scientific studies of Supernova 1987a. A 28.4 million cubic foot balloon was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 1100 pounds, to measure gammaray and hard xray emissions. A second, 29.47 million cubic foot balloon also was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 3700 pounds, that would measure gammaray emissions, but over a different energy band. These scientific missions were part of the overall NASA Balloon Program managed by the Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 88154; MSFC Release 88160) ')0*NASA deployed the C141 Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), to observe Supernova 1987a. KAO completed a fiveweek deployment to New Zealand to conduct high altitude observations of charged particle and heavy metals emissions produced in the explosion of the giant blue star, first detected in February 1987. The
The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was rolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) to Launch Pad 39B in preparation for mission STS26, scheduled for late September. (UPI, Jul 4/88; NY Times, Jul 5/88; W Post, Jul 5/88; WSJ, Jul 5/88; W Times, Jul 5/88; P Inq, Jul
NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747100 jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) for the space transportation system. A letter contract was signed with Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and eliminate a potential singlepoint failure in the space transportation system. The 231foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747100, which is nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release 8828; JSC Release 88005) During February:
The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA general counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27, 1985. He began his career at NASA in September 1982, as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8898)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, inaugurated its Mark III Hypercube parallel supercomputer, the result of a 5year research and development effort at the JPL Center for Space Microelectronics Technology and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). The Mark III spearheaded the arrival of massively parallel supercomputing. Its first module, placed online at the Caltech computer network, contained 32 nodes, or processing units, which together had a peak speed of about 512 million floating point operations per second. Three more 32node modules would be added during the next nine months to form a 128node hypercube with a peak speed of 2 billion floating point operations per second. The Mark II Hypercube was being used for scientific, engineering, and defense research applications, including analysis of NASA multispectral space imaging data; analysis of NASA synthetic aperture radar images taken from the Space Shuttle; and simulation of the Strategic Defense System. (NASA Release 8888)
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
Astronomers at NASA's Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of California at Berkeley uncovered the most distant galaxy yet seen. Called 4C41.17, the newly discovered galaxy is located at an estimated distance of 15 billion light yearsmore than 90 percent of the distance to the visible limits of the universe. The discovery was made by a team of American and European astronomers, using the Very Large Array (VLA) Radio Telescope Facility near Socorro, New Mexico, and was confirmed a galaxy using the 2.1 meter optical telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory. Studying remote galaxies like 4C41.17 was expected to help forge a better understanding of how galaxies have evolved since the time of the Big Bang. This research was supported by NASA, the European Space Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope project, and the Space Telescope Science Institute. (NASA Release 88111; P Inq, Aug 9/88; B Sun, Aug 9/88; )
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
NASA issued the newest update of its mixedfleet manifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launch vehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changes made to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launch windows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from
E. Ray Tanner was appointed Director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tanner had been serving as Manager of the Space Station Projects Office, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August 1988. Prior to that he was Deputy Director for Space Systems in the Science and Engineering Directorate. (NASA Release 88175; MSFC Release 88178)
The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on
NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to pay silent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at 11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39B on January 28, 1986. Flags around KSC and at NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half staff while workers stood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challenger flight. Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S. McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit and loudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men and women of the Challenger crew." (UPI, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88;
A series of powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people. The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizer used aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and other military and civilian boosters. The explosions produced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 footwide crater at the facility site. Seismographs at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of the explosions was investigated. 0*The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solid fuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. A prolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's production activities would also threaten the military's missile production schedule. (UPI, May 5/88; AP, May 5/88; NY Times, May 5/88; W Post, May 5/88; WSJ, May 5/88; USA Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B Sun, May 5/88;
NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)
NASA announced that a scientist at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a new, ground breaking computational model that could accurately simulate the complex, fluctuating air flow within aircraft engine turbines and compressors. The new computational model, developed by NASA scientist, Man Rohan Rai, was expected to generate significant savings for the aircraft engine industry once it became ready for commercial applications. The model performed one of the most complex computer simulations ever undertaken and provided the most accurate calculation to date of air flow within turbines. Engine concepts and designs had been tested primarily by experimental methods, most often by building prototype engines and subjecting them to a battery of tests. Advanced computer techniques were far less expensive and much faster. Current computational work was performed on a Cray2 supercomputer at the new Ames Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility. (NASA Release 8894; ARC Release 8850; SF Chron, Jul 13/88; Bus Week, Jul 25/88)
Science magazine published findings from a recent Earthbased radar mapping of the planet Venus, conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) scientists. Newly processed radar pictures of the surface of Venus showed what may be geologically recent volcanic activity and impact cratering, including possible volcanic mountains and broad lava flows and fields like those which make up the Hawaiian Islands. The JPL radar images, with a resolution of less than a mile, were the latest in a series of Earthbased radar scans of Venus conducted at the Goldstone, California, complex of NASA's Deep Space Network. The Magellan spacecraft was expected to make more detailed radar observations of Venus in 1990. (NASA Release 8865; C Trib, May 21/88; )
NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of the launch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impact of Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set this launch date is based on over two years of persistence and dedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in the STS26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center on
The Pioneer Venus orbiter spacecraft marked 10 years of orbital observations of the clouddraped planet. Ceremonies were held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to celebrate Pioneer's accomplishments. December 9 would also mark 10 years since a companion spacecraft, Pioneer Venus 2, had entered the atmosphere of Venus along with 4 hardimpact probes it had released. Observations by Pioneer revealed a great deal about the atmospheric content of Venus, plate tectonics, volcanic activity, and the magnetic field. Pioneer had also observed five comets, including Halley. Pioneer, whose orbit was deteriorating, was scheduled to cease operating in August 1992 and be destroyed upon entering the lower atmosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 88165)
Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88120) During August: A Cray YMP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) Facility. The NAS was established as a national facility available to leading U.S. research institutions through a national network. It had longterm support from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and chemistry. Supercomputer systems were complementing and extending aerospace research being done in wind tunnels and highvelocity (4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new YMP central processor would not only solve old problems four times as fast as existing systems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena that could not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers. Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system would be the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as the National AeroSpace Plane and the Space Shuttle. '!0*Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this new supercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989. (ARC Release 8880)
NASA's Lewis Research Center and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were awarded the prestigious Collier Trophy at the annual Robert J. Collier Trophy Dinner hosted by the National Aviation Club. Lewis and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were honored for developing technology and testing advanced turboprop propulsion systems that offered dramatic reductions in fuel usage and operating costs for subsonic transport aircraft. (NASA Release 8859)
Controllers at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, directed the Voyager 2 spacecraft to fire its hydrazine thrusters for 3 minutes and 29 seconds in order to steer the craft toward a flyby of Neptune on August 28, 1989. The Voyager 2 trajectory would bring it to within 3,000 miles of Neptune's cloudtops. (Voyager 2 Neptune Encounter Press Kit; LA Times, Nov 14/88)
outward at 868 miles per second. Previous Kuiper observations of the expanding ejected cloud had greatly contributed to understanding how the explosion proceeds. KAO Supernova 1987a research was being conducted by the Astrophysics Branch, Space Science Division, Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 88168; ARC Release 8889)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, and the Department of Energy's Argon National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, signed an agreement to begin joint research in the development of hightemperature superconductivity (HTS) materials and technology. The objective of this major research effort would be to exploit recent rapid advances in HTS technology for significant space and aeronautical applications. Research and technology development would be undertaken in those areas where HTS could be an enabling technology or substantially improve existing Initially, research would concentrate on advanced studies and critical exploratory experiments to identify the most promising applications for further development. Among the first candidate applications would be superconducting magnetic energy storage, space electromagnetic propulsion, microwave power transmission, aeropropulsion, and electromagnetic launch systems. (NASA Release
After 23 years in solar orbit, Pioneer 6, the oldest operating spacecraft, returned to the vicinity of its launch. The craft passed within 1.16 million miles of the Earth, roughly five times the distance between the Earth and its Moon. This distance was the closest Pioneer 6 had ever approached Earth since launch from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida in 1965. With only five lunar distances separating them, Earth's gravitational pull was strong enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, thereby increasing time in orbit for Pioneer 6 by six days (from 311 to 317 days) and 6 million miles. The spacecraft was designed to study the Sun's atmosphere, the heliosphere. After 23 years, two of Pioneer 6's original instruments were still transmitting information on the turbulence of the solar wind to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Three sister probes followed Pioneer 6 into solar orbit. During the period from 1966 to 1970, Pioneers 7, 8, and 9 were launched into coordinated orbits. With Pioneer 6, this spacecraft team formed a network of solar weather stations monitoring the heliosphere, triangulating information back to Earth from the far side of the Sun, and increasing understanding of solar effects on Earth's magnetic field. (SSR 1965 105A; ARC Release 8881)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date of December 1989. The earlier date was made possible following reassessment of a variety of factors, including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the period. (NASA Release 88143)
NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reached agreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the permanently crew tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency would serve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU. Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)a permanently attached, pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The pressurized portion of the JEM would provide a shirtsleeve environment for the Space Station crew to perform research activities. The JEM's exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth observation, communications, advanced technology development and other activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experiment logistics module, which would provide transportation and storage of logistics items, would be transported to the Station by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8870)
NASA announced that it would lease to the U.S. Government unassigned space aboard a commercially developed space facility. The leasing agreement would apply for five years beginning at the end of fiscal year 1993. At least 30 percent of the facility would be available for commercial use. The facility would be deployed, checked out, and serviced periodically on orbit by Space Shuttle crews. It would provide a crewtended, shirtsleeve workspace and would also be able to operate in an untended, freeflying mode, providing a microgravity environment for periods of four to six months. NASA would initiate an open competition to be managed by the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 8825)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
