The first scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view of the heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of a supernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in a distant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole. Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been offandon. The navigation problem had been0*narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus would be delayed two or three weeks. (NY Times, Aug 30/90; W Times, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90117; 90118) During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing and directing untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, and spacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire from the Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and be involved with daytoday processing of Space Shuttle vehicles. (NASA Release 90116; 90119)
Charles Pellerin, director of astrophysics for NASA, announced that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope mirrors could easily be fixed in a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for mid1993. The mission would require replacing the telescope's widefield planetary camera with one designed to correct the flawed mirrors. (P Inq, Aug 17/90; W Times, Aug 17/90)
Victor L. Peterson was named Deputy Director of the Ames Research Center in California. Since joining NASA in 1956, Petersen held several positions at the center. (NASA Release 9036)
Liftoff of the Space Shuttle Columbia was scrubbed for the third time, after a fuel leak was discovered. It was reportedly not in the same area as the leak that halted the mission last May. The second delay for liftoff occurred during the last week of August because of communication problems with the Xray telescope in Columbia's cargo bay. NASA engineers believed the problem lay in the fuel pumps feeding the Shuttle's three main engines and began replacing them the next day. Agency officials said that the flight would be delayed at least 11 days.0*W Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; W Post, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; NY Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90)
The Ames Research Center in California awarded a fiveyear, $32.8 million contract to Silicon Graphics for a work station to be used in the Ames Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation Processing System Network. The work station would allow users to analyze and visualize their work in computational fluid dynamics and other largescale scientific simulation and modeling applications.0*(NASA Release C90w)
NASA launched a Delta rocket carrying a West German observatory into a 360milehigh orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The observatory consisted of an Xray telescope and a widefield camera for detecting extreme ultraviolet light; scientists hoped the observatory would yield information about forces associated with the center of our galaxy, intergalactic gasses, quasars, black holes, hot stars, and objects on the edge of the universe. The observatory was dubbed Rosat, after the German Scientist Wilhelm Roentgen who discovered Xrays in 1895, and promised to be 100 times more sensitive than even the Einstein Xray Observatory launched in 1978. It was originally scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in 1987. (LA Times, Jun 2/90; NY Times, Jun 2/90; B Sun, Jun 2/90; P Inq, Jun 2/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
The Galileo spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on October 18, 1989, looped 10,000 miles above the planet Venus in what NASA engineers termed a "gravity assisted maneuver" that increased its speed by almost 5,000 mph for its trek to Jupiter. After taking 16 pictures of Venusian cloud and wind patterns while searching for lightning, the craft was scheduled to take more pictures of the planet during its return journey. The second set of photographs, which were to be coupled with sensors, were to detect dust, infrared and visible light, and electrically charged particles. Scientists determined that the spacecraft would be within range of the Earth and able to send back data, in October, using its small antenna. It was expected to reach Jupiter in December 1995. (P Inq, Feb 12/90; B Sun, Feb 11/90; NY Times, Feb 11/90)
NASA scientists reported that despite its flaws, the Hubble Space Telescope was sending back some clear pictures, better than any a ground telescope could produce. The latest photographs of Jupiter and Pluto were better than any ever taken, but until the telescope's "near sightedness" was corrected images of distant, faint objects would continue to be unclear. (W Post, Oct 5/90; NY Times, Oct 5/90)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
Rockwell Space Operations was selected by NASA for a $814 million, 10year station operation support contract. The contract would provide support for mission, flight crew, and facility operations for the Space Station and other flight programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Mar 7/90)
Officials announced that an advisory committee created by Vice President Dan Quayle and the National Space Council was set up to examine how to manage future efforts in space. The committee, made up of two former congressmen, a former astronaut, and several top industry executives, was to report to the National Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that he had urged the committee's creation because of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, grounding of the Shuttle fleet, and design flaws in the proposed Space Station. (NY Times, Aug 3/90)
Ames Research Center in California awarded a costplusawardfee $210.8 million contract for software support. Under the contract Sterling Federal Systems, Inc. would provide computational support for problem applications and systems programming, systems design and engineering, software management and maintenance, and modification of existing software. (NASA Release C90y)
Scientists and engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, began extensive tests on its recently developed untended planetary rover. An unproven technology was needed for a vehicle on a distant planet controlled by ground crews on Earth inasmuch as roundtrip communication would be anywhere from 8 minutes to 40 minutes. Computer Aided Remote Driving allowed vehicle planning and identification of a 10sofmeterslongobstaclefree path, with a threedimensional display from stereo cameras aboard the vehicle. SemiAutonomous Navigation allowed an operator to determine a nominal extended route tens of kilometers long. (NASA Release 9085)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
Telescopes for NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft were delivered to the Goddard Space Flight Center for integration into a payload module scheduled for launch in August0*1991. The science payload was designed, built, and tested at the University of California, Berkeley, to focus on the study of an unexplored portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called the extreme ultraviolet, between the Xray and ultraviolet wavelengths. (NASA Release 9034)
A NASA official announced that Mark Showalter, at the Ames Research Center in California, had discovered another moon orbiting Jupiter. He found it while doing analysis of images taken in 19801981 by Voyager 2. The smallest of the planet's known satellites was dubbed 1981S13. (B Sun, Jul 25/90; W Post, Jul 25/90; NASA Release 90103)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope for the first time had observed a faint object, a quasar billions of light years from Earth. Officials hoped that study of the image, known to astronomers as UM675, would give clues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe was born. (W Times, Nov 5/90)
NASA announced the selection of 84 proposals for Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Aiming to stimulate technological innovation from small business, the contracts were allowed to reach $500,000 over a twoyear period. (NASA Release 90152) '%0*November 27: The sixmember Hubble Optical Systems Board of Investigation, formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena, California, released its final report, cumulating a 5month study. The report stated that both NASA and the PerkinElmer Corporation, then known as Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirror that prevented the Hubble Space Telescope from distinguishing very faint objects. Lower management at the Corporation discounted any information that conflicted with certified procedures for testing the mirror with newly designed equipment. Upper management at PerkinElmer and at NASA, the report went on, were left unaware of potential problems the mirror might have had in 1981. Dr. Allen and Leonard Fisk, NASA's Chief Scientist, agreed that NASA management operated under different procedures then and would have caught the problem in 1990. (NY Times, Nov 28/90; W Post, Nov 28/90) During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation held their first "Technology 2000" conference in Washington, D.C., to encourage marketing of space technology. Among the innovations showcased were an implant device for releasing insulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument called the "Video Harp"; a system to allow the hearing impaired to locate loud noises such as sirens; a digital audio signal processing system for fuller, more realistic sound called the "Convolvotron"; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System; and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with stepbystep instructions to a student. Hightech gear only a few years away, said USA Today, included a spaceage washer and dryer, refrigerator, and gloves. USA Today, Nov 29/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call for proposals for design of a Satellite Servicer System flight demonstrator to show the ability to maintain satellites in polar and high inclination orbits. The onorbit flight demonstration would exercise rendezvous and docking, as well as orbital replacement unit exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 9012)
A Delta rocket was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully carrying an International Maritime Satellite Organization communications satellite into orbit. The satellite was intended to expand international telephone and facsimile services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. (W Post, Oct 31/90) During October: Photographs sent back from the Magellan spacecraft since September 15 were ten times sharper than any seen before. The images "revealed a whole new planet" and "almost everywhere you look on Venus you see volcanic features," said scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. (CSM, Oct 25/90)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
NASA scientists Michael J. Prather and Robert T. Watson warned that current levels of ozone depletion could cause public health problems and threaten plant life regardless of what steps were taken to reduce it. Their study predicted that the salient depletion over the Arctic could drift southward, similar to the damaged ozone over Antarctica that periodically drifts over New Zealand and Australia. (P Inq, Apr 20/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
NASA's Langley Research Center at Langley Field, Hampton, Virginia, and Honeywell's Space System Group, successfully concluded a joint flight research project that involved study of Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites for improved automated landing in spacecraft and aircraft. Fifteen GPS satellites were in orbit at the time of the test, and the group hoped to add nine more by 1993. Meanwhile, NASA and the Technical and Administrative Services Corporation signed a 2year agreement for the exchange of information associated with closed environment systems related to food production both on Earth and in space. The hydroponic technology sharing involved no exchange of funds. (NASA Release 90155, 90148)
Engineers located two leaks in the Space Shuttle's fuel line that they determined could easily be fixed and stated that flights would resume soon. The problems, said William Lenoir, NASA's flight director, did not appear to be a result of any design flaw; he added that eight of the nine scheduled missions would likely be flown this year. In the meantime, investigators from a sixmember board of investigation created by NASA July 2 were seeking to find what had gone wrong with the Hubble Space Telescope. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who headed the board, promised a congressional committee that they would pinpoint the problem and fix responsibility. The investigation, he said, would be "very embarrassing to someone or some group." (W Post, Jul 14/90; NY Times, Jul 14/90)
NASA's Langley Research Center selected Ball Corporation for a $90 million contract to develop an atmospheric instrument for the proposed Earth Observing System. The instrument, Spectroscopy of the Atmosphere Using Far Infrared Emission, would be designed to study middleatmosphere ozone distribution. (NASA Release, C90i)
The Department of Defense and NASA announced the appointment of contractors to continue research and development on the National AeroSpace Plane. General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, United Technologies (Pratt & Whitney), and Rockwell International planned to jointly pursue hypersonic technologies. (NASA Release 9071)0*May 31: The Apollo 204 Capsule, which caught fire on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida, and claimed the lives of three astronauts on January 27, 1967, remains at Langley Research Center in Virginia, where it has been stored since shortly after the accident. The capsule was slated to be entombed with the illfated Space Shuttle Challenger in an abandoned missile silo at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release 9076)
NASA tested two of its experimental aircraft at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. One of the aircraft, an F16XL, used an experimental wing surface for improving airflow at supersonic speeds. The second aircraft, an X29, demonstrated an increase for highangleofattack, the angle of an aircraft relative to its actual flight path. (NASA Release 9052; 9059)
NASA successfully tested its selfrepairing flight control system on an F15 aircraft at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The system detected damaged flight control components, such as ailerons, rudders, and elevators, and adjusted undamaged flight surfaces to compensate so the pilot could maintain good aircraft response. (NASA Release 9043)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
landing postponed for a day because of fog. The flight set a precedent both because of duration, 11 days, and because the aircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result of the captured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a few minor problems involving a leaky dehumidifier, a smoke detector0*that went off unexplainably, a malfunction in one of the three Inertial Measurement Units (critical for reentry, but the Shuttle can land with only one functioning unit), and a small engine used by the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that fired for no reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the Shuttle cargo bay and was scheduled to be flown to Kennedy Space Center in Florida atop a modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week. During reentry, two NASA experiments measured the aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics of the orbiter. One of the experiments, a Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing experiment, involved an infrared camera used to collect imagery from the left wing, an area that reached 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, a higher than usual temperature, on the STS28 flight. The second experiment involved the Shuttle Entry Air Data System, housed in Columbia's nose cap to gather "air data" to determine the orbiter's aerodynamic flight characteristics.(NY Times, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90; W Post, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90;C Trib, Jan 13/90;CSM, Jan 16/90; NASA Release 908)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
Ground controllers adjusted commands on the Hubble Space Telescope for focusing on stars. Although other problems existed wobble from solar panels on the telescope and vibration as it went through spacethe first pictures were taken and sent to Earth on this day. (NY Times, May 21/90; W Times, May 21/90; W `"Post, May 21/90)
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
NASA scientists warned that examination of data from the ozone hole over the South Pole showed record depletion. They added that ozone levels throughout the Southern Hemisphere were as low as they had ever been. The ozone hole has been monitored since 1979 with the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the GoddardManaged NIMBUS7 spacecraft. (C Trib, Oct 12/90; NASA Release 90137)
Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, devised a way to salvage the Japanese lunar mission that successfully orbited a probe around the Moon but did not send data back because of a failed transmitter. The mother ship that launched the probe was in an elliptical orbit around the Earth and could achieve lunar orbit by taking advantage of the "fuzzy boundary." The "fuzzy boundary" is an area about 1 million miles from Earth where gravitational forces emanating from our planet and the Sun cancel each other out. The limited supply of fuel carried by the spacecraft was not sufficient to allow it to reach a lunar orbit by conventional means. Success with the plan, they determined, would mean an enormous fuel savings should lunar bases be built in the future. (LA Times, July 16/90)
NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science and Technology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during a meeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environment monitoring (realtime solar wind data), Space Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle. Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for building and utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in xray and infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph, reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, and satellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90106)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, awarded Jackson and Tull of Washington, D.C. a $19 million contract to support the Applied Engineering Division in automation and robotics and thermal and data systems. The firm was selected under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act; the potential for the contract over a fiveyear period was $63 million. (NASA Release C90q)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory began testing its prototype for the Planetary Rover Navigation Test Bed Vehicle, a selfnavigating vehicle, about the size of a small car, for use in planned outposts on the Moon and Mars. (Daily News, Mar 13/90)
NASA considered a proposal for a major repair of the Hubble Space Telescope that would include the reinstating of full observation abilities. In addition to replacing the telescope's main camera in 1993, as already planned, astronauts would also replace another device with corrective optics for light that reached other important scientific instruments. The plan called for repairing or replacing the craft's solar panels, as well, because their vibrations had interfered with many sensitive observations. (NY Times, Oct 27/90)
NASA announced the selection of 280 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts in their'"0*1990 Small Business Innovation Research program (SBIR). SBIR had aimed at stimulating technological innovation in small business for the past 8 years; the Phase I contracts normally would not exceed $50,000. (NASA Release 90144)
Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)
Physicians at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, announced in November that they had instituted a new treatment, promethazine, for space motion sickness. Since NASA's return to flight in September 1988, the medication had helped decrease the malady. (NASA Release 90155)
Jerry Grey, Director of Science and Technology Policy for the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, recommended that weapons designed for the Strategic Defense Initiative be developed to locate and destroy any asteroids that threaten Earth, views endorsed by Vice President Dan Quayle. Grey noted that 1,500 asteroids cross the Earth's orbit every year, that the location of only 100 of them is known, and that the impact of even a relatively small asteroid could have a devastating effect. (P Inq, May 15/90; C Trib, May 17/90)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a $42.6 million contract to Rockwell International for continued Space Shuttle systems engineering and integration services. The contract called for Shuttle launch and flight support, test verification, operations integration, flight evaluation, engineering analysis, and data systems operations, as well as special studies. (NASA Release C90z)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, Exploration and Technology, announced an organizational change at the AmesDryden Flight Research Center, Mountain View, California, designed to reinforce and strengthen national flight research capabilities at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF), Edwards, California. Kenneth J. Szalai was chosen as the Ames Deputy Director, effective December 3, 1990. He was, however, located at Dryden and directed research and operations. Szalai previously served as Chief of the Research Engineering Division at Dryden. (NASA Release 90149)
Boeing Space Operations, Inc. was awarded a $35.9 million costplusawardfee contract for program assurance engineering support at Ames Research Center in California. Under the contract, Boeing would provide reliability and quality assurance, system safety engineering, test engineering, management, institutional safety, and health and environmental0*services. (NASA Release C90o)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a fiveyear, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90aa)
NASA reported on the completed computerized medical reference system, a project engendered by computer and medical experts at the University of Florida and the Kennedy Space Center in Florida in 1979 and known as the Clinical Practice Library of Medicine (CPLM). The system contains nearly all of the text and graphics of seven commonly used medical reference books that are considered essential for practicing medicine. Being lightweight as well as offering high speed access to references, the CPLM has great potential for both space travel and Earth uses alike. (NASA Release: 9030a)
NASA unveiled its latest research laboratory at Ames Research Center in California. The Human Performance Research Laboratory was designed for study of prolonged space travel. Ground was also broken at the dedication for the new $8.6 million Automated Sciences Research Facility, designed to provide research and technology development in automation and artificial intelligence. (NASA Release 9053)
The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of Investigation created by NASA met for the first time in Washington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for the telescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allen said, "The board now has a good base of information from which to0*proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)
NASA canceled a contract with TRW Corporation for the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, aka Space Tug, a spacecraft intended to lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and a proposed Xray telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for the cancellation was recent budget pressure facing NASA. (WSJ, `"Jun 8/90; W Times, Jun 8/90; Sp News, Jun 1117/90; NASA Release
NASA scientists regained contact with Magellan after a 14hour loss. The spacecraft went into a safe mode, in which it shut down many of its systems and pointed its solar panels toward the Sun because of navigation problems it falsely interpreted. The ship's computer memory was sent back to Earth so scientists could determine the problem in Magellan's program. Scientists were pleased, however, with the first set of pictures taken during Magellan's test run over the planet. They, however, cautioned that Magellan's mission to begin regular mapping by `"August 29 would likely be delayed. (W Times, Aug 20/90; P Inq, (#Aug 19/90; W Post, Aug 18/90; NY Times, Aug 18/90; LA Times, Aug
NASA said that the Hubble Space Telescope, which had been plagued with problems, was discovered to have a flawed mirror, causing the $1.5 billion instrument to be "near sighted." The mirrors, which were ground into the wrong shape, rendered useless the telescope's most important scientific instrument, a widefield planetary camera designed to explore the farthest reaches of the universe. Engineers said that instruments scheduled to be attached to the telescope in 1993, 1996, and 1997 could compensate for the flaw and added that these flight schedules might be advanced. Tests were not done on the effectiveness of the mirrors before the telescope was launched because engineers felt that the checks were cost prohibitive. (P Inq, Jun 28/90; NY Times, June 28/90; W Post, Jun 28/90)
For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that, said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12day visit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90)
Columbia; "astro" astronomy telescopes. Jul 9: Atlantis; classified military cargo. Aug 29: Columbia; a Spacelab life sciences module. Oct 5: Discovery; the Ulysses probe. Nov 1: Atlantis; Gamma Ray Observatory. Dec 12: Columbia; a materials science laboratory. A military mission carrying a variety of infrared sensors for the Strategic Defense Initiative was reassigned for 1992. NASA planned for 64 Space Shuttle flights and 30 expendable launch vehicle missions through September 1995. (UPI, Jan 29/90; W Times, Jan 30/90; NY Times, Feb 4/90; NASA Release 9015)
NASA engineers revealed that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope were even more difficult to correct than first expected. The most vexing problem was a 20minute vibration from the solar panels every 90 minutes as the craft passed from night to day. The onboard computer's attempt to compensate for the vibration only made the problem worse. Another problem was the telescope's frequent inability to lock onto the stars that it was commanded to seek. In addition, the reaction of the spacecraft to radiation over the South Atlantic, where the Van Allen belt dips closer than usual to the Earth, was more acute than expected; numerous data were lost and false computer signals were given. It was hoped that all three problems could be remedied via modifications to the telescope's computer. (NY Times, Jun 15/90; P Inq, Jun 15/90; B Sun, Jun 15/90)
NASA scientists reported to the American Astronomical Society preliminary information obtained from the Cosmic Background Explorer spacecraft, launched on November 18, 1989, aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, the Differential Microwave Radiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment0*supported the Big Bang theory, but at the same time minimized the belief that other releases of energy had subsequently occurred. Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft performed with unprecedented precision. This precision was predicted to increase over the spacecraft's estimated two more years of data gathering. (NASA Release 905; P Inq, Jan 15/90)
Surprised NASA scientists released a photograph taken
NASA selected ST Systems Corporation for negotiation to a 5year, $37 million contract for operation and analysis support for Goddard's National Space Science Data Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. NASA also awarded CBI Services, Inc. a $28.2 million contract for work on Ames Research Center's 12foot pressure wind tunnel. (NASA Release C90dd; C 90ee)
The Langley Research Center in Virginia selected Mason and Hanger Services, Inc. for negotiation of a 5year, $97.9 million contract to support all aspects of supply, transportation and equipment management; general and specialized administrative services; different aspects of the security program; and support of the scientific and technical information program. The Television Development Division of NASA Headquarters awarded the Imaging Systems Laboratory of Florida Atlantic University a one to fiveyear contract with a potential value of $3 million for research and development in advanced video systems for space and terrestrial applications. (NASA Release C90cc; 90131A) ' 0*
The Air Force decided in September to convert the Space Launch Complex6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for Space Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in 1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study of cosmic Xrays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited several international scientists. The pictures sent back represented a neutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASA Release 90133)
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
Technical assistant Edwin Sherry, from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, explained a minor problem that the Spacecraft Magellan had developed three days earlier and a little more than halfway into its journey to map Venus. A computer chip failure, caused either by electrical corrosion or an electrically charged particle spewed out by the sun, necessitated frequent commands from ground crews to keep Magellan moving in the right direction. The craft's guidance system normally focused on two stars to ascertain and adjust its heading. Sherry explained that some difficulties with the vast array of electronics during flight were expected and that the mission was in no danger. Scientists hoped to send a new program aloft that would allow the ship's computer to bypass the damaged chip. (AP, Jan 4/90) (#'0*.815@8<H? (#'0*.815@8<H?
Engineers at NASA ran tests of the Hubble Space Telescope to determine if vibrations were interfering with precise pointing at specific stars. The problem had been discovered two days earlier when sensors locked on to a "guide star" to orient the0*spacecraft. Engineers noticed a slight wobble, one sixhundredth of a degree up and down every minute, that interfered with both fine pointing mechanisms and star observations. (NY Times, May
NASA selected 28 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in their Small Business Innovation Research Program. The awards were worth $13 million and part of an ongoing effort to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of the small business sector, and increase the commercialization of federally funded research. (NASA Release 9021)
The Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, awarded Rockwell International Corporation a fiveyear extension on the contract for systems integration. The $1.36 billion contract extensions were for flight and ground systems engineering maintenance and safety analysis, including configuration of the hardware required for each orbiter flight and Shuttle mission support from countdown to landing. (NASA Release C90A; C90B; WSJ, Jan 12/90)
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiations leading to a $172 million contract for payload mission integration. Under the contract, the company would provide management, personnel, equipment, services, supplies, facilities, and materials for Shuttle/Spacelab missions. Spacelab, carried in the Shuttle's cargo bay, converted the Shuttle into a versatile onorbit research center. (NASA Release
