Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore announced that for financial reasons it was ending its participation in the Magellan Telescope project in Las Campanas, Chile as of June 30. It cited an inability to raise the $15 million, which was its project share. The role of the Astronomy Department at Johns Hopkins was enhanced through its space participation. The Hopkins Ultaviolet Telescope was successfully flown aboard the Space Shuttle and Johns Hopkins contains on campus the Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA's center for astronomy programs with the Hubble Space Telescope. (B Sun, Apr 3/91)
NASA announced the selection of 39 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). SBIR seeks to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small business in meeting federal research and development needs, and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. The awards included 36 small, high technology firms located in 17 states and were valued at about $19 million. (NASA Release 91-15; Huntsville Times, Jan 29/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the huge outpouring of volcanic material from Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, a research team of NASA atmospheric scientists was being sent to the West Indian island of Barbados to gather data to help evaluate the global atmospheric effects of this event. Several NASA scientists subsequently commented on Pinatubo's plume and its spreading. (NASA Release 91-103; W Post, Jul 8/91)
According to the press, two members of the House subcommittee that oversees NASA spending, Chairman Bob Traxler, Democrat of Michigan, and ranking minority member Bill Green, Republican of New York, asked NASA Administrator Richard Truly why NASA did not buy a Mir Space Station or other technology from the Soviet Union. NASA replied that the U.S. aerospace industry would not like it. (AP, Oct 25/91; B Sun, Oct 26/91; LA Times, Oct 27/91)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center's Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), an instrument aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory, had detected "the most distant and by far, the most luminous gamma-ray source ever seen." The EGRET team, led by Carl Fichtel, reported to the International Astronomical Union, Cambridge, Massachusetts, that a source of intense gamma radiation was detected between June 15 and June 28. The source was identified as the variable Quasar 3C279, located in the constellation Virgo. (NASA Release 91-117; W Post, Jul 29/91)
NASA issued a release indicating that as a result of Apollo data findings NASA scientists and other researchers had a revised theory of the origin of life on earth. Life may have begun more than once and been wiped out several times by rare, planet-melting superimpacts on the Earth. Evidence of such early solar system impacts is well-preserved on the moon. (NASA Release 91-87; UPI, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 6/91)
NASA announced the selection of MK-Ferguson Corporation, Cleveland for a contract to provide engineering, construction, and maintenance services to NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C91-mm)
The local newspaper carried an article on an area resident, Dale Reed, who said his "lifting-body concept"--an aircraft shape that eliminated the need for wings, influenced the design of the Space Shuttle. He built scale models of his idea and convinced his boss, Paul Bikle, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, to try it on a glider. Reed was a NASA engineer for 32 years and subsequently worked as senior engineer for PRC, Inc., a NASA contractor. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Sep 13/91)
NASA announced the opening of the new Biocomputation Center at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The center, under Muriel Ross, had the task of studying the neural network to understand how nerves are organized and function. (NASA Release 91-129)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
Lowell Hawkinson, chairman of the Gensym Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, which created the G2 system, announced that Biosphere II, would be initiated in March. Biosphere II is an environment controlled by the advanced computer program G2 and designed for eight scientists to seal themselves inside for two years. NASA had been using G2 on its Shuttle flights to control certain functions since October 1989. According to Tony Heindel, a light controller at Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, G2 monitors 16,000 data points per second, gathering such information as temperature, voltages, availability of jet thrusters, and condition of on-board computers and instruments. (NY Times, Feb 10/91)
The Test Technique Demonstrator program at Langley Research Center, Langley, Virginia, provided hypersonic data on airframe/engine integration applicable to design of the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The program involves an industry consortium, which includes North American Aviation division of Rockwell International, General Dynamics, and McDonnell Douglas for airframe design, and Pratt and Whitney and Rocketdyne for the propulsion system. C. Larry Edwards, manager, NASP Aerodynamics Technology Program, said the hypersonic testing phase should be completed by 1992. (AvWk, Mar 25/91)
The Washington Post featured the space biology team at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, which has created a stir with a government-patented invention that allows large quantities of many types of human cells to be grown by removing the force of gravity. NASA's Rotating Wall Bioreactor had great potential for improving patient treatment and may grow still more cells when used in space. In this connection, NASA announced that the rotating wall vessel developed at the Johnson Space Center's Biotechnology Program, would be tested in space during the Atlantis flight. (W Post, Nov 18/91; NASA Release 91-195)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, announced a contract award to
According to UPI, the new Shuttle Endeavour's maiden voyage in April 1992 faced a significant delay because of numerous problems discovered after it was delivered to the Kennedy Space Center. Among other reasons for the delay were the parts cannibalized from Endeavour to avoid major launch delays of other orbiters. As the Shuttle was inspected, more than 1,400 problem reports were filed regarding work needed. (UPI, Oct 19/91)
An article pointed out that space exploration was not a short-term mission. Therefore, given the age of several existing Space Shuttles, Congress should plan ahead and appropriate funds for additional Shuttles for the 21st century. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 7/91)
Gerald Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center at a press conference spoke of the findings of the Gamma Ray Observatory to date. He said that an instrument called the Burst and Transient Source Experiment had detected 117 gamma ray bursts since launching. Thse bursts were randomly scattered, not from the center of the Milky Way Galaxy as previously thought. (AP, Sep 23/91; P Inq, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; W Post, Sep 24/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that NASA engineers were trying to fix an intermittent power failure in the Hubble Space Telescope affecting one of the two ultraviolet detectors housed in the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph. As a result, some 30 percent of research planned for the spectrograph must be postponed. (B Sun, Sep 4/91; LA Times, Sep 9/91)
According to UPI, an extraordinarily sharp picture of Jupiter taken by the Hubble Space Telescope showed the planet's turbulent atmosphere and the telescope's capabilities. (UPI, May 6/91)
A local newspaper described the flight of the ER-2 (Earth Resources) giant high-flying spy plane that flew over the San Joaquin-Sacramento Valley. In 4 1/2 hours, the plane of the NASA-Ames Research Center captured more than 7 million acres on film. The photographs were to be a resource for the best use of water supplies in California.  (Bakersfield Californian, Sep 7/91)
William Paciesas, research professor of Physics at the University of Alabama, Huntsville, is co-investigator of an experiment on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory to be carried by Space Shuttle Atlantis in April. The Burst and Transient Source Experiment was to study the origins of gamma ray bursts. Gamma rays are at the upper end of the energy spectrum, carrying more energy at higher frequency than visible light, ultraviolet light, or x-rays. (Hntsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly spoke on the opening day of the Space Exploration '91 convention in Houston, sponsored by the NASA Alumni League. He said that recent successes by unmanned missions were paving the way for future space initiatives. He also stressed the need for belt tightening over the next several years. (H Post, Oct 30/91; H Chron, Oct 30/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that volunteers in a water taste test at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center had difficulty or were unable to distinguish recycled from regular water. The recycled water came from perspiration collected in a test chamber, and in which the salts, oils, and microorganisms were subsequently removed. The recycling process was designed to be used on the Space Station to minimize need for additional water. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 10/91; W Times, Jul 19/91)
NASA announced that the X-29, an unusual research aircraft built to investigate the feasibility of a forward-swept wing design, made its last flight in its high angle of attack research program on September 30 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 91-159; Antelope Valley Press, Oct 4/91)
NASA announced it would hold the first Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) Post-Retrieval Symposium June 2-8, 1991, in Kissimmee, Florida. LDEF exposed 57 science and technology experiments to the space environment for almost six years until Shuttle Columbia returned it to Earth in January 1990. The conference was planned to examine the results of LDEF and the effects of a long-term space environment on materials and systems. (NASA Release N91-38)
NASA announced the selection of 70 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. The high technology firms were located in 21 states. (NASA Release 91-210)
The Huntsville Times published a history of NASA in connection with its Marshall Space Flight Center and the Army Ballistic Missile Agency Development Operations Division in Huntsville. Reference was made to the early days of the Redstone Arsenal as well as to statistics of employment and various Shuttle launches.  (Htsvl Tms, Jun 9/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that Advanced Computer Systems, Inc. of Fairfax, Virginia, would provide administrative automated data processing services for GSFC's Information Management Division. The contract would take effect April 1, 1991, and would consist of a one-year basic period and four one-year priced options for a total of $58.8 million. (NASA Release C91-d)
NASA announced that contrary to a news report that appeared, NASA was not planning a mission to visit the Hubble Space Telescope any earlier than late 1993. The science community had discussed this possibility because of some observed erratic behavior of the Hubble in one of the maneuvering gyros. Alternative servicing strategies were being evaluated. The announcement contradicted a Washington Post article. (NASA Release 91-121; W Post, Jul 31/91; AP, Jul 31/91; UPI, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91; P Inq, Aug 1/91; USA Today, Aug 1/91)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch on September 12, would deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) 350 miles above Earth. The UARS is to study humankind's effect on the planet's atmosphere and its shielding ozone layer and is the first major flight element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 91-136)
Whereas NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York plans to announce that 1990 was the hottest year ever recorded, NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, says 1990 was only the fourth hottest year since 1979. The difference is accounted for by the fact that Goddard uses ground-based thermometers to record local heat while Marshall uses satellites, which broadly measure atmospheric temperature world-wide. In addition to the global temperature analysis, the World Resources Institute released two related studies. One was by Richard Heim of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Global Climate Laboratory. (WSJ, Jan 8/91; W Post, Jan 10/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; LA Times, Jan 10/91; CSM, Jan 16/91; NY Times Magazine, Feb 3/91)
Gerald Fishman, principal investigator of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, said so far the experiment on the Gamma Ray Observatory was working as planned. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 23/91)
Nature magazine contained an article by its associate editor David Lindley that was extremely laudatory of the findings of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its flaws. He referred specifically to data obtained from the two spectrometers, designed to operate primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths to which the Earth's atmosphere is opaque. (Nature, Jun 6/91)
The Los Angeles Times reported that in order to minimize the impact on California's economy of job losses in the aerospace industry, Governor Pete Wilson sent letters to Congress supporting the B-2 bomber and NASA's Space Station project. (LA Times, Sep 1/91)
A study by the University of Southern California found that space exploration was viewed as "frivolous" by the average American. These results were disclosed at the 7th annual National Space Symposium. A space journal commented that NASA needed to find new ways of communicating its message more effectively. (Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
UPI reported that new Space Shuttle Endeavour was delayed an additional day in its trip from the factory in California to Kennedy Space Center in Florida because of stormy weather. (UPI, May 6/91)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
An interview featured Lawrence Ross, Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, a 30-year-old facility with 3,000 civil servants. Priorities at Lewis include research in propulsion, electric power generation, and advanced communications. Ross answered various questions about the Space Station, solar dynamic power systems, nuclear propulsion research, the continuing need for maintenance funds, and the role of Lewis in the National Aerospace Plane program. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
In an article written for the Houston Post, Republican Congressman Jack Fields strongly advocated Senate support of NASA's Space Station. Referring to various uses of the Space Station program in the fields of medicine, industrial production, and basic science, he stressed the United States commitment to space exploration. (H Post, Jun 20/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of H. Lee Beach Jr. as Deputy Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-198)
The media reported on NASA's plans to install corrective lenses on the Hubble Space Telescope in order to correct the faulty lens and at the same time to make other repairs. Details remained to be announced. (AP, Jul 2/91; NY Times, Jul 3/91; W Times, Jul 3/91)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for the contract to design, develop, and operate a science support center for the space-based Advanced x-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). AXAF was scheduled to be launched in 1998 as the third of NASA's Earth-orbiting Great Observatories. The center is to serve the international scientific community with an observation program for the x-ray telescope and the data it collects. (NASA release 91-46)
NASA announced that its Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) was maneuvered to point at its first scientific target of opportunity, the sun, on June 7. Controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, repositioned the observatory to gather data from two X-class solar flares. All four GRO instrument teams reported receiving good data on solar activity as a result. (NASA Release 91-91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center asked for proposals for a follow-on system to its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). The system was to be used to manage data relating to payloads for Space Shuttles and ultimately for the Space Station. The new system was to include a relational data base management subsystem, a project management subsystem, a technical documentation subsystem, and a page printing subsystem and covers a 10-year period. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
NASA Project Scientist Steve Saunders stated that Magellan scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were studying the surface features on Venus caused by wind. Soviet landers and the US Pioneer probes measured wind speeds near Venus at two to four miles per hour, or about the speed needed to move sand grains. The Magellan images indicated wind streaks. Project Manager Tony Spear said that a new strategy to protect Magellan from the heat of direct sunlight has successfully cooled the spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-63)
The Chicago Tribune carried an article dealing with the boon that the blurred vision of the Hubble Space Telescope was proving to researchers. Some dozen teams of scientists took Hubble data and using their computer enhancement programs produced clearer images. In the process they have raised their own profiles in a sometimes obscure research field. (C Trin, Dec 15/91)
The press cited concern over "millions of pieces of trash zooming around in space" and the fear that they might hit the Hubbell Space Telescope or some orbiting astronauts. The concern caused work on new debris-monitoring devices and a system to warn astronauts of impending collisions with space junk so they could take evasive action. The U.S. Space Command's space surveillance network already kept track of about 6,700 pieces of larger litter at least four inches in diameter that might damage a Space Station. (AP, May 10/91; W Times, May 24/91)
A number of NASA scientists participated in the International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids held in San Juan Capistrano, California, and jointly sponsored by NASA and The Planetary Society. At congressional request, a NASA committee headed by David Morrison, space science chief at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, was to recommend how to improve the search for asteroids. Another committee was to advise how best to divert threatening asteroids. At the end of the conference July 3, a statement advocated construction of several sophisticated new telescopes to find all significant asteroids and learn if any were on a collision course with Earth. (AP, Jul 1/91; AP, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; P Inq, Jul 6/91; Oakland Tribune, Jul 8/91)
Jerry Ross and Jay Apt fixed a stuck satellite antenna in NASA's first unscheduled repair in space, showing the value of the human element in space flight. Thereafter they remained outside for three more hours to test equipment. A further spacewalk was scheduled before return to Earth. (USA Today, Apr 8/91; B Sun, Apr 8/91; AP, Apr 8/91; UPI, Apr 8/91; C Trin, Apr 8/91; CSM, Apr 9/91; W Post, Apr 9/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 9/91; Birmingham News, Apr 12/91)
The Soviet Union observed Cosmonaut Day, marking the thirtieth anniversary of the space flight of Yuri Gagarin. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91)
Robert Gibson, an astronaut removed from command of a Shuttle mission for violating flight-safety rules, unofficially has set a new altitude record of 27,000 feet in a single-engine Cassutt Formula 1 "midget" racing plane. (UPI, Feb 1/91; LA Times, Feb 3/91)
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed environmental challenges facing scientists worldwide. Commenting on greenhouse gases, it stated that the international program of Canada, the European Space Agency, Japan, and the United States would help fill knowledge gaps. Within this framework, NASA's Mission to Planet Earth formed a major part. This included the need to analyze the hydrological cycle over the oceans, represented in part by the use of a spectrometer supplied by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The lower atmosphere also needed study as pointed out by Jack Fishman of the NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. Such study would include investigation of the "self-cleaning ability" represented by the hydroxyl radical. (CSM, Apr 25/91)
Members of NASA's Project Viking, the group that put the first two spaceships on Mars 15 years previously, gathered at the Langley Research Center to commemorate that event on July 20, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, Jul 23/91)
ST Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, announced its selection by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center to provide support for the High Energy X-Ray Telescope Sounding Rocket Program. (PR Newswire, Jul 9/91)
University of Colorado astronomer Jack Brandt talked of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its fuzzy focusing. Discoveries included proof that Pluto has a moon and dramatic photographs of a star spewing hot gases during its birth in the Orion constellation. (W Times, Feb 14/91)
The media discussed the forthcoming launch of Atlantis and the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) it will set in orbit. Gamma rays have the highest of all forms of radiation and are born deep inside atomic nuclei. GRO was to canvass the entire sky over a two-year period, scanning the whole sky during the first year and concentrating on the most intriguing objects the second year. GRO was to be controlled by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists from Germany's Max Planck Institute, which supplied GRO's imaging telescope, were to assist. GRO's Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer Experiment was to be the main instrument for examining the material enveloping supernovas to look for gamma rays. University of Washington astronomer George Lake believed GRO would find in the dark matter, strange particles called "wimps" (weakly interacting massive particles) in a Milky Way object called Geminga. The Soviet spacecraft Granat, carrying a French gamma-ray detector, found an object that accretes surrounding matter, generating antimatter that in turn creates gamma rays. (P Inq, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; UPI, Apr 1/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; UPI, Apr 2/91; CSM, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; USA Today, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; AP, Apr 3/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; P Inq, Apr 5/91)
Later in the 1990s, NASA will launch the Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle (STEP) to compare the inertial and gravitational mass of two objects suspended in orbit. The launch relates to an international effort to study gravity and proposals for locating the National Science Foundation's $211 million Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory. (W Post, Mar 17/91)
NASA announced that as part of its Planetary Astronomy Program of the Office of Space Science and Applications, a team of radar astronomers had identified a near-Earth metal asteroid for the first time. Their discovery, observed from the giant Arecibo radar/radio telescope in Puerto Rico, was published in Science magazine. The object, called 1986 DA, was observed and analyzed by a team under Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The asteroid contains mostly iron but also 8 percent nickel as well as some platinum-group metals and gold. (NASA Release 91-89; NY Times, Jun 11/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
The Baltimore Sun published an article quoting Richard Stolarski, research scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, concerning ozone depletion. He stated that the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic failed to shrink as was hoped. He wondered whether the same might occur over the North Pole and indicated the need to understand the limits under which ozone depletion occurred. Subsequently, NASA announced the findings of its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, which indicated the ozone depletion in Antarctica was almost as severe as the record year of 1987. (B Sun, Oct 5/91; NASA Release 91-165; AP, Oct 9/91; UPI, Oct 9/91; NY Times, Oct 10/91; USA Today, Oct 10/91; CSM, Oct 10/91; W Post, Oct 11/91)
Encore Computer Corporation filed an agency protest of a $191 million award by NASA Johnson Space Center to IBM Corporation for a mainframe requirements contract. NASA officials were to meet with Encore representatives over the disagreement, which involved pricing information submitted. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
NASA selected Ball Corporation of Muncie, Indiana, to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. (C Trin, Apr 18/91)
According to the Cleveland Plain Dealer, the Ohio EPA ordered an investigation and cleanup of contamination at NASA's Lewis Research Center. NASA officials stated voluntary cleanup efforts were underway and Peter W. McCallum, NASA's chief of environmental safety said most of the sites had been cleaned up or soon would be; he was confident no contamination was leaving NASA's property. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Jul 3/91)
A space journal editorial advocated that the Space Station be judged by Congress on its own merits and that space exploration was also a social need, medically, environmentally, and agriculturally. NASA did what Congress requested and the committee needed to explain its failure to approve the revised Space Station plans. (AvWk, May 27/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the six moons of Neptune discovered by Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 were given names by the International Astronomical Union's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. In addition, Saturn's newest moon, Pan, was discovered by Mark Showalter, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (P Inq, Sep 28/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
Bob MacMillan, public information manager for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said scientists had ordered the Magellan spacecraft to reduce its mapping of Venus and stay in the shade to prevent recording equipment from overheating. (AP, Aug 28/91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled the most detailed images of Mars ever taken. Scientists said the telescope made possible a long-term program to monitor seasonal climate and surface changes on Mars that previously had been impossible. According to the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore, the images revealed Martian features as small as 31 miles across. (W Post, Mar 18/91; UPI, Mar 18/91; CSM, Mar 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
Atlantis returned to Kennedy Space Center from MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa. (AP, Apr 18/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) chief scientist William Kinard of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, revealed that 200 experimenters in nine countries were analyzing the data gathered by the LDEF satellite that Space Shuttle Columbia rescued in 1990. The plan was to retrieve LDEF after 11 months, but delays and loss of Challenger stranded LDEF for five years and nine months. Nevertheless experiments were conducted and interesting findings were being discovered. (CSM, Feb 8/91)
An editorial in a space journal advocated that NASA wind down its program for the construction of the National Aerospace Plane, the X-30, for which it has no funds, rather than wait until 1993 to decide. Instead the journal advocated NASA's focusing on "research and development that would continue its already impressive advances in materials and propulsion technology." (SP News, Dec 2-8/91)
Florida Today described the opening on September 3 at the Kennedy Space Center of a third garage for NASA's four-Orbiter Space Shuttle fleet. The hangar was outfitted with equipment intended for the Air Force's mothballed Shuttle launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, saving NASA about $40 million. (Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
An editorial criticized expenditures by Congress and the administration on Mission to Planet Earth with its environmental concerns, as opposed to spending larger sums on space exploration. (W Times, Mar 28/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald expressed the concern of some NASA staff over the number of flight waivers NASA had issued. NASA issues such waivers on certain critical items rather than change the Shuttle design, which would be very costly. Statistics indicate that the number of waivers approved since the Challenger accident more than tripled. According to Frank Pizzano, head of the reliability and maintainability engineering division at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the increase results from stricter standards for waivers but many weaknesses were eliminated in the Shuttle redesign after the Challenger accident. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 8/91)
A proposal that $211 million be spent on the chance that gravity waves could be exploited to fathom black holes and other cosmic enigmas divided scientists and faced Congress with a quandary. Involved was possible Federal funding of two proposed gravity wave observatories, a joint project of the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. American supporters of the project, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), admitted there was no guarantee of success but believed its scientific potential was gigantic if it succeeded. (NY Times, Apr 30/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
The media reported that because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The right tire was severely damaged on landing, but the new stronger brakes worked well. In addition, twice as much fiberglass thermal tile filler would have to be replaced than was customary after a flight. The astronauts accomplished 32 of 33 planned primary observations, 18 of 21 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments. (P Inq, May 7/91; W Post, May 7/91; NY Times, May 7/91; USA Today, May 7/91; B Sun, May 7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI, May 9/91)
NASA technology developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, designed sensors to monitor potentially damaging heat build-up in electronic circuits. Such technology was to be used in connection with the huge television Jumbotron screen for the Superbowl game on January 27. NASA's Technology Utilization program is cited as an example of the applications that can be made from NASA findings. (NASA Release 91-10)
NASA announced that Dudley McConnell, Associate Director for Applications for NASA's Earth Science and Applications Division, died of an apparent heart attack. (NASA Obituary; Fla Today, Oct 29/91; W Post, Oct 31/91)
NASA announced the selection of Taft Broadcasting Company of Houston for a contract providing television support services for the Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-x)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, has selected Hughes/Santa Barbara Research Center, Goleta, California as its contractor for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir (MODIS-N) instrument for the Earth Observing System (EOS) program. EOS is central to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Program. MODIS-N is the key research instrument to fly on a series of EOS unmanned polar spacecraft. Over a 15-year period, it would measure terrestrial, oceanographic, and atmospheric parameters to assess environmental changes. (NASA Release C91-1)
Queen Elizabeth visited Johnson Space Center in Houston. (AP, May 22/91; W Times, May 23/91; LA Times, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
Bruce Bunin, manager of Advanced Commercial Programs at Douglas Aircraft Company, stated that McDonnell Douglas Corporation had won a contract for up to $8 million from NASA's Langley Research Center to conduct system studies on the next-generation commercial supersonic transport. The five-year contract was part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program aimed at resolving environmental and economic issues and developing technology for a High Speed Civil Transport (HSCT). The HSCT team was to study atmospheric effects, noise and sonic boom reduction, advanced materials and lightweight structures, supersonic laminar flow control, engine cycles, and airline economics. (PR Newswire, Mar 11/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, had selected H and H Consolidated, Inc. of Hampton, Virginia, for an operation/maintenance and Alteration contract of facilities and equipment services. (NASA Release C91-jj)
The Huntsville Times reported that engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had successfully tested a 17.5-foot-long solid rocket motor on September 26. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
The British journal Nature carried an article by Rodney A. Viereck and Edmond Murad of Phillips Laboratory, a space research center at Hanscom Air Force Base, Bedford, Massachusetts. Their findings indicated that the probable reason for the eerie orange glow of the Shuttles was caused by oxygen in the upper atmosphere striking nitric oxide on the Shuttle's skin, forming excited nitrogen dioxide, which radiates light when it moves off the surface. (NY Times, Nov 12/91; Xinhua, Nov 12/91)
NASA engineers worried over data indicating that the critical 16-foot main antenna of Galileo, essential for the Jupiter probe, may have failed to unfold properly. Such a failure would limit the speed of transmitting data from Jupiter to Earth and reduce the number of photographs that could be sent. Galileo was unique among spacecraft launched to date in that it has a "dual spin" design with the antenna being located on the spinning section. Efforts were underway to see how the situation could be remedied. (LA Times, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 15/91; NY Times, Apr 17/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91; W Times, Apr 18/91; USA Today, Apr 18/91)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, awarded a $112 million contract to General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc. in San Diego, California, for launch services connected with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). SOHO is part of a cooperative effort among NASA, the European Space Agency, and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science to conduct an examination of the sun and various solar phenomena through launches in 1992 through 1995. (NASA Release C91-m)
A feature article in the New York Times discussed the impact of space rockets on the ozone layer. Reportedly, NASA estimated that each Shuttle flight injected some 75 tons of chlorine into the stratosphere. Dr. Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute in New York City, calculated that the lifting of nine Shuttles and six Titan 4s every year would add 0.3 percent to stratospheric chlorine, which in turn would destroy much less than 1 percent of the ozone there. This made the Shuttle a large source of pollution but small by comparison to any other industry such as refrigeration or solvents. (NY Times, May 14/91)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
Thirteen European countries--Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland--met to discuss European Space Agency plans that were threatened by Germany's lack of funds. The German research budget was short $930 million because of an economic slowdown and the huge costs of German unification. The space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into space and according to Germany's ZDF television network, was assured of funds. The question of funds for other projects, for which Germany and France were major funders, remained unclear. (AP, Nov 18/91; Science and Technology, Nov 25/91)
Stormy weather prevented Space Shuttle Atlantis from landing at Kennedy Space Center so it landed instead at MacDill Air Force Base; the flight would resume when the weather cleared. (AP, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91)
NASA announced that the Antarctic ozone levels had reached the lowest values ever observed on October 6 (110, plus or minus 6), according to preliminary data from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-168; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
NASA announced the renaming of the Gamma Ray Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, by Space Shuttle Atlantis, in honor of American physicist Arthur Holly Compton. (NASA Release 91-151)
The Baltimore Sun reported that thanks to a NASA program to establish a super computer network among black universities, Morgan State University had received a super computer. The university planned to make the super computer the foundation of a new Center for Applied Space Science and Engineering. (B Sun, Jun 7/91)
Eugene Kranz, Director of the Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) at Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the establishment of a Space Station Mission Operation Project Office within MOD. The new office, headed by Charles R. Lewis, was to have responsibility for the development and implementation of Space Station Freedom flight operations. (NASA Release 91-35)
NASA Associate Administrator Spence Armstrong met with Marshall Space Flight Center officials on December 4. He said NASA's programs put it in a good position to continue to attract top engineering talents. NASA would need to attract engineers from several previously underrepresented groups, including blacks, women, the disabled, and other minorities. (Htsvl Tms, Dec 5/91)
An article citing Technology Review, referred to the system developed by NASA's Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resources Information Services to fight fires by enabling firefighters to "see" through the fire. (San Francisco Examiner, Aug 14/91)
UPI reported that ground had been broken for the $70 million Space Center Houston being built just outside Johnson Space Center. The center is to be an "experience center" providing visitors with a sense of daily Space Station life. (UPI, May 28/91)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
The Huntsville Times quoted the General Accounting Office as saying that contrary to earlier concerns, a survey revealed that potential retirements of skilled NASA scientists and engineers would not be a problem. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 1/91)
An editorial in Florida Today referred to NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's comment about NASA giving serious consideration to consolidating Shuttle operations at Kennedy Space Center. He estimated this would cut Shuttle costs 25 percent. Such a move would also result in consolidating Shuttle management, as recommended in the Advisory Committee report. (Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported a NASA announcement on November 8 that its $10 million effort to determine whether a hole in the Earth's protective ozone layer was developing over the North Pole, was delayed by mechanical problems in both the project's aircraft. Mike Kurylo, manager of NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Program, said the DC-8 jet had a crack in its landing gear and the high-altitude ER-2 aircraft was grounded for a problem with its wings. In addressing the same subject, the New York Times quoted the project's chief scientist as saying three ER-2 planes would be used to survey the ozone layer at high altitudes. (B Sun, Nov 9/91; NY Times, Nov 10/91)
Several media articles dealt with attempts to rescue spacecraft Galileo's mission. The Los Angeles Times described Galileo's flight, which was functioning perfectly toward Jupiter, apart from its malfunctioning antenna. Engineers sought both by heating and cooling the craft to unstick the antenna. The New York Times reported in detail on efforts by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, operated by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, to free the antenna, thus salvaging the mission. If efforts failed, Galileo would be unable to communicate discoveries to scientists because the craft's small antennas could not transmit recorded pictures until returning to the vicinity of Earth. The third attempt to fix the antenna was pronounced a failure on August 20. Other possible courses of action were discussed. (LA Times, Aug 9/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; W Post, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91;  NY Times, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; UPI, Aug 21/91; AP, Aug 28/91)
NASA announced that its John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, had awarded EG&G Florida, Inc., a one-year extension of its contract for base operations services. (NASA Release C91-qq)
The Washington Post, quoting Edward Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble Space Telescope scientist, said that a computer programming error caused the Hubble to shut itself down temporarily on December 9. The problem was not considered serious and should result in losing only two days of scientific observations. NASA announced on December 12 that the Hubble resumed science data collection as of that morning and returned safely from its standby condition or safe mode, a capability built into all NASA spacecraft. In connection with the Hubble, the Baltimore Sun reported a problem with its spectrograph, which NASA believed it solved by leaving the power supply units for both ultraviolet detectors on all the time. (W Post, Dec 11/91; UPI, Dec 11/91; AP, Dec 11/91; W Times, Dec 12/91; NASA Release 91-204; C Trin, Dec 12/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; B Sun, Dec 13/91)
The Discovery astronauts conducted final experiments, celebrated the 30th anniversary of U.S. space flight on May 5, and prepared to return to Earth. (P Inq, May 6/91; W Times, May 6/91; USA Today, May 6/91; B Sun, May 6/91; C Trin, May 6/91; AP, May 6/91; UPI, May 6/91)
NASA announced that undergraduate engineering students at Mississippi State University, Starkville, had won the competition to build a 50-foot mockup of the X-30/National Aero-Space Plane. (NASA Release 91-182; Fla Today, Nov 10/91)
AP quoted Guy Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, as stating that his research indicated the eruption of Mount Pinatubo could lead to reduced levels of protective ozone over North America and Europe in the winter of 1991-92 and the summer of 1992, possibly increasing the risk of skin cancer. Richard Stolarski, ozone researcher at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said the projections were plausible but based on ozone depletion from El Chichon, a Mexican volcano that erupted in 1982, the thought there would be less ozone depletion than predicted. (LA Times, Jul 20/91; P Inq, Jul 20/91)
The National Research Council in its report The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, after two years of study recommended that more modest instruments than the Hubble Space Telescope and only a few large observatories be developed. The next instrument, the $617 million Gamma Ray Observatory, was to be launched in April 1991. During the 1990s, of more than 50 proposals made, the report endorsed only four: the $1.3 billion Space Infrared Telescope Facility; an $80 million infrared-optimized telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii; the $115 million Millimeter Array, a group of telescopes to cover star-forming regions and galaxies; and a $55 million optical telescope to operate in the Southern Hemisphere. The report recommended several more modest programs including the $230 million Stratospheric Observatory for Far-Infrared Astronomy; the $250 million Astrometric Interferometry Mission to map positions of celestial bodies more precisely; the $15 million Large Earth-based Solar Telescope; and a $70 million spacecraft dedicated to the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopy Explorer satellite and increasing to five the Explorer satellites to be launched on rockets. (UPI, Mar 19/91; W Post, Mar 20/91; W Times, Mar 20/91; NY Times, Mar 20/91; LA Times, Mar 20/91; B Sun, Mar 24/91)
Forrest McCartney, director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, said NASA might have to close one of its two Shuttle launch pads to save money. (P Inq, Oct 22/91)
NASA announced the award to members of three Space Shuttle crews of the Vladimir M. Komarov Diploma by the National Aeronautic Association for their "outstanding achievements in the field of exploration of outer space. The awards were from the Council of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale. The crews receiving the awards were the January 1990 STS-32 mission, which retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility; the December 1990 STS-35 mission, which carried the ASTRO-1 astrophysics observatory; and the October 1990 mission STS-41, which deployed the joint NASA/European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft to study the sun. (NASA Release 91-202 Revised; Fla Today, Dec 15/91)
Cort Durocher, executive director of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Washington and a former combat pilot and space engineer, wrote in the Houston Chronicle that while working to minimize risks, space exploration involves occasional failures and possible loss of life. (H Chron, Mar 25/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the selection of TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California, for one Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer/Earth Probe Spacecraft (TOMS/EP). The contract was to provide for the design, development, fabrication, assembly, test, integration, launch, and post-launch support of the aircraft. (NASA Release C91-t)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)
In an article in the Science section, Time discussed the theory that a giant comet that struck the earth was responsible for killing off dinosaurs. In this connection, the findings of a team of scientists led by Charles Duller at NASA's Ames Research Center were mentioned. The team discovered from satellite photos of Yucatan the semicircle that might indicate a huge buried crater of an asteroid. (Time, Jul 1/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
Bill Moyers, a member of a national panel of experts involved in Project Censored, a compendium of the most underreported stories of 1990, dealt with NASA and the ozone. Soviet scientists first raised environmental questions about the solid rocket fuel used by the Space Shuttles. They said it left 250 tons of hydrochloric acid eating up the ozone layer after every launch. The Earth Island Journal and the San Francisco Chronicle reported the story. On the program, environmental activist Helen Caldicott spoke of chlorine molecules that chomp up ozone molecules. (P Inq, Feb 25/91)
Robert Brown and Paul A. Vanden Bout, astronomers at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Charlottesville, Virginia, using the 12-meter telescope on Kitt Peak, Arizona, in July discovered carbon monoxide in a strange object previously found by researchers in Ursa Major. A huge gas cloud, at the fringe of the universe, it might be linked to a galaxy in formation. (P Inq, Nov 21/91; LA Times, Nov 25/91)
The Magellan spacecraft temporarily lost contact with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, when its antenna was misdirected toward Earth. Contact was restored, and only 0.3 percent of the mission's scheduled surface mapping was lost. (C Trin, May 14/91)
NASA announced that at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, at Edwards, California, simulator research showed that multi-engine aircraft with specially programmed flight control systems could touch down safely using only the engines to turn and land. (NASA Release 91-85)
David Webb of the White House National Commission on Space, speaking at a U.S. Space Foundation National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, said that the commission in 1985 had recommended increased NASA spending for research and development. However, Admiral John Poindexter, then National Security Adviser, opposed it, with the result that no action was taken. (Washington Technology, May 2/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, announced the appointment of former NASA deputy director J.R. Thompson Jr. as executive vice president. He was to manage the new Orbital office in Huntsville, Alabama, near Marshall Space Flight Center. (AP, Nov 12/91; W Post, Nov 13/91; W Times, Nov 13/91; Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 14/91)
The Cleveland Plain Dealer reported that NASA's Lewis Research Center on December 13 refused to sign cleanup orders for nine sites within the Brook Park complex that were contaminated with hazardous materials. NASA officials indicated they wished to continue talks with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and that signing the orders would mean waiving their right to appeal. Moreover, they complained the agreement did not limit the sum the Ohio EPA could charge for overseeing the cleanup. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Dec 14/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
Kenneth Szalai, recently named director of NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Base, stated that NASA was putting a new emphasis on aeronautics. The facility's number one project involved the F-18 high-angle-of-attack program to help design more maneuverable aircraft. Similar work was underway on the X-29 as well as modifications on the F-15 jet fighter and testing of Space Shuttle landing gear systems. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 7/91)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
A group advising the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that a 10-year delay in taking action to curb global warming would mean little further increase in the level of warming predicted by the end of the 21st century. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Xingjian Jiang authored a study indicating this. Meanwhile, William K. Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, echoed this stance by saying "It's better to get it right than to act too precipitously." Scientists disagreed on the subject, and Senator Al Gore strongly opposed the Bush Administration's position. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)
NASA and the Defense Department were expected to present the National Space Council with a proposal to build a new, heavy unmanned booster for the late 1990s. It would be based on a Space Shuttle external tank equipped with oxygen/hydrogen engines, using strap-on solid rocket motors. Jack Lee, director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, told the US Space Foundation Symposium in Colorado Springs that the belief was that the new device could achieve a payload cost to orbit as low as $500-$1,000 per pound. (AvWk, Apr 15/91)
NASA scientists connected with the Hubble Space Telescope correction project were quoted with reference to the amount of work to be done. The Hubble science team, subject to top-level NASA approval, was to build a second generation Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WFPC) with only four instead of eight of the powerful electronic light detectors known as charge-coupled devices (CCDs). The proposed change took account of tight money and time pressures but meant that the photographic operation might take 10 to 20 percent longer, according to Ed Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble scientist. The extent of repairs to be made would be decided by the end of 1991 but probably would involve Shuttle astronauts making three or four spacewalks of at least six hours each. (W Post, Oct 20/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91)
NASA announced its award of a $191 million, five-year contract to Krug Life Sciences, Houston, for medical operations and research support services. The work, covering the period March 1, 1991 through February 29, 1996, was to be done at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-f)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
UPI reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had detected gas clouds that appear to be from the universe's early day much nearer Earth than previously thought possible. NASA also released pictures taken by Hubble of an unusual jet spouting from a massive, unstable star called Eta Carinae, which upset existing ideas about how the star spewed out matter. (UPI, May 17/91)
The Antelope Valley Press quoted John Young, special assistant for engineering, operations, and safety at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston as saying that for NASA to land Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center instead of Edwards Air Force Base in California posed an increased risk. Although the Florida landing saved NASA the cost of ferrying a Shuttle back from California and the five to seven days involved, Florida weather was more problematic. Furthermore, Edwards had more runway alternatives whereas Kennedy had only one. John E. Pike, space policy analyst for the Federation of American Scientists said NASA should wait on Florida landings till all Shuttles were equipped with drag chutes to slow them down. (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 9/91)
Per Gloersen, a senior scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was quoted by the media as reporting in the British publication Nature findings concerning the shrinking of the polar ice cover. Global warming might be the cause, but Gloersen said 30 years of records would be needed for a definite conclusion. (UPI, Jul 3/91; B Sun, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; W Post, Jul 8/91)
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)
An article on the Hubble Space Telescope commented that despite its flawed main mirror, the teamwork of the Hubble operational team combined with elaborate computer processing had enabled a rich scientific harvest. (CSM, Feb 20/91)
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)
NASA announced that the second mission of the Pegasus air-launched space booster was scheduled for July 17. Pegasus was to be launched from below the wing of a NASA B-52 aircraft based at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Pegasus was to carry seven small Defense Department satellites for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and put them into low Earth orbit. (NASA Release N91-49)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA researchers produced various vegetables in their imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The experiment, designed to prepare for Space Station existence, could not, however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Times, Aug 18/91)
NASA engineers studied a tiny crack on the hinge mechanism of Shuttle Atlantis but planned to go ahead with a launch in April. Atlantis was scheduled to ferry into orbit the Gamma Ray Observatory, a Hubble Space Telescope-class astronomical instrument built to study extremely high energy radiation from deep space. (NASA Release, "STS-37 Mission Advisory"; UPI, Mar 6/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced plans to create a new Office of Space Flight Development. This would allow the existing Office of Space Flight to concentrate on the safety and efficiency of space flight. (NASA Release 91-148)
Former astronaut Michael Collins in his new book, Mission to Mars, said that he believed homosexuals and lesbians should be barred from space exploration because they would be likely to create interpersonal problems. NASA never considered sexual orientation in hiring. (AP, Apr 9/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, Apr 9/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly gave an interview to Space News about NASA's role in promoting space education and the agency's future plans. One of the difficulties is attracting greater numbers of women and minorities. He discussed NASA's plan to establish a new office of human resources and the need for more people schooled in Earth sciences.  In an editorial in the same issue, the publication commended NASA for its attention to education in high-technology fields and efforts to recruit women and minorities. It also pointed out the number of laid off workers in the aerospace industry as a result of the sharp downturn in the defense industry as potential employees in the space field. (Space News, Feb 4-10/91)
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
The Los Angeles Times covered the fifth annual Conference on Small Satellites, held at Utah State University. Most of the scientists and engineers attending favored NASA using smaller satellites for specific goals rather than larger spacecraft, which they believed to be NASA's trend. (LA Times, Sep 2/91)
William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said NASA hoped to cut the operating cost of its Space Shuttle program by 15 percent over a five-year period. It planned to do this by eliminating a layer of management and merging the offices of the Program Directorate in Washington, Level I, with the Program Office located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Level II. The reorganization plan as yet lacked final approval. (W Times, Dec 13/91; Fla Today, Dec 13/91)
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)
The media discussed plans for NASA's next Shuttle flight, that of Discovery in September to deploy a satellite to study the ozone layer in Earth's upper atmosphere. Discovery was moved to the launch pad, and various systems were connected to prepare for a practice countdown. (UPI, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91)
The media reported a study contained in the British journal Nature, written by Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California, Christopher P. McKay, who also worked at Ames, and James F. Kasting, associate professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State University. The authors concluded it would be relatively easy to alter Mars' atmosphere to make it suitable for plants. Making the planet fit for people, however, would take about 100,000 years. (P Inq, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; C Trin, Aug 8/91; LA Times, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91)
An article critical of NASA for emphasizing space at the expense of the domestic aviation industry appeared in the Los Angeles Times. An example cited was Boeing's need to use a wind tunnel research facility operated by the Royal Aerospace Establishment in Britain to test its new top-secret 777 passenger jet because NASA had shut its decrepit wind tunnel in Sunnyvale, south of San Francisco. The aeronautics community reportedly felt neglected because only 6 percent of NASA's budget was allocated to aeronautics. As a result, there was little government support for research and development in U.S. general aviation, which has suffered in relation to government support given by other countries to their aviation industries. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
The media discussed Forrest McCartney's being asked by NASA to step aside as head of the Kennedy Space Center so that he could be replaced by Robert Crippen. McCartney said he would have liked to stay on another year, but this was not possible. (W Post, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 2/91; UPI, Nov 2/91; NY Times, Nov 3/91; SP News, Nov 4-10/91; O Sen Star, Nov 9/91)
NASA announced a recent agreement between its Office of Commercial Programs and the University of Alabama, Huntsville (UAH), that would provide additional flight research opportunities on the Space Shuttle for NASA's 17 Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). In support of this, Instrumentation Technology Associates, Inc., Exton, Pennsylvania, signed a commercial agreement with UAH to provide the university's Consortium for Materials Development in Space CCDS, with flight hardware that would be flown on five Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 91-203)
The Aerospace Industries Association said on December 11 that the U.S. aerospace industry would post record sales of $140 billion in 1991, but that employment during the year dropped 8 percent to 1.16 million workers. (LA Times, Dec 12/91)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, announced that it had selected BAMSI, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a $140 million preventive and remedial maintenance and services contract. (NASA Release C91-u)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had made a supplemental agreement to the contract with McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California. The modification included the changes made in Space Station Freedom Program review activities. (NASA Release 91-124)
UPI reported that NASA managers reviewed plans to resume routine Shuttle landings at the Kennedy Space Center. The unpredictability of Florida's coastal weather was at issue but it was felt that improvements NASA made in the Shuttle fleet were such that routine landings could now occur. (UPI, Jun 19/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
A tiny crack was found on one of the substitute Shuttle hinges sent from Endeavour to spaceship Discovery. Dr. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said the crack was too small to be a cause for concern. (NY Times, Mar 15/91; W Times, Mar 15/91; USA Today, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91
According to AP, the National Research Council endorsed NASA's planned Earth Observation System, which it called "the largest single component of the most ambitious scientific enterprise ever undertaken." The Council stated it had some concern over the program's management, however, and urged the earth science and space research community to keep a close eye on the program. (AP, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 13/91)
Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator, of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, testified before the House Science Subcommittee that the redesign of Space Station Freedom had limited the scope of the laboratory, eliminating experiments in astronomy, physics, and earth sciences. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
The California Institute of Technology and the University of California, with funding from the W.M. Keck Foundation, were preparing to build a new $93.3 million Keck II telescope in 1992 on top of Hawaii's Mauna Kea volcano, adjacent to the Keck I being completed. Foundation chairman Howard B. Keck announced that the foundation would pay $74.6 million for the second telescope. Edward C. Stone, director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said scientists were sure NASA would get Congressional approval to finance the remainder. The linked telescopes, according to Stone, "can explore the origin of the visible universe by peering back to the first 1 billion to 2 billion years after the Big Bang, when we believe that galaxies began to form out of the residue of the Big Bang." (C Trin, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 27/91; NY Times, Apr 27/91; LA Times, Apr 27/91; W Post, Apr 27/91; CSM, Apr 29/91)
The media reported on the "spectacular" nature for some viewers but confusing for some telescopes of the total solar eclipse. Drake Deming of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt said his team was up most of the night but succeeded in time in solving a problem with one of their instruments. (AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 12/91)
The same publication discussed the way in which Michael Griffin, described as "NASA's new moon/Mars czar," was shaking up NASA's space exploration initiative. Reportedly, Griffin wanted to move fast on launching a "relatively inexpensive, high-visibility space mission," such as sending an unmanned spacecraft to scout for a permanent base on the moon. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
NASA's goal was to deploy two Space Shuttle missions during April: Atlantis on April 5 and Discovery on April 25. The last two-launching month was January 1986. In addition to launching the Gamma Ray Observatory, the Atlantis flight would feature a spacewalk by Jerry Ross and Jap Apt. (NY Times, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; LA Times, Apr 4/91; B Sun, Apr 5/91;  W Post, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91)
William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, announced that NASA was sending Space Shuttle Discovery from the launch pad back to the hangar to repair cracked door hinges. Shuttle director Robert Crippen said Discovery should be ready to fly in late April or early May. (AP, Feb 28/91; P Inq, Mar 1/91; NY Times. Mar 1/91; WSJ, Mar 1/91; W Times, Mar 1/91; USA Today, Mar 1/91; W Post, Mar 1/91; UPI, Mar 1/91)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director John M. Klineberg announced that Peter T. Burr had been named Deputy Director of the center. Burr had served as Director of Flights Projects at Goddard since August 1989. (NASA Release 91-28)
NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft, mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar, had discovered the longest channel known in the solar system, 4,200 miles long. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, said it was not known what formed the channel. (NASA Release 91-141; LA Times, Aug 30/91; UPI, Aug 30/91)
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
NASA announced the selection of Lawrence J. DeLucas of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and Eugene H. Trinh of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to fly as payload specialists on the first U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission, scheduled for June 1992. (NASA Release 91-66)
NASA was considering repairs costing at least $50 million to the Hubble Space Telescope. In addition to the telescope proper, the question was whether to compensate for flaws in three other instruments: two spectrographs and the faint-object camera. Such repairs would involve Costar (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement) and cost $30 million to $40 million, while the telescope repair cost would be $14 million. To test the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water tank at Marshall Space Flight Center would determine whether the work could be accomplished in the estimated 16 hours required. Despite the need for such repairs, Edward Weller (Wiler?), NASA program scientist for the observatory, stressed the achievements the Hubble telescope had made in revealing the universe. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; B Sun, Apr 23/91; Birmingham News, Apr 23/91; AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91)
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)
NASA announced that the next Shuttle launch, scheduled for late February, would be delayed until early March in order to replace three thrusters used to steer the ship in orbit. During the eight-day flight, the 44 thrusters would be used to maneuver the ship into unusual positions. The ship's re-entry engines also would be fired so a satellite temporarily placed in orbit could observe the rocket exhaust plumes. The aim was better identification of the plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. NASA also displayed the Gamma Ray Observatory scheduled to be carried into orbit in early April. (P Inq, Jan 30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Today, Jan 30/91; AP, Jan 30/91; NY Times, Jan 31/91)
Florida Today published figures of Kennedy Space Center spending for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1991. The center spent $1.42 billion in Florida, an increase of 3.6 percent over the previous year. Of that amount, $1.03 billion  went for on-site contractors. (Fla Today, Oct 30/91)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, mounted atop NASA's Boeing 747 Shuttle carrier, began its two-day flight back to Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (AP, Dec 7/91; W Times, Dec 8/91)
The United Nations (U.N.) reported that the world's ozone layer, particularly over the Antarctic, was thinner than ever and the "hole" over the Antarctic was increasing. However, U.N. scientist Ruman Bojkov said the U.S. Space Shuttle Challenger had not significantly contributed to the situation. Readings were taken by NASA satellites and ground-based spectrometers and the data analyzed by international scientists convened by the U.N. Environment Program and the World Meteorological Organization. Subsequently Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly said "The problem is more serious than we believed." (UPI, Oct 22/91; P Inq, Oct 23/91; W Post, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; WSJ, Oct 23/91; CSM, Oct 23/91; W Times, Oct 23/91; B Sun, Oct 23/91; LA Times, Oct 23/91)
While commending Jay Apt's and Jerry Ross's work in freeing the jammed antenna of the Gamma Ray Observatory during their Atlantis mission, an editorial commentator advocated a rethinking of spaceflight goals and greater realism. (CSM, Apr 17/91)
The Sunnyvale, California City Council approved a position paper prepared by the Moffett Field Committee, composed of representatives of NASA's Ames Research Center, and several neighboring city councils and chambers of commerce. The paper proposed that if Congress approved closing the Moffett Field Naval Air Station, NASA operate the field instead to ensure that research and transport activities continue. (San Jose Mercury News, Apr 17/91; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 18/91)
An article about the colorful sunsets along the California coast referred to the effects of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. According to Francisco Valero, chief of atmospherics research at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, Pinatubo probably spewed some 16 million tons of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, causing the spectacular sunsets. However, the aftereffects were that the cloud of sulfuric acid droplets could further accelerate the depletion of the ozone layer. (P Inq, Aug 3/91)
An article in Florida Today referred to former NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's proposal that some 100 top Shuttle program managers around the country be moved to Kennedy Space Center under a consolidation plan NASA was considering. The recommendations were to be discussed at a December 9-10 meeting with NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (Fla Today, Nov 15/91)
NASA stated that Endeavour would not be convoyed through Lancaster as previous Shuttles were, but instead would fly via a 747 jet to Houston's Johnson Space Center. There a dedication ceremony would be held before Endeavour was flown to Florida to prepare for its mission. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 28/91)
William J. O'Neil, manager of the $1.4 billion Galileo project at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said Galileo fired its thrusters to put it on a course to take it close to the asteroid Gaspra on October 29. (AP, Oct 10/91; W Times, Oct 10/91; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
Scuba divers exercising on an underwater treadmill at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, are helping gather data to be used in NASA's spacesuit design. (NASA Release 91-11)
NASA spokeswoman Vera Hirschberg said former American University president Richard Berenzen was working for Booz-Allen and Hamilton in investigating the societal benefits of the Space Exploration Initiative on behalf of NASA. (AP, Mar 11/91)
Robert Brown and Riccardo Giacconi of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore wrote an article favoring NASA's shift toward a more balanced program of small, intermediate, and large missions. The reason was that important research goals must be pursued with appropriate tools, including large spacecraft. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope, which was proving so valuable, needed a larger spacecraft as was to be the case with the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility under development. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
Joseph Stickle, chief engineer at NASA's Langley Research Center, was quoted in connection with NASA's role in promoting small planes. He said that the annual convention of the Experimental Aircraft Association, held in Oshkosh, Wisconsin, was a place where NASA featured its innovations that would make small planes safer, such as a spin-resistant design, lightning-protection technology, or airfoils. (WSJ, Dec 12/91)
NASA announced that its research plane F-16XL demonstrated laminar airflow over a significant part of its wing while flying at supersonic speeds. This could increase flight efficiency and reduce fuel consumption. The experiment occurred in a series of 28 flights at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. In this connection, the New York Times wrote about wind shear problems faced by aircraft, leading to airline disasters, and NASA's work on three predictive systems made by Lockheed Corporation, Rockwell International, and Turbulence Prediction Systems. (NASA Release 91-188; Daily Press, Newport News, Nov 20/91; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 21/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, awarded Metric Constructors, Inc., of Tampa, a $56,215,000 contract to build the Space Station Processing Facility. The 457,000-square-foot facility was to contain preflight and processing points for Space Station Freedom as well as 63,000 square feet of dedicated payload processing space. (NASA Release C91-h)
The New York Times cited a report by Jean O. Dickey, a geodesist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and Raymond Hide, a geophysicist at Oxford, published in the journal Science. They analyzed the rotation of the earth, which is fitfully and almost imperceptibly slowing. More accurate measurements than in the past were possible by bouncing laser signals off quartz reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts. (NY Times, Aug 9/91)
Dr. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that Magellan to date had mapped more than 58 percent of Venus, including Aphrodite Terra, the largest of the highland regions. Various hypotheses exist regarding the formation of the different "continents" on Venus, and the mapping should clarify the situation. (NASA Release 91-31)
NASA announced that on July 15 at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, NASA's F/A-18 High-Alpha Research Vehicle maneuvered in flight for the first time using a specially designed thrust vectoring system. Such research flights were to continue over the next two years and were designed to make future jet fighters safer. (NASA Release 91-123)
NASA announced that the last of three SR-71 aircraft, loaned to NASA by the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to arrive at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, in late July. The Antelope Valley Press earlier reported the successful check flight of the Blackbird on July 10, prior to delivery to the NASA facility. The "Blackbirds" were to be used for high-speed, high altitude research in such areas as aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, and thermal protection materials. (NASA Release 91-111; Antelope Valley Press, Jul 11/91)
The Chicago Tribune reported that Northwestern University scientists had discovered a process called sputtering that can coat hardened steel with titanium nitride films a few microns thick and double its hardness. The computer-controlled system was built for Northwestern's Basic Industrial Research Laboratory (BIRL) in a project that also involved funds from NASA and the Department of Energy. (C Trin, Jul 28/91)
NASA further announced the selection of two additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These were the Center for the Commercial Development of Space in Satellite and Hybrid Communication Networks, University of Maryland Systems Research Center, College Park, and the Space Communications Technology Center, Florida Atlantic University Research Corporation, Boca Raton. In an unrelated action, NASA and Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, agreed to discontinue the Center for Space Processing of Engineering Materials because of decline in research by metals producers. (NASA Release 91-166; B Sun, Oct 10/91)
NASA's launch of the UARS satellite to study the ozone layer was covered extensively by the media. The launch was slightly delayed by communications hitches between ground and the satellite and communications difficulties continued after the launch. Later reports, however, indicated controllers had succeeded in getting the faulty data receiver to work. On September 16 the Discovery temporarily had to move to a lower orbit to avoid possible collision with an old Soviet rocket. (NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91; P Inq, Sep 15/91; W Post, Sep 15/91; AP, Sep 15/91; UPI, Sep 15/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 16/91; USA Today, Sep 16/91; W Post, Sep 16/91; W Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91; P Inq, Sep 17/91)
The Washington Times reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center near Houston had 842 pounds of moon rocks brought back by 12 moonwalkers on six Apollo flights between 1969 and 1972. The rocks are loaned to scientific groups for study. Each nation in the world also has a small piece of moon rock, sent at President Nixon's instruction in the early 1970s. (W Times, May 24/91)
NASA's Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Experiments Program Manager Dean Olmstead expressed NASA's pleasure that the U.S. Army had joined NASA to conduct various ACTS experiments. ACTS forms the center of NASA's satellite communications research and development efforts. (PR Newswire, Aug 20/91)
Final approval was given for the construction of a new visitors' center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The Manned Space Flight Education Foundation helped raise funds for the $60 million structure. (AP, Apr 12/91)
NASA announced the development by its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, of a new, more accurate, airborne radar system for topographic mapping of the Earth's surface. The instrument, called TOPSAR for topographic synthetic aperture radar, would be about three times more accurate than existing topographic mappers and had many commercial and scientific uses, according to Howard Zebker of the Pasadena laboratory. (NASA Release 91-205)
According to AP, antennas on six major spacecraft had malfunctioned during the preceding 17 months, threatening the crucial flow of information from missions. Accordingly engineers conducted extra reviews of antennas on Atlantis. Henry Hoffman, guidance and control chief at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said part of the problem was that antennas were increasingly large and complex, requiring folding for launch and problems arose when they were extended or unfolded. (AP, Aug 4/91)
According to Florida Today, the Atlantis astronauts were scheduled to arrive at Kennedy Space Center in a few days, to begin preparations and a practice countdown for the Space Shuttle flight. (Fla Today, Oct 28/91; UPI, Oct 31/91)
A U.N.-sponsored study, the committee for which was co-chaired by Robert Watson, a NASA scientist, provided the first evidence of a summertime thinning of the Earth's protective ozone layer over parts of the Northern Hemisphere, including the United States. The findings were based on both ground and satellite data, according to Watson in a briefing. Evidence showed 3 percent of the summertime ozone layer and 6 percent of the wintertime ozone layer were lost over the middle-latitude regions during the 1980s; similar results were expected for the 1990s.
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce as Deputy Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. He had served as Director of Aerospace Technology at Lewis since 1984. (NASA Release 91-65)
The Antelope Valley Daily News reported that NASA might be flying one of the Advanced Tactical Fighters, namely the F-23 prototype, about which it was negotiating with Northrop Corporation. The aircraft would be used for aeronautics research at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Jul 7/91)
The New York Times reported that Edward C. Aldridge Jr., president of McDonnell Douglas Electronic Systems, who served on the National Space Council that made recommendations on NASA's programs, was to become president and chief executive of Aerospace, a federally financed research and development center in El Segundo, California. (NY Times, Dec 19/91)
NASA announced that the spacecraft Galileo would execute a trajectory correction maneuver on March 20 to help aim it for the first-ever flyby of an asteroid next October. To perform the maneuver, Galileo would fire its small thrusters on and off during a three and one half hour period, thus changing its speed about five miles per hour. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, manages the Galileo project. (NASA Release 91-43)
The Government Accounting Office issued a study criticizing NASA's system of testing spacecraft before launching. It called the system poorly organized with testing practices varying from one center to another because NASA lacked uniform policies. The study dealt with the Hubble Space Telescope and the weather satellites, as well as Space Shuttles. (AP, Sep 23/91; UPI, Sep 23/91; LA Times, Sep 23/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; WSJ, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had completed one year of operation on April 25. Joseph H. Rothenberg, Associate Director of Flight Projects for Hubble Space Telescope at Goddard, summarized the Hubble's achievements. These included the taking of various images and presentation of data from observations at key scientific meetings. Scientists planned to compensate for the spherical aberration by modifying the telescope's replacement instruments. These included the placement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II in 1993 and further servicing plans during astronaut space walks. (NASA Release - Hubble Space Telescope; LA Times, Apr 29/91)
NASA scientist Thomas J. Miller said NASA would establish a Nuclear Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center in early 1991 to develop nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. The Defense and Energy departments would join in this project; the NASA FY 1991 budget included about $1 million for nuclear propulsion development. Such propulsion could significantly reduce the time required from Earth to the moon or Mars. (AvWk, Jan 7/91)
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) ordered an independent engineering review of NASA's plans for the Earth Observing System to study global climate change. An Administration official said OMB wanted an assessment of the advisability of large, complex satellites and of the specific sensors and launch plans. (AvWk, Feb 18/91)
The Hubble Space Telescope proved more useful than expected despite the flaw in its mirror. The congressional appropriation of an additional $30 million in NASA's 1991 budget allowed some repairs to be made from the ground using computer processing and radio control. NASA plans additional repairs by astronauts in 1993, attaching new mirrors to the outside of the telescope. (W Times, Apr 11/91)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected the team of General Electric Corporation, Cincinnati, and United Technologies Pratt and Whitney Divsion, West Palm Beach, Florida, for a contract for propulsion materials to be used on a 21st century High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C91-z)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute announced the cosponsorship of a conference on Advanced Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Technologies at the Cleveland Convention Center September 4-6. The conference is to be part of the Lewis Center's 50th anniversary celebration. (NASA Release 91-140)
Extensive media coverage preceded the scheduled launching of Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12. The countdown was planned to begin on September 9, but the discovery of a leak in the orbital steering system might delay the mission. The flight was to be the first in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program and was to place into orbit the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The UARS was to carry 10 scientific instruments, of which four would study the ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 8/91; W Post, Sep 8/91; NY Times, Sep 8/91; P Inq, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 9/91; W Times, Sep 9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B Sun, Sep 10/91; NY Times, Sep 10/91; P Inq, Sep 10/91; W Times, Sep 10/91; LA Times, Sep 10/91; AP, Sep 10/91; UPI, Sep 10/91)
The Baltimore Sun quoted Anne Thompson, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center with reference to the interconnectedness of the atmosphere's mounting problems: global warming, ozone depletion, and smog. As examples she pointed out that some hydroxyl-enhancing gases contributed to acid rain; others contributed to the greenhouse effect, while at the same time, hydroxyl played a vital role in stemming depletion of the Earth's ozone layer. (B Sun, Nov 9/91)
The New York Times cited the recent issue of Nature with articles by NASA scientists and others on the possibility of using advanced technologies to make Mars's environment more terrestrial and thus hospitable to humans. A May issue of Life magazine was also cited as evidence of growing scientific interest in the potential habitability of Mars. Nevertheless, serious obstacles remained, in addition to the tremendous costs that would be involved. (NYT, Oct 1/91)
NASA announced that scientists and engineers at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, successfully tested the mini-rover Rocky III in the Avawatz Mountains south of Death Valley. The mini-rover, weighing 52 pounds, was designed to be used on Mars. (NASA Release 91-153; Bus Wk, Sep 9/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston announced the award of a contract to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, modifying the Space Station Freedom Program Integration Support (Schedule B) contract. Schedule B involved the integration of Space Station components. (NASA Release C91-nn)
NASA announced the selection of PacificCorp Capital, Inc., Reston, Virginia, for a contract for Institutional Automatic Data Processing (IADP). IADP was to support the Johnson Space Center, Houston, and the White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico. (NASA Release C91-p)
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)
Parade Magazine contained a feature article on Barbara Morgan, who following the death of Christa McAuliffe in the Challenger disaster, was her designated successor as NASA's teacher in space. NASA Administrator Richard Truly was quoted as saying that after NASA's annual review of the subject, it was determined that it was not yet appropriate to send another teacher on the Shuttle although it was only a matter of time. Morgan stated she recognized the risks of space flight but was nevertheless eager to go ahead with a flight mission. (Parade, Jul 14/91)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, feared it might be necessary to send a communications satellite to Jupiter to relay Galileo's discoveries to earth. It would take three years for such a satellite to reach Jupiter, assuming funding were available. However, the engineers still hoped to resolve the problem of the failure of Galileo's high-gain antenna to open properly. Six nearly identical antennas were used on NASA's primary communications satellites without encountering problems. (LA Times, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 28/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; NY Times, Apr 30/91)
According to AP, the Hubble Space Telescope presents astrophysicists with a mystery: the existence of hydrogen clouds in space that should have dissipated billions of years ago. According to Ed Weiler, NASA's space telescope program manager, this was Hubble's most significant finding to date. (AP, Oct 23/91)
NASA announced that researchers from its Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, would use satellite and airborne instruments to measure the surface elevation of polar glaciers. The program was designed to aid scientists determine ice buildup or melting resulting from global climate change. The program is to occur in Greenland between August 23 and September 16. (NASA Release 91-133)
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)
The Washington Post discussed the success of NASA engineers in fixing the computer software "bug" that caused spacecraft Magellan, after its arrival at Venus, to lose contact with Earth. Magellan mission director James Scott of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California confirmed that the problem was solved and possible similar flaws in other space programs were being eliminated. (W Post, Aug 18/91)
Nature quoted scientists at NASA's Atmospheric Sciences Division in Hampton, Virginia, as reporting that forest fires--previously thought to be a major source of nitrous oxide--actually produce only about 7 percent of the amount in the atmosphere. The importance of the source of nitrous oxide relates to its action in the destruction of Earth's ozone layer. (W Post, Feb 25/91)
According to the Washington Post, new findings of astronomers tended to indicate that the universe was both smaller and younger than previously thought. The result, if the Hubble Space Telescope should be able to provide accurate readings on the matter, might prove that the calculations of the Hubble constant (regarding the age and size of the universe) needed to be revised. (W Post, Sep 30/91)
Officials of the European Space Agency and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that scientific teams concerned with the Ulysses mission to the poles of the sun were preparing for physics investigations during Ulysses's forthcoming encounter with Jupiter. Ulysses was expected to reach Jupiter and its satellites on February 8, 1992, and make a two-week sweep past the planet. (NASA Release 91-82)
NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced that it had selected Johnson Controls World Services, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, for a JSC plant maintenance and operation support contract. (NASA Release C91-q)
NASA's Soft X-ray Telescope aboard the Japanese Solar-A spacecraft launched from Japan's Kagoshima Space Center on August 30, made its first X-ray images of the sun. The purpose of the mission was to produce pictures of the genesis and life of solar flares to enable scientists to learn more about them. (W Times, Oct 3/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
The Christian Science Monitor commended NASA for naming the orbiting Gamma Ray Observatory the Arthur Holly Compton Gamma Ray Observatory because of the late Nobel Prize laureate's studies of the subject. Moreover, the renaming focused attention on one of NASA's "outstandingly successful missions." (CSM, Oct 9/91)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
The Huntsville Times indicated that NASA and consumers in general had much in common, namely a situation of being caught in a recession when careful budgeting was necessary. Nonetheless, many NASA programs, such as Magellan's probe of Venus, and the Hubble Space Telescope, were continuing their good work. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 17/91)
Lennard Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator, announced that the two largest mirrors for NASA's Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility have been successfully tested in the new X-ray Calibration Facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-145)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) sponsored a workshop of scientists, environmentalists, regulators, and aerospace industry representatives the summer of 1991. As a result, a report was issued on October 17, concluding that rockets blasting into space generate pollutants that deplete stratospheric ozone, increase acid rain, contribute to global warming, and reduce air quality. Jerry Grey, science and technology policy director for the AIAA, said all nations that launch rocket-powered vehicles should contribute to an international effort to reduce the problems. The United States used more solid rockets than any other nation. For example, NASA estimated that each Space Shuttle flight deposited about 75 tons of chlorine into the ozone layer. Subsequently, Reuters interviewed Steve Newmann, chief environmental engineer in NASA's Office of Space Flight. He admitted NASA played a minor role in depleting the ozone layer it was studying but said NASA was working to make its next generation of space vehicles more environmentally friendly. (NY Times, Oct 18/91; B Sun, Oct 28/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
NASA announced that in conjunction with the Federal Aviation Administration it would sponsor an international government/industry workshop on aircraft icing. The workshop is to be held at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, which has the Lewis Icing Research Tunnel, the world's largest refrigerated icing tunnel. (NASA Note to Editors N91-75)
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
The media reported an article in the journal Science, indicating that despite reports of global warming and African drought, the Sahara desert shrank markedly since 1984, following a substantial expansion over the preceding four years. Two NASA scientists, Compton J. Tucker and William W. Newcomb, at NASA's Laboratory for Terrestrial Physics in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Tech University's International Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Land Studies, conducted the research. Satellite measurements of vegetation on the ground were used to calculate the extent of the desert. (AP, Jul 18/91; NASA Release 91-114; W Post, Jul 21/91; P Inq, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91)
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
News editor Budd McLaughlin of the Huntsville News denied the blame placed on the media by Jack Lee, director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, for NASA's poor public image. (Huntsville News, Apr 1/91)
NASA program scientist Edward Weiler said in a telephone interview with UPI that an emergency Shuttle mission to replace faulty gyroscopes and solar panels aboard the Hubble Space Telescope was not needed before a flight already set for 1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NASA engineers were perfecting computer control software that would stabilize the telescope if all its gyroscopes were to fail, until a Shuttle repair mission were mounted. (UPI, Aug 23/91)
Scientists from several US government and university laboratories reported finding the rare atmospheric isotope Beryllium-7 present on the surface of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF). Dr. Gerald J. Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, commented on the significance as twofold: to date the isotope is known as produced at much lower altitudes than the LDEF was orbiting; and only one atmospheric gas, atomic oxygen, is previously known as interacting with orbiting spacecraft. The LDEF was returned from space by Space Shuttle Columbia in January 1990 after nearly six years in Earth orbit and was still being analyzed. The LDEF program was managed by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-30)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected RMS Technologies, Inc., of Landover, Maryland, for a contract for the computing, communication, and network mission needs of the center. (NASA Release C91-y)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of an extension to the United Technologies Corporation's Hamilton Standard Division's Extravehicular Mobility Unit hardware contract. (NASA Release C91-rr)
According to AP, the Shuttle Columbia left California on a piggyback jet ride to its home at Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (AP, Jun 19/91)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, for a $140 million support service contract for center operations. (NASA Release C91-n)
NASA announced some of the results of its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), built by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. The LDEF was in a space environment from April 1984 to January 1990, with various materials samples and experiments on board. The 57 science and technology experiments gathered data on space radiation, atomic oxygen, meteoroids, contamination, space debris, space systems, and life sciences. Implications of LDEF results were being used in the design of lunar bases and Mars-bound aircraft. (NASA Release 91-113)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an Air Force-funded research center in El Segundo, California, was to begin in the fall to study the effect of rocket launches on the Earth's fragile ozone shield. Aerospace Corporation planned to investigate the role of solid rocket fuel combustion in the destruction of the zone. These studies would supplement studies of ozone depletion done by NASA and would likely influence the types of fuels to be used in the National Launch System, a new generation of rockets scheduled for use after the year 2000. (LA Times, Jul 25/91)
Gerald Fishman, a NASA astrophysicist at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced at a conference of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle that the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) carried on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory was detecting gamma-ray bursts with greater sensitivity than previously. (NASA Release 91-81; UPI, May 28/91)
Marshall Space Flight Center Director Jack Lee told the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce that the news media were to blame for NASA's bad image during the preceding year. In discussing Marshall's economic impact on the area, Lee cited increases in its budget, which had risen from $1.8 billion in 1983 to a requested $3.6 billion in fiscal 1992. Of this amount, an estimated $1.08 billion would be spent in Alabama. Moreover, Marshall civil service and contractor employees represented about 12 percent of the total Huntsville population. (Hntsv Tms, Mar 26/91)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, began analyzing the photos of Venus produced by the Magellan Spacecraft. JPL operates Magellan for NASA. The pictures show a tortured landscape featuring extreme volcanism, particularly surface bulges 30 to 140 miles wide called "arachnoids." (LA Times, Feb 4/91)
NASA announced the appointment of Leonard S. Nicholson as Director, Space Shuttle program, replacing Robert L. Crippen who is to be Director, Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 91-208; AP, Dec 16/91; W Times, Dec 17/91; USA Today, Dec 17/91; Fla Today, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91)
NASA announced it would be a major participant in the multi-agency High Performance Computing and Communication (HPCC) to begin in FY 1992. NASA had the lead role in coordinating interagency software and algorithm research and development. In this connection, NASA would buy advanced test beds from industry and use test beds developed by the Department of Defense to evaluate and build initial applications. NASA would also develop software to solve major computational challenges involved with robotic design and control. NASA centers would be equipped with the latest network communications to support the National Research and Education Network and NASA would expand the HPCC research program of NASA-funded research institutes and through NASA grants to universities.
NASA announced that a soccer ball-shaped carbon molecule might be the perfect propellant for a spacecraft engine that produced thrust by expelling charged atoms or molecules. Stephanie D. Leifer, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, and Winston A. Saunders of the California Institute of Technology proposed to use the molecule Carbon 60 as a fuel in ion engines. (NASA Release 91-197)
The Department of Energy requested $30 million to create a new space exploration program relating to civilian space activities. The new request brought the Energy Department's 1992 budget request for space exploration to $142 million, compared with NASA's $94 million. Some experts and officials saw the Energy Department's role in space as desirable, both to prevent NASA's monopoly and because the Department maintained active technology development programs whereas NASA allowed its technology research and development to wither as it struggled with existing programs. (W Post, Apr 30/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the work of its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the arcjet thruster technology had been selected for station keeping use on AT&T's Telstar 4 communications satellites. Arcjet systems offer a significant improvement in propellant use over chemical and other electrically augmented thrusters, thus increasing the satellite's on-orbit lifetime or payload mass. (NASA Release 91-40)
NASA announced that its latest target in efforts to understand the global climate and predict future patterns are the cirrus clouds. In mid-November, atmospheric scientists from NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, to lead were researchers to Coffeyville, Kanasas, where ground, airborne, and satellite measurement platforms were to conduct intensive cirrus cloud investigation for 25 days. (NASA Release 91-187)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Paris Observatory, using data from the Voyager 1 spacecraft, for the first time had described an anti-greenhouse effect on a solar system body. In an article in Science magazine, they also described the temperature structure and energy balance on Titan, Saturn's largest moon. (NASA Release 91-143)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced its selection of Fairchild Space, Germantown, Maryland, for a contract to provide engineering support services for the Space Technology Division. (NASA Release C91-w)
NASA postponed the landing of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of high winds at Edwards Air Force Base in California and bad weather at the alternate landing site of Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (P Inq, Apr 11/91; B Sun, Apr 11/91; W Post, Apr 11/91; W Times, Apr 11/91; NY Times, Apr 11/91; USA Today, Apr 11/91; AP, Apr 11/91; UPI, Apr 11/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that based on a recent policy review, NASA's Space Flight Participant Program would be kept in abeyance until 1992. NASA previously had indicated that when the program resumed, first priority would be given to a teacher in space in fulfillment of space education plans. (NASA Release 91-50; UPI, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91)
NASA announced that a developmental Space Shuttle main engine sustained extensive internal damage while it was undergoing ground testing July 24 at NASA's Stennis Space Center, near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi. The engine differed from engines used in Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 91-118)
Joel S. Levine, a senior research scientist in the Atmospheric Sciences Division of NASA's Langley Research Center, commented on NASA's role in researching the contribution of fires to the "greenhouse effect." He indicated that the oil well fires in Kuwait could be the largest single contributor to this effect. However, forest fires and agricultural burning actually provided more carbon dioxide. NASA scientists studying the problem use satellite findings in their analyses. (Daily Press, Mar 10/91)
The Soviet Union used the name of Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space 30 years ago, to boost its emerging commercial space program. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at an opening ceremony in Moscow said Soviet space science and technology were open to international cooperation and called for joint space research with the United States, European countries, China, India, Japan, and others. (AP, Apr 11/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer carried an article about the new issue of Science magazine and its reports on the likely creation of hole in the Arctic ozone. The article quoted Robert Watson, head of NASA's atmospheric ozone program, as saying that Earth's ozone layer was declining as much as 8 percent each decade; scientists previously thought it was only 2 to 4 percent. Also NASA research found that losses occurred in the spring as well as winter, raising concern that ultraviolet radiation might threaten crops, forests, and ecological processes. (P Inq, May 31/91)
A British woman, Helen Sharman, was tentatively selected for the next international space flight with two Soviet cosmonauts to the Mir Space Station. (UPI, Apr 23/91)
A discussion of the robot explorer Magellan's probe of Venus during its 16 months and more than 3,000 orbits, mapping more than 90 percent of the surface, appeared in the Washington Post. Lead scientist Stephen Saunders of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, which manages the mission, was quoted as saying that scientists were looking for "active plate tectonics" such as occur on earth, such as "continental drift." To date, no such discoveries occurred. (W Post, Oct 21/91)
William B. Lenoir said NASA's manned space flight division must cut expenses by 3 percent each year in the next five years to save $1 billion. The last alternative would be to reduce the number of space flights but that would be "a couple of years away." Later media comments indicated that NASA's budgetary discipline and the slimming down of the Space Station plans appeared to be paying off for NASA in relation to Congress. (AP, Oct 5/91; AvWk, Oct 21/91; W Post, Oct 28/91)
An editorial in a space publication stressed the need for space flight to gain some Congressional advocates and for NASA's new launcher plan to be salvaged before it was too late. (SP News, Apr 22-28/91)
NASA rolled the Shuttle Atlantis to a launch pad at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for a scheduled April 6 liftoff. (W Post, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
Engineers began a practice countdown for Space Shuttle Columbia, and the four-man, three woman crew prepared to begin dress rehearsal for a planned May 24 launching. The purpose of the nine-day 11th flight of Columbia was the Spacelab Life Sciences mission, the first spacelab dedicated to life sciences research. The crew were to perform experiments to evaluate the adaptation of humans to space flight as well as to conduct some experiments on animals in a gravity-free environment. The planned experiments were to be conducted in the Spacelab module. (NASA General Release 91-69; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; UPI, May 13/91; AP, May 13/91; B Sun, May 14/91; W Times, May 14/91; USA Today, May 14/91)
Tom McGlynn, a Computer Sciences Corporation software scientist for the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) Science Support Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, described four data analysis systems developed for GRO. The GRO launched by Atlantis carried four instruments designed to study overlapping portions of gamma rays, the highest energy radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
According to Patrick McCormick of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines might cool global temperatures by a few tenths of a degree for as long as five or 10 years. (W Post, Aug 14/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Paul H. Holloway as Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-171)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center was testing a beta version of Com's newest OSI routing software. The software was comparable to that known as Open Shortest Path First, which allows intermediate systems to talk to each other and figure out the best way to send information on the network from point A to point B. (Government Computer News, Apr 1/91)
According to the Washington Post, the Hubble Space Telescope discovered evidence that dying stars can rejuvenate themselves when they collide with each other. The violent collision enables them to be reborn as a younger, brighter star. (W Post, Aug 22/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91)
NASA announced the selection of seven Historically Black Colleges and Universities to receive Core Research Center grants to develop further their research capability and research infrastructure. The institutions were: Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta; Fisk University, Nashville; Florida A&M University, Tallahassee; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia; Howard University, Washington, D.C.; North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro; and Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-193)
James W. McCulla, Director of Media Services, NASA, replied to an op-ed article in the Washington Post by Jessica Mathews, vice president of World Resources Institute. Mathews maintained that there was no justification for the U.S. space exploration program now that the Cold War had ended. McCulla replied that learning more about the universe, Earth systems, and life beyond Earth were significant goals.(W Post, Jan 4/91; P Inq, Jan 4/91)
A space journal article discussed the likelihood of NASA's taking over Moffett Field in California in order to keep the Ames Research Center, which it shares with the Navy, going. Reportedly, NASA was considering such a move if the Defense Department closed the naval air station. The result would be operating a 1,000 acre airfield with two runways more than 8,000 feet long, the largest airfield complex operated by NASA. (AvWk, Jun 24/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company announced it has teamed up with Japanese architectural and engineering firm Shimizu Corporation to develop space exploration technologies for the proposed U.S. lunar/Mars initiative. Each company was to fund its own research, which included applying solar energy on the lunar surface to process materials into useful resources such as oxygen and creating closed system that would recycle most of the products needed for a lunar base or long-term expedition to Mars. (WSJ, Jul 12/91; LA Times, Jul 12/91)
Space Shuttle Columbia, according to AP, began its trip from an assembly building at Kennedy Space Center to the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, a four-mile journey. (AP, May 2/91)
Wayne Littles, head of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center office charged with designing a heavy-lift launch vehicle for military and NASA purposes, commented on work underway. Still in the early stages, the heaviest lift models would carry at least 200,000 to 250,000 pounds. New advanced solid rocket boosters were planned as well as work on developing an unmanned version of the Shuttle, called Shuttle C. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 11/91)
NASA announced that the first mirror for its Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) space observatory was successfully completed at Hughes Danbury Optical System, Danbury, Connecticut, and shipped on June 12 to Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, for assembly. The AXAF observatory was to consist of six nested pairs of mirrors to obtain high resolution x-ray images of the universe. (NASA Release 91-95)
Scientists of NASA's Magellan Project, together with the US Geological Survey, invited the public to propose names of notable women for the many impact craters and large volcanic vents being discovered on Venus. Names sent to Magellan offices at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory were to be compiled for the Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature, a committee of the International Astronomical Union (IAU). The IAU, which makes the final approval, meets only every three years and thus new names cannot be considered until 1994. (NASA Release 91-38; W Times, Mar 22/91; C Trin, Mar 27/91)
NASA announced that the application of its sensor technology led to the development by a Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia team, headed by Allan J. Zuckerwar, of a portable fetal heart monitor. The marketing of this monitor was to be part of the NASA program to transfer the agency's space age technology to the private sector. (NASA Release 91-90)
Lewis Schiff, program coordinator for NASA's High Alpha Technology Program, a cooperative research program at NASA's Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers, announced that tests were underway on an F/A-18 fighter aircraft in the world's largest wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California. (NASA Release 91-92; LA Times, Jun 24/91)
Ellen Stofan, a Magellan scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said the planet Venus may be venting interior heat through giant hot spots called coronae, a form of volcanism. She indicated that Magellan data had revealed many exciting new aspects of coronae. (NASA Release 91-48)
The Daily Press recounted the dedication on October 10 of the 100-ton Variable Density Wind Tunnel as a National Historic Landmark. The ceremony occurred at NASA's Langley Research Center. The wind tunnel was responsible for more efficient wing designs of aircraft and established NASA's predecessor, the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics as a technologically competent organization. (Daily Press, Oct 11/91)
Space Shuttle Endeavour arrived at Kennedy Space Center. Considerable work remained to be done on the Shuttle, including the installation of the three main engines. (AP, May 7/91)
The media reported NASA's announcement that henceforth the Kennedy Space Center in Florida would be a prime Shuttle landing site beginning with Atlantis's mission in July. However, because of Florida's temperamental weather, Shuttles were expected to return to California 60 percent of the time, according to Robert L. Crippen, director of the Space Shuttle program. (AP, Jun 20/91; UPI, Jun 20/91; NYT, Jun 21/91; B Sun, Jun 21/91; LA Times, Jun 21/91)
A space policy analyst for a major aerospace company in California questioned the lack of activity concerning the Strategic Environmental Research Program (SERP). Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat from Georgia, sponsored the program in 1990 to bring vital data and skills from the Defense and Energy departments to bear on problems of environmental research and global warming. The proposal was to select some classified defense satellite data with potential usefulness in global change research, declassify them, and make them available to researchers in global warming. Congress authorized $200 million for SERP in the 1991 Defense Authorization Act, but nothing further was heard. (SP News, Mar 25/91)
RMS Technologies, Inc., Marlton, Pennsylvania, announced it had received a contract from NASA to provide operational support for workstations, other computers, and peripheral equipment at NASA's Lewis Research Center. (P Inq, Jul 24/91)
NASA announced that researchers at its Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, had developed a laser-based system for measuring winds above launch sites. The system called CLAWS, for Coherent Launch Site Atmospheric Wind Sounder, was created by the Spacecraft Controls Branch, Flight Systems Directorate, and Lockheed. CLAWS was used in the September 12 launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and might eventually replace weather balloons as a means of gathering data aloft. (NASA Release 91-206)
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)
NASA announced the selection of 301 research proposals (from 2,583 received) for immediate contract negotiation in NASA's 1991 Small Business Innovation Research Program. While meeting federal research and development needs, the program aims to stimulate technological innovation. (NASA Release 91-184)
The Environmental Quality Permit Board for the state of Mississippi in Jackson approved an air emissions and waste water discharge plan of NASA, needed to test-fire rocket motors at the John C. Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis. Water quality certification remained to be granted. The Board had one opposing vote from the head of the Department of Wild Life because of NASA's plans to fill in 69 acres of wetlands and clear 150 to 200 acres. The official considered this plan contrary to the president's policy that there be no net loss of wetlands. (Poplarville Democrat, Jan 3/91)
NASA announced its selection of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC), Fairfax, Virginia, for a contract to provide ocean color data. These data were to support research performed by the Laboratory of Hydrospheric Processes, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The contract would run for about 7.5 years, of which 2.5 years would be development time and five years of data production. The mission's scientific objective was to measure changes in ocean color that indicate where concentrations of phytoplankton and chlorophyll lie on the surface of the ocean. For global change research, measuring concentrations of phytoplankton are essential in understanding the role of oceans in the global carbon cycle. The phytoplankton's photosynthesis stores vast amounts of carbon and understanding better how oceans store and release carbon will help understand global climate.
NASA announced a number of contract arrangements. A contract extension was awarded to Vitro Corporation of Silver Spring, Maryland, to continue safety and support services at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. NASA further selected Nichols Research Corporation, Huntsville, Alabama, and BDM International, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to compete for a support contract for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. In addition, NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, contracted with Johnson Controls, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida to provide maintenance and operational services at Johnson. (NASA Releases C91-dd, C91ee, C91ff)
NASA's Johnson Space Center announced the award to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, of a modification to the Space Station Freedom Schedule A contract. Schedule A provided hardware components for the Space Station and the modification will encompass the Integration, Test, and Verification Environment and Ada Compiler. (NASA Release C91-pp)
NASA announced that its Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resource Information Services, Inc., both of Mountain View, California, would jointly develop a system to allow firefighters to merge elevation and vegetation data with live pictures of forest fires. This would enable firefighters quickly to "see" through a smoky forest fire and plan their strategy. The three-year, $600,000 project called for NASA to expand existing remote sensing technology and for Terra-Mar to develop portable computer work stations and advanced software. (NASA Release 91-56)
John Guest, a geologist from University College, London, was working at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory on data from the Magellan spacecraft's mission to Venus. Evidence of volcanic action exists although Magellan's mapping mission, begun September 15, 1990, thus far reveal no volcano erupting. (AP, Feb 14/91)
Florida Today reported that Forrest McCartney, who had headed Kennedy Space Center since 1986 would be retiring in about a year. Subsequently, the media reported that McCartney had been asked to step aside early by top NASA managers. (Fla Today, Oct 23/91; UPI, Oct 25/91; AP, Oct 26/91; W Times, Oct 27/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91)
According to the Washington Post, for the fourth time since April, NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena were trying to free the antenna on the robot explorer Galileo. The scientists deduced that three of the 18 ribs of the antenna were stuck in the closed position. Being unable to deliver direct force, they sought to "shake" the structure by alternately heating and cooling it. On December 14-15, NASA tried again to free the jammed antenna without success. (W Post, Dec 15/91; UPI, Dec 16/91; W Post, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91; USA Today, Dec 18/91)
NASA issued a summary fact sheet on its earth science research programs. Past NASA satellite missions used various remote-sensing instruments to study parts of the Earth system. The Coastal Zone Color Scanner on Nimbus-7 observed the biological productivity of the oceans. The Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), on the same satellite, returned 12 years of data on global ozone levels and helped identify the Antarctic "ozone hole." In the 1990s, NASA was to study the interaction of all environmental factors air, water, land, and biological life, that make up the Earth system--to help decision makers understand global environmental trends and protect the planet.
George Rhee, an astronomer at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, in an article in Nature, discussed the observed rate at which space is expanding in all directions, known as the Hubble constant. Rhee stated that new measurement had produced the relatively low value of 50 kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light-years) for the Hubble constant, agreeing with the estimate of Allan R. Sandage of the Carnegie Institution's observatories in Pasadena, California. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
Four Israeli high school students paid a two-week visit to the United States after winning an astrophysics contest in Israel. The competition was sponsored by the National Museum of Science, Planning, and Technology in Haifa to encourage Israeli youth to focus on technology and the sciences.  The students visited Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and NASA's headquarters. (Washington Jewish Week, Apr 11/91)
Magellan project manager Tony Spear at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the spacecraft had completed its objective for the primary phase of the Venus mission more than one month before the end of the first 243-day mapping cycle. Magellan mapped 70 percent of the planet by April 3, and would have mapped 84 percent by May 15. The mission was to be extended to allow Magellan to map the remaining 14 percent, including the south pole. Toward the latter part of its mission it will also acquire gravity data. Magellan's findings, as described in Science magazine, indicated Venus was volcanic and geologically active. (NASA Release 91-49; AP, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; AP, Apr 5/91; NASA Release 91-53)
NASA cleared Space Shuttle Atlantis for launch on April 5 and said the mission would include the first US walk in space in five and one half years. The five-member crew was to deploy the 17-ton Gamma Ray Observatory. (AP, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; P Inq, Mar 28/91; USA Today, Mar 28/91; W Times, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 31/91)
NASA announced that investigations of the sun's fiery outer atmosphere would intensify when the Ulysses spacecraft passed behind the sun on August 21. Edward J. Smith, Project Scientist for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that at conjunction (when the spacecraft and Earth are on opposite sides of the sun), radio waves transmitted from the spacecraft would travel through and become distorted by the innermost region of the corona. (NASA Release 91-131)
NASA announced the selection of nine scientists as team members in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Microwave Observing Project. The SETI project has two elements: Targeted Search and Sky Survey. The Targeted Search was to use the largest available antennas and search over a 1 to 3 gigahertz (GHz) frequency range, looking for patterns that could indicate an artificially generated signal. The search would conduct the most sensitive search yet conducted of nearby (less than 80 lightyears distant) solar-type stars. The Sky Survey would use the 34-meter antennas of NASA's Deep Space Network sites to scan the whole sky over a 1 to 10 GHz frequency range. The survey could detect signals from the vicinity of distant sunlike stars or from areas beyond the solar-type stars. SETI observations were to begin on Columbus Day 1992, with the Sky Survey deployed at Goldstone, California, and the Targeted Search mounted at the National Science Foundation's Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico.
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)
A column by Robert C. Cowen cited variances in figures for global warming among NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and the University of Alabama at Huntsville from those of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, the Climate Research Unit of East Anglia in England, and the Soviet Union's Hydrometerorological Scientific Research Center. According to the British and the Goddard Institute, 1990 was the warmest year on record globally but according to the Marshall Center, using different data, the hottest years in descending order were 1987, 1988, 1983, and 1990. (CSM, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91)
Astronomers Joss Bland-Hawthorn of Rice University, Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland, and R. Brent Tully of the University of Hawaii, using the telescope atop Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii have found a huge object. It might be a "supermassive black hole," but if so it would be more than 100 million times larger than the largest black hole thought to exist. It might also be a dead or dormant quasar. Astronomers hoped that the Gamma Ray Observatory of Atlantis would help to resolve the mystery. (NY Times, Apr 9/91; AP, Apr 9/91; P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Post, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 15/91)
NASA announced that on February 21 test personnel at its John C. Stennis Space Center, Mississippi, had conducted a 1.5 second ignition test on a new turbopump developed by Pratt and Whitney for the Space Shuttle Main Engine. The company test program, underway since 1986, includes a partnership with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. The pumps use newer design technology and materials. Stennis Space Center is NASA's facility for testing all Space Shuttle Main Engines that power the orbiter during its first 8 1/2 minutes of flight. (NASA Release 91-36)
NASA announced that NASA 816, a modified Convair F-106B, had been retired after more than 30 years of flight research. It was to be moved to the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton. (NASA Release 91-73)
Edward Stone, new director of the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which manages planetary missions for NASA, commented on present and future plans. He stated Magellan was sending back pictures of Venus; Galileo, on its way to explore Jupiter and its moons, would view the asteroid Gaspra in October; and Mars Observer was being prepared for a September 1992 launch. He spoke of the preliminary unmanned research necessary before any exploration of Mars could be undertaken. (CSM, Apr 15/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, NASA's Advisory Council met following the House of Representatives vote to discuss plans for the Space Station and how to put the "A" for aeronautics back into NASA. Edward Starke Jr., chairman of the ad hoc committee on the High Speed Research Program reported on plans for a new supersonic jet to be used by the commercial aviation industry. (Htsvl Tms, Jun 8/91)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, awarded a $145 million contract to Loral Infrared and Imaging Systems, Lexington, Massachusetts to design and build the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS). This instrument would fly on NASA's first Earth Observation System (EOS) satellite flights in 1998. AIRS would be a global thermometer in space to study the effects of increased greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. The main goal of EOS-A satellites is to study the effects of potential global warming through long-term observations. AIRS would operate continuously for five years. (NASA Release 91-61; WSJ, Apr 23/91)
Douglas Birch authored a feature article on the Hubble telescope, its findings and its limitations because of the flawed main mirror. Reportedly, the Hubble repair mission is to occur in November or December 1993. Astronomers were also concerned about the telescope's age in terms of its effectiveness. Much of Birch's article centered on an interview with Douglas Duncan, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Institute on the campus of Johns Hopkins University, who used the Hubble telescope spectrograph data extensively. (B Sun Magazine, Oct 20/91)
The Orlando Sentinel Star published two special reports on NASA and Space Shuttles. The first was a review of the first ten years of space flight: the dreams in contrast with the reality of costs and delays experienced. The conclusion was that "The price of a rushed design on a shoestring budget has meant, for the Shuttle, unreliability." The second article dealt with NASA's plans for the next decade with reference to such items as the Personnel Launch System, a small capsule or space plane on top of an expendable booster rocket to carry astronauts and some cargo to a Space Station; the Advanced Manned Launch System, a reusable vehicle combined with a reusable booster, capable of carrying more persons and cargo; and the National Aerospace Plane (NASP), which would burn a "slush" mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen. Most research funds to date went into the development of the NASP. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/91)
The media reported that NASA engineers had debated whether to remove additional sensors in Columbia that might be cracked. NASA planned to create a new investigative team to review the process of flaw detection. (NY Times, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Times, May 24/91; USA Today, May 24/91; AP, May 24/91; UPI, May 24/91)
