Former NASA Administrator Richard Truly said that he would assume a new job as director of the Georgia Tech Research Institute, a branch of the Georgia Institute of Technology. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), an international team of astronomers took a major step in redetermining the expansion rate of the universe. This rate, known as the Hubble Constant, is one of two critical numbers needed for making a precise determination of the size and age of the universe. The Constant is an estimate of the rate at which the universe is expanding and is expressed in kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light years). The results were reported by Drs. F. Duccio Macchetto, Nino Panagia and Abhijit Saha of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland; Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Institute of Washington; and Gustav Tammann of the University of Basel, Switzerland, at the internationl workshop "Science with the Hubble Space Telescope," held in Sardinia, Italy, June 29 through July 9, 1992. (NASA Release 92-97)
According to a report in Aviation Week & Space Technology, wind tunnel facilities at Russia's Sibnia research and development center were being made available to Western companies. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
A panel of experts at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science said that computers now perform some medical functions better than doctors and that machines are going to get even smarter in the future. Terrell Ward Bynum of Southern Connecticut State University said that NASA and the Department of Defense were working on a "smart" battlefield stretcher, which as envisioned, could provide expert diagnostic capabilities and would be able to dispense drugs or even jolt the heart back into normal rhythmn. (AP, Feb 7/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
Geologists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at Louisiana State University announced that they had discovered several previously unknown earthquake faults in California's northeastern Mojave Desert by analyzing remote sensing images at optical, infrared, and radar wavelengths. At a meeting of the Geological Society of America in Cincinnati, JPL's Dr. John Ford outlined how spaceborne imaging technology has helped scientists find these newly observed faults. (NASA Release 92-186; AP Oct 27/92)
At a press conference of the 179th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Atlanta, astronomers reported that recent ultraviolet observations with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) suggest that what were thought to be randomly distributed, nearby primordial clouds of hydrogen may actually be associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 92-4)
Reacting to the recent failed attempt at tethered space flight by the crew of Shuttle Atlantis, Astronaut Jeffrey Hoffman, the payload commander, said NASA needed to improve the way equipment was tested on the ground before flight. "When we're doing fundamentally new things, we've really got to pay close attention to how we're doing the testing on the ground or else we're going to continue to get surprised," Hoffman said. (APn, Aug 14/92)
It was reported that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was studying aurorae on the giant planet Jupiter. The HST made observations of Jupiter over a four-day period when ESA/NASA Ulysses spacecraft swung by the giant planet. While passing Jupiter, Ulysses made measurements of Jupiter's powerful magnetic field and the flow of subatomic particles along magnetic field lines. Simultaneously, HST was looking at aurorae, one visual manifestation of these electrical fireworks. These joint observations provided a unique opportunity to combine ultraviolet images and spectra with information on particles and fields. By studying the activity of Jupiter's aurorae, astronomers hoped to learn more about the dynamics of Jupiter's immense magnetic field, the structure of the giant planet's upper atmosphere, the effects of aurora on the chemistry of the polar regions on Jupiter, and Jupiter's interaction with the moon Io via a magnetic "flux tube." (NASA Release 92-22)
A group of NASA scientists sampling the air over southern Africa found massive pollution usually associated with the industrial centers of the Northern Hemisphere. Most of the pollution is caused by peasant farmers burning huge tracts of scrub brush to clear their land for planting. The group arrived in southern Africa in early October after studying a virtually identical problem in Brazil. Together, the pollution from the two regions was thought to be changing the atmosphere throughout the Southern Hemisphere. Some 180 scientists from 13 countries were involved in what was considered the most detailed atmospheric study ever made of the South Atlantic. (AP, Oct 12/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope announced that they had spotted the gathering of swirling stars that is believed to be the gravitational signature of a black hole in a galaxy called M32. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories in Tucson, Arizona, and a scientist using the Hubble, said that based upon what he has seen so far, "I would be surprised if M32 turns out not to be a black hole." Concurrently the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory discovered 11 objects in space that constitute "a new class of objects--the gamma ray quasar." The new gamma ray quasars, some as far as 10 billion light-years away, are probably similar to the thousands of other quasars detected in recent years, but the nature of quasars is still debated. (AP, Apr 9/92; B Sun, Apr 9/92; LA Times, Apr 9/92; W Times, Apr 9/92; U Post, Apr 13/92; USA Today, Apr 9/92; CSM, Apr 14/92; NASA Release 92-46 and 92-47; NASA Note N92-28)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
Virginia Governor L. Douglas Wilder was scheduled to dedicate on Sunday April 5, the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton, Virginia. The $30 million facility, which was to serve as the new official visitor center for the NASA Langley Research Center, has a 300-seat IMAX theater and was to feature exhibits on the Viking Orbiter and Viking Lander, as well as numerous exhibits on the history of flight and space exploration. (W Post, Apr 1/92)
Officials at NASA's John F. Kennedy Space Center in Florida said that the agency had selected I-Net, Inc., of Bethesda, Maryland, for negotiation of a contract to provide engineering support services to the center's Engineering Development Directorate. The contract was to  run for five years and have an estimated value in excess of $100 million. (NASA Release C92-12)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
A 50-foot-long X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) mockup rolled out of its hanger in ceremonies at Mississippi State University, Starkville. Forty-five students in Mississippi State's engineering program worked for five months to construct the 5,000-pound mockup at the University's Raspet Flight Research Laboratory. Throughout the project, they had access to NASP program officials, who advised them on technical aspects of the X-30's design. The program was directed by Dr. George Bennett. (NASA Release 92-86)
An experimental aircraft known as the X-31 had flown maneuvers at a 70-degree angle of attack, the Pentagon announced.  All of the plane's experimental flights were flown at the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. (AP, Sept 28/92)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena was added to the federal Superfund list of the nation's most dangerous dump sites because toxic solvents used 40 years ago during research on liquid rocket propellants had leaked into ground water. (LA Times, Oct 14/92; AP, Oct 14/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA announced that extended observations by the Hubble Space Telescope indicated that Jupiter's moon Io has a smaller atmosphere than previously thought, with very dense regions possibly over volcanoes and surface frost. The observations also showed that despite continual volcanic activity, Io's surface has remained largely unchanged since first photographed by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. (NASA Release 92-163)
Space Shuttle Discovery, which flew in space nine days in January, returned home after 14 days on the ground in California and a cross-country piggyback trip on a Boeing 747. The Shuttle left for the Kennedy Space Center, stopping overnight at Biggs Army Air Field in El Paso, Texas and at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. (AP, Feb 16/92)
Large landslides have been identified on Venus by Magellan Project scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. They are similar to landslides that have been known for some time to occur on Earth and Mars, a project spokesman said. (NASA Release 92-75)
NASA chief Daniel S. Goldin promised a bolder, "new" NASA that would control costs on its scientific missions in space and support the research and development efforts of domestic aircraft makers. Goldin's promise came at a NASA town meeting at California State University, Dominguez Hills campus, where several hundred people showed up for an opportunity to question Goldin about overpriced components, underfunded programs, and a lack of direction in the nation's space program. It was the fourth town meeting Goldin had hosted around the country since taking over as NASA's chief administrator in April. (LA Times, Dec 9/92)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jeremiah W. Pearson, III, announced that Thomas Utsman, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight, will become the Program Director for the Space Shuttle. He will direct long-range Shuttle planning, Space Shuttle continuous improvement activities and overseeing efforts to reduce Shuttle operations costs while maintaining safety. (NASA Release 92-83)
Walter Jaffe of the Leiden Observatory in the Netherlands said that the Hubble Space Telescope had captured the most detailed view yet of an immense caldron of heat, violence, and energy surrounding what might be called a "black hole," a celestial object 10 million times more massive than the sun. Astronomers said the photograph provided powerful support for the theory of "black holes" by showing several of the features predicted to surround them. The galaxy belongs to the Virgo Cluster of galaxies about 45 million light-years from Earth. (W Times, Nov 20/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; W Post, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 20/92;)
Flights of the X-31 Enhanced Fighter Maneuverability demonstrator aircraft resumed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The X-31s were being flown at Ames to show the value of thrust vectoring (directing engine exhaust flow) coupled with an advanced flight control system for close-in air combat at very high angles-of-attack. (NASA Release 92-52)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
Leaders of the world's space nations attending the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C., last week said that they lacked the money to go it alone in space, yet the will to cooperate internationally seemed also to be lacking. Two views about space exploration emerged among scientists. An optimistic view held that space exploration methods could worthwhile projects at affordable prices. The pessimistic view held that space cost too much, lacked public support, and that ideas must be constrained. The congress, the largest gathering of space experts ever convened, attracted more than 5,000 delegates from 70 nations and featured more than 2,700 technical papers. (Space News, Sept 7-13/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers announced the detection of the rare element boron in an ancient star. This element may be "fossil" evidence of energetic events which accompanied the birth of the Milky Way galaxy. An alternative possibility is that this rare element may be even older, dating from the birth of the universe. If that is the case, then the HST findings may force some modifications in theories of the Big Bang. (NASA Release 92-5)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said that the ozone hole over the Antarctic that has formed annually since 1987 had closed up again after setting records for depleting Earth's protective ozone layer. After falling from October 12 to December 5, ozone levels rose above the levels considered to be a "hole" on December 6. The hole formed earlier and lasted longer this year than ever before, the scientists said. (UPI, Dec 10/92)
NASA said that construction had started on a high-flying, light-weight, unpiloted research aircraft called "Perseus" that NASA was to use to measure ozone levels and other atmospheric conditions. NASA viewed Perseus as the first step toward general use of advanced aircraft for many aspects of Earth sciences research such as climate and radiation studies, tropical dynamics, meteorology, and for studies of the stratosphere and troposphere. Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation of Manassas, Virginia, won the $2.25 million contract to design, build, and flight test two Perseus aircraft. Flight tests were slated to begin in late 1992.(NASA Release 92-110)
A team of scientists using two satellites in orbit announced they had solved the puzzle of a mysterious source of high-energy gamma rays, located in the direction of the constellation Gemini and known as Geminga. According to a report in the journal Nature, the gamma rays were flowing from a spinning 300,000 year old  neutron star or pulsar. Scientists do not understand why Geminga favors gamma rays over other wavelengths. Two other bright sources of gamma rays already known to be pulsars, buried within the Crab and Vela supernova remnants, emit radiation in x-ray, radio, and optical wavelenghts. (W Post, May 26/92; P Inq, May 22/92)
NASA researchers said that tests on astronauts aboard a June 5-14, 1991, flight of the Space Shuttle Columbia found their hearts, lungs, immune systems, and nervous systems responded in unexpected ways. Involved were blood pressure, muscle mass, production of key cells, and proper balance and orientation. The results do not suggest any major obstacles to long-term space missions, according to Ronald White, NASA's chief of life sciences. Longer human space flights, however, might depend on developing artificial gravity or other measures to minimize the physical effects of spaceflight. (UPI, Jul 25/92; NY Times, Jul 25/92; W Post, Jul 25/92)
NASA astronomers announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had caught a clear glimpse of more than 300 galaxies clustered four billion light-years away, giving astronomers their first detailed view of galactic structure at a time when the solar system was just beginning. The Hubble images revealed that star-forming galaxies were far more prevalent in the clusters of the younger universe than in modern clusters of galaxies near us today. The findings have important implications for theories of how galaxies have evolved and are continuing to evolve at an apparently rapid rate. The observations also may have uncovered the most distant cluster of galaxies yet seen at a distance of 10 billion light-years, two-thirds of the way back to the presumed origin of the universe. (NASA Release 92-213; NY Times, Dec 2/92; LA Times, Dec 2/92; W Post, Dec 2/92; The Sun, Dec 2/92; USA Today, Dec 2/92; UPI, Dec 2/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
A Senate Appropriations subcommittee recommended spending no additional funds for NASA's advanced solid-rocket motor plant in Mississippi. On July 29, the House of Representatives voted 249 to 159 to eliminate $265 million in research and development funds for the project, leaving only $50 million to close it down. (W Post, Jul 31/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92)
According to NASA scientists, human, plant, and animal cells exposed to the microgravity of space for only a few days show changes in function and structure. Although preliminary, the results of the recent life sciences research on the Space Shuttle suggest alteration in metabolism, immune cell function, cell division, and cell attachment. Scientists also reported dramatic changes from space travel in some of the body's systems. Four principal investigators from the Space Life Sciences-1 mission flown aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in June 1991 reported key finds in the areas of cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and neurovestibular physiology. (NASA Release 92-124)
J.P. Mitchell, Pratt and Whitney's Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) Alternate Turbopump Development project manager, reported that a pair of Pratt and Whitney designed high-pressure turbopumps had been successfully tested at 100 percent rated power on a SSME at NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. (PR Newswire, Jan 23/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin issued a call to restore America's leadership in aeronautics that is threatened by failure to invest adequately in research facilities and advanced technology. Goldin told the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics meeting in Arlington, Virginia, that additional spending had to be directed to high speed research, advanced subsonic and systems integration, critical research facilities, and hypersonic research. Top priority needed to be given to developing a hypersonic commercial plane that could carry 300 passengers at least 6,000 miles nonstop at two-and-one-half times the speed of sound by the year 2005. NASA's budget provided for $1.1 billion for aeronautics, or 7.9 percent, Goldin said, a funding level that had to increase. (NASA Release 92-219; The Sun, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 10/92; H Post, Dec 10/92; AvWk, Dec 14-21/92)
In an effort to inspire students to study mathematics, science and technology, almost 1,000 engineers from NASA planned to visit schools nationwide during the week of February 16-22. NASA's "teachers for a day" will be participating in the National Engineers Week's Discover "E" Program, the largest student outreach effort sponsored by the engineering profession. NASA engineers were to participate in career day activities, teach students, conduct science competitions, participate in teacher workshops, and judge science fairs. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said, "Space exploration and its monumental engineering feats are vital to America's future competitiveness, will strengthen domestic economy, provide jobs for Americans and inspire students to study mathematics and science." (NASA Release 92-24)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
During the Soviet period, Ukrainian scientists and industry were an integral part of the Soviet space program, which employed over 250,000 people. When the breakup of the Soviet Union fragmented its space program, Ukraine gained one of the world's most advanced aerospace industries, capable of producing everything from rockets to satellites. However, without the Soviet Union to pour money into space exploration, Ukraine was looking for new ways to keep its aerospace industry working. (LA Times, Apr 24/92)
The NASA announced that both tape recorders aboard the $617 million Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were malfunctioning, and engineers directed the craft to not use the machines. Compton, a joint project of NASA and the European Space Agency, was built by the space and technology group of TRW under the direction of Daniel Goldin, the man selected by President Bush to become the new NASA administrator. (W Post, Mar 24/92)
Florida Today reported that the Hubble Space Telescope, despite a flawed primary mirror that prevented it from stargazing perfectly, nevertheless had shown astronomers enough of the universe to rattle their theories of creation and the nature of the universe. Circling the Earth every 90 minutes the Hubble has provided new insights into "globular clusters, the black hole, gaseous hydrogen isotopes, and a shell of gas moving from a giant star in another galaxy." (Florida Today, Feb 2/92)
McDonell Douglas Space Systems Company's Kennedy Space Center division was chosen as a finalist for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy, which is given annually to the NASA contractor which makes the greatest achievements in applying Total Quality Management (TQM) principles to their day-to-day operations. The goals of the award are to incorporate more efficient ways of 222doing business throughout NASA and its contractors and to transfer the performance improvement methods of award winners from company to company. "It is clear from your company's application that you have positive steps to advance quality, productivity and the continuous improvement process," NASA safety chief George Rodney told division officials in a recent letter. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
NASA's plan to transfer work modifying Space Shuttles from Palmdale to its Kennedy Space Center in Florida triggered protests from California's congressional delegation and the governor's office. The NASA decision would affect about 500 jobs at Rockwell International's Palmdale facility, where five of the orbiters had been assembled since the 1970s and where the space agency had done major modification work on the Shuttle fleet. (LA Times, Feb 1/92)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
Researchers from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, used laser-ranging instruments aboard the Wallops P-3B (HL) Orion aircraft to measure the Arctic sea ice above the water and the Greenland polar glacier elevations in order to study global climate changes. The data gathered was to be compared to previous studies and used to develop a baseline for future studies. Scientists are interested in developing accurate measurements of sea ice and glaciers because changes in these systems may indicate trends in world climate. Appreciable changes in these ice systems, such as increased melting, could directly affect global climate. (NASA Release 92-38)
NASA's inspector general, Bill Colvin, said that an investigation had been going on for nearly two years as to whether the Perkin-Elmer Corporation of Danbury, Connecticut, maker of the flawed mirrors of the Hubble Space Telescope, withheld data that would have revealed focusing problems before Hubble was sent aloft. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; WSJ, Oct 20/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)
NASA research aircraft were exploring the potential of fiber optic sensors in critical aircraft flight control systems. Because of fiber optic's advantages in flight systems, researchers believe fiber optics will improve flight control, engine performance and safety. The research project is part of the Fiber Optic Control System Integration program managed by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland and jointly funded by NASA and the U.S. Navy's Naval Air Systems Command. The first NASA plane to fly with fiber optic sensors was the F-15 Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control (HIDEC) aircraft at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edward, California. (NASA Release 92-23)
James Edwin Webb, 85, whose work as the chief of America's space agency was instrumental in putting a man on the moon, died March 27 at Georgetown University Hospital. During Mr. Webb's tenure, America's first manned space flight took place as well as the first orbital flight by John Glenn and the first walk in space by Edward White. (W Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 29/92; W Post, Mar 29/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
NASA announced that an array of powerful, interconnected computers would help NASA solve some of the complex problems associated with designing aircraft propulsion systems. The Lewis Advanced Cluster Environment system at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, is a network of 33 IBM RISC/6000 computer stations that can perform up to 1 billion floating point operations per second and has three billion bytes of memory, making it the world's most powerful IBM workstation cluster. (NASA Release 92-195)
NASA scientists tapped into a 300-year-old lead coffin in St. Mary's City, Maryland, in a search for air free of man-made pollutants. Samples of such air was expected to aid in understanding ozone damage in the present-day atmosphere. Tests on this and other coffins also helped NASA scientists evaluate the effectiveness of a tool that examines metal for tiny cracks or corrosion that occur in aircraft or spacecraft. (USA Today, Oct 21/92)
A $25 million, five-year program to expand the ability of helicopter pilots to fly close to the ground, around obstacles and in bad weather, was initiated by NASA and the U.S. Army. Experiments conducted at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would study displays that give pilots information, better guidance and navigation systems and ways to improve helicopter weapons systems. The program's main research tool would be a modified UH-60A Black Hawk helicopter called the Rotorcraft-Aircrew Systems Concepts Airborne Laboratory or "RASCAL." In addition to Ames, flight tests were also to be conducted at Crows Landing, a U.S. Navy facility in California's San Joaquin Valley. (NASA Release 92-28)
Jim Scott, Magellan project manager at the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, expressed regret at NASA's decision to cut short the spacecraft's mission. Since its launching from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on May 4, 1989, the spacecraft had mapped 97 percent of Venus' surface, using radar to peer through the planet's thick clouds and take pictures of the rugged, volcanic landscape. Scientists hoped to continue mapping in more detail during an "extended mission" ending in 1995, but NASA officials decided to avoid adding $80 million to the cost by ending the mission on September 30, 1993. The budget decision meant that engineers would not be able to move Magellan from its elliptical orbit and into a lower circular orbit starting in May 1993. That would have allowed Magellan to remap Venus with three to 10 times more detail than the pcitures it already had taken. (NASA Release, 92-14; W Times, Jan 29/92)
NASA scientists using the Hubble Space Telescope said they had discovered extended disks of dust around 15 newly-formed stars in the Orion Nebula starbirth region 1,500 light-years away. Such disks are a prerequisite for the formation of solar systems like the sun's. Hubble's detailed images confirm more than a century of speculation, conjecture, and theory about the genesis of solar systems. Astronomers said the Hubble data was the strongest evidence yet that planets could exist beyond the solar system and may even be a common occurrence. "We have found a place where it is very possible that there will be planets within the next few million years," said Edward Weiler, program scientist for the space telescope, at a NASA briefing. (NASA Release 92-226; W Times, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec. 17/92; NY Times, Dec 17/92; LA Times, Dec 17/92; CSM Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 17/92; UPI, Dec 17/92; APn, Dec 17/92; Newsweek, Dec 28/92)
NASA scientists, reviewing results of seven months' observations, said that after a record buildup of ozone-damaging chemicals last January, the amounts rapidly dissipated because of sudden warming in February and March. While the tests continued to show a thinning of the ozone layer that protects the earth from ultraviolet rays, the sudden warming prevented any severe ozone depletion over the Arctic region, the scientists said. Nevertheless, they said, the potential for severe ozone destruction over parts of the United States, Canada, and Europe remains a matter of serious concern because of the high concentrations of destructive chlorine that were detected. (W Times, May 1/92; NY Times, May 1/92; W Post, May 1/92; USA Today, May 1/92; LA Times, May 1/92)
Dr. Carl Fichtel, Principal Investigator for the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), announced that NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory found three new gamma-ray quasars, detected more than 200 cosmic gamma ray bursts, and captured the best ever observation of the glow of gamma radiation from the disk of the Milky Way galaxy. The Compton Observatory, built by TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, California, is the second of NASA's "Great Observatories." The first was the Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April 1990. The Compton Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, from the Space Shuttle Atlantis, orbits Earth at an altitude of 268 by 262 miles. (NASA Release 92-6)
A status briefing marking the 20th anniversary of Pioneer 10's launch was scheduled for March 2 at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The briefing was to examine new and past space accomplishments and a spacecraft signal was scheduled to be "piped in" to the briefing from five billion miles away. Also featured in the briefing would be a launch-identical, full-scale replica of Pioneer 10 shown for the first time. (NASA Note N92-16)
NASA scientists released pictures and results from spacecraft Galileo's December 8 flight over the moon's north pole and 189 miles above the southern Atlantic Ocean. The flyby allowed Galileo to practice for Jupiter by studying Earth as if it were an alien planet. The craft detected radio signals that changed frequencies in a repeating, artificial way, indicating intelligent life on Earth. It also detected ice clouds in the stratosphere that help create a hole in the protective ozone layer above Antarctica and found evidence that the moon once was more volcanically active than thought. (AP, Dec 22/92, 23/92; C Trib, Dec 23/92; W Times, Dec 23/92; NY Times, Dec 23/92; UPI, Dec 23/92)
At the American Astronomical Society's semiannual meeting in Atlanta, a team of scientists announced that, using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had made the most precise measurement to date of the percent of heavy hydrogen in space, which better determines the physical conditions present in the theorized Big Bang at the origin of the universe. Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, differs from ordinary hydrogen by having one neutron in addition to one proton in its nucleus. A measurement of the ratio of deuterium to ordinary hydrogen provides a critical test of conditions in the universe at the time of the Big Bang because it is believed that essentially all of the deuterium now present was created at that time. If further research finds no evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," then the new deuterium measurements strengthen the idea that the universe will expand forever. If true, the universe had a brilliant beginning but will have no end. (NASA Release 92-2)
Thorsten L. Gunther, 76, a retired geodesist who worked on Goddard Space Flight Center contract involving earth measurement, died April 25 at Washington Hospital Center of combinations after surgery for an aterial aneurism. A resident of Washington area since 1947, he lived in Bethesday. Gunther was an expert onsatellite geodsy and author of the NASA Directory of Station Locations. (W Post, May 5.92)
NASA delayed the maiden flight of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour from May 4 to May 7 to allow a daylight liftoff. Tom Utsman, acting associate administrator for space flight at NASA, said officials had reviewed the criteria and decided that it would be prudent to delay the flight so detailed photographs and documentation could be made for analysis. A dalylight liftoff also would allow Endeavour's seven-member crew to make a daylight landing back at the Kennedy Space Center in case of an engine failure early in flight. (UPI, Apr 28/92; W Post, Apr 28/92; USA Today, Apr 28/92; NY Times, Apr 28/92)
Dr. Everett Gibson of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, Dr. Haraldur Karlsson, and scientists at the University of Chicago analyzed drops of water extracted from several meteorites believed to have come from Mars and concluded that the oxygen isotopes in the water were extraterrestrial. Photographs returned to Earth from the Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft show features that suggest Mars once may have had a water-rich atmosphere and flowing water on its surface. Through the years, several meteorites have been collected on Earth that scientists have identified as Martian by comparing them to information gleaned by the Viking spacecraft. Six of these meteorites were used in the water extraction procedure. Findings from the work completed by the team may answer some questions about the processes operating in the solar system. (NASA Release 92-35)
The Magellan spacecraft fired its four thrusters to swoop within 113 miles of the surface of Venus for study of the planet's gravity and prominent surface details. Since its deployment in 1989, the Venus probe has used radar to map 99 percent of the planet, exceeding its goal of 70-90 percent. With its mission completed beyond expectations, NASA scientists expected to shut down Magellan in May 1993 as a cost-cutting measure. (NASA Release 92-148; USA Today, Sept 15/92; LA Times, Sept 15/92)
NASA reported that the TOPEX/POSEIDON satellite would be launched aboard an Ariane IV launch vehicle from the Guiana Space Center (CSG) in Kourou, French Guiana. The satellite, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, was to study ocean circulation and its role in regulating the global climate. (NASA Note N92-50)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The proposals were submitted by 65 small, high technology firms located in 16 states. Total value of the 28 awards was $14 million. SBIR objectives are to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally funded research innovations. The SBIR program is managed by NASA's Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., and all individual SBIR projects are managed by nine NASA field centers. (NASA Release 92-27)
Some leading American astronomers complained about the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support for astronomical research in the United States. The absence of dependable funding put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan, the astronomers charged. Federal financing had flagged, they said, just as a steam of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices were ready to be exploited. There were also management problems. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that poor management of America's space and astronomy programs had hobbled efforts to compete with European science. (NY Times, Aug 18/92)
Researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said that they would take part in a Russian biomedical space mission. Ames scientists expected to use monkeys to study the effect of lengthy space travel on bones, eyes, and inner ear receptors. The space mission would involve experiments from several nations and was expected to be launched December 29. (UPI, Dec 14/92)
NASA researchers said they had "flown" a complete three-dimensional high-performance aircraft in a supercomputer for the first time. The research was part of an effort to reduce wind tunnel tests of new aircraft designs. The new supercomputer techniques have promise in aerodynamic studies of fighter aircraft and in other areas where fluid flow is modeled, such as weather prediction, spacecraft entry, artificial heart design, etc. (NASA Release 92-105)
Robotics engineers and scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, planned to demonstrate a new planetary lander and robotic rover at a specially designed test site near the laboratory. "Rocky IV," a prototype of a mini-rover, might be launched to Mars in 1996 as part of the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Pathfinder mission. The 16.5-pound testbed would let NASA researchers study how to integrate planetary lander functions and science instruments under conditions approximately those of a Mars mission. (NASA Release 92-93)
Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland called for immediate congressional action to shift U.S. research and development from military hardware to products that would compete in the "environmental marketplace" of the future. NASA, she said, should develop "the second-generation Concorde...and leapfrog our competitors in a 21st century industry that will generate a $200 billion market of the future." (W Post, Apr 10/92)
A technical consultant to the House Committee on Space, Science and Technology, said that if the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane is built, it would be assembled in Palmdale, California. Scott Crossfield, a former test pilot, said President Bush, Vice President Quayle and the National Space Council were strong supporters of the X-30. Crossfield said it would cost an estimated $5 billion to $12 billion for the pair of X-30s. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 1/92)
A NASA airplane, equipped with delicate instruments, carried three astronomers to 41,000 feet above Hawaii last month to examine indications of a "black hole" at the heart of the Milky Way galaxy. The launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and improvements in ground-based instruments led to several announcements this year of tangible evidence for the existence of "black holes." (LA Times, Sept 21/92)
Lockheed Corporation's Space Operations Company unit won the competition for a $200-million-a-year contract to manage the Kennedy Space Center in Cocoa Beach, Florida. NASA said the contract would run for an initial period of four years, plus three two-year options, for a total potential contract period of 10 years. Its estimated value over the 10-year period was $1.9 billion. (WSJ, Nov 19/92; W Post, Nov 19/92; Fla Today, Nov 19/92)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies said chemicals, particularly sulfurs, spewed into the atmosphere by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines are reflecting 2 percent of sunlight back into space, reducing heat. The impact is global; local temperatures might not be affected. Scientists said early studies of the effects of Pinatubo's eruption indicated volcanoes play a far greater role in climate change than once thought. (USA Today, May 19/92; W Times, May 19/92; W Post, May 19/92; P Inq, May 19/92; B Sun, May 19/92)
Three U.S. scientists, including one from NASA's Ames Research Center, completed the first joint U.S./Russian Antarctic expedition since the breakup of the former Soviet Union. The purpose of the expedition was to investigate the physical, chemical, and biological properties of ice-covered lakes in the Bunger Hills Oasis of East Antarctica. This was the first time U.S. scientists had explored these lakes, which are near a Russian research station. (NASA Release 92-73)
NASA, in conjunction with the nation's two leading aircraft engine makers, reported that it would be developing advanced materials that could make a next-generation supersonic airliner possible by the year 2005. A five year, $88 million partnership with General Electric Aircraft Engines, Cincinnati, and United Technologies, Pratt and Whitney Division, East Hartford, Connecticut, was to center on critical composite materials and processes that U.S. industry would need to design and build a fleet of high-speed civil transports. The planes would fly at more than twice the speed of sound and at much higher altitudes than today's commercial airliners. A cost-effective, environmentally compatible supersonic airliner could cut long-distance trip times in half. For example, a future high-speed civil transport could fly from Los Angeles to Tokyo in 4 1/2 hours instead of the 10 hours taken by present subsonic passenger planes. While NASA, Pratt and Whitney and General Electric will form the core of the team, many other U.S. engine companies, materials suppliers and composite fabricators also will play an integral part. This interaction will provide the base for a future U.S. manufacturing capability in high-temperature composites and will let the involved firms take early advantage of the program's technical results. The composites also will help American manufacturers of subsonic airplanes, power systems and military aircraft. (NASA Relese 92-21)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he would act promptly to implement the recommendations of a Management Review Team for enhanced security at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The team considered Ames high risk for hostile intelligence operations. (NASA Release 92-207; UPI, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 19/92; USA Today, Nov 19/92; W Times, Nov 19/92; P Inq, Nov 19/92; AP, Nov 18/92, 19/92, and 20/92; W. Post, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 22/92; Space News, Nov 23-29/92)
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
NASA continued to prepare for what it called "the most aggressive" space-shuttle mission yet--its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set for December 7, 1993. As conceived, it would require four astronauts working in two-person shifts several days to make the repairs. They would need three or possibly four space walks to complete the work. The main task was to install a new camera and a set of corrective mirrors to compensate for spherical aberration in the main 2.4-meter mirror. These and other repairs would, NASA hoped, restore 90 to 95 percent of Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM, Dec 16/92)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration began evaluating new technology that could substantially improve the efficiency of the nation's air traffic system, including improved on-time arrivals, increased fuel efficiency, and a decreased work load for air traffic controllers, according to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center. (Commercial Aviation News, Sept 22/92)
Facing a tight budget, National Aerospace Plane officials proposed extra steps to slow the program aimed at building two runway-to-orbit research planes. The program's goal was to make the first flight of an x-30 aerospace plane by late 1999. The revised program director Robert Barthelemy presented the revised schedule to top Air Force and NASA officials in a quarterly technical review at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. Congress approved $250 million for the program for the 1992 year after slashing nearly $100 million from the Bush adminstration's $303.8 million request. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Based upon images taken by NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers reported that they had found intriguing evidence that a black hole, weighing over 2.6 billion times the mass of the sun, exists at the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. Galaxy M87 is at the center of a nearby cluster of galaxies in the constellation of Virgo, 52 million light-years distant, and contains more than 100 billion stars. (NASA Release 92-10)
Recent studies showed that the technology spinoffs from National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) research and development had already had a positive impact on U. S. aerospace, automotive, medical, chemical, food processing, and energy industries. The studies predicted that the Gross National Product could expand by about $26 billion over the next 10-15 years as a result of productivity gains fostered by the program and that employment also could increase by an average of 40,000 jobs annually. In particular, the studies showed that NASP research could significantly benefit industries such as aerospace, motor vehicle, and emerging industries such as ceramics and high-speed civil transportation. (AvWk, Jul 27/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
Astronomers reported interesting initial results from a survey of several hundred quasars being studied with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Using Hubble's high resolution images, the "Snapshot Survey" program detected evidence on gravitational lensing at a level of detail not usually found with ground-based telescopes. The findings set new limits on the nature and distribution of material in the universe. The results provided information on objects such as stars and galaxies that can be detected with telescopes as well as non-luminous material or "dark matter." In the past decade, about a dozen examples of probable gravitational lenses had been discovered by ground-based telescopes. According to conventional theoretical models, approximately half of all multiple-image gravitational lenses cannot be identified from ground-based telescopes because the separation between the images would be less than one arc second, which is below the nominal resolution limit for ground-based telescopes. The Hubble Space Telescope routinely provides 0.1 arc second resolution of moderately bright point sources, making it a unique and powerful tool for searching for multiple-image lenses. The HST data may ultimately provide new and unexpected insights into the early universe. While the Snapshot Survey will not offer insights into the competing Big Bang models, results will provide scientists with the denizens of the universe but not how they got there. (NASA Release 92-3)
NASA astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory announced that they had observed what they believed to be a galaxy in the process of forming. They estimated that the galaxy is more than 10 billion light years distant. (W Times, Nov 1/92; NY Times, Nov 3/92; AP, Nov 11/92)
NASA selected the ColeJon Corporation of Cleveland, Ohio, for negotiations leading to award of a support service contract for operations, maintenance and repair of facilities at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio. Estimated value of the contract was approximately $30 million. (NASA Release C92-3)
NASA researchers began a three-week airborne study to increase understanding of microscopic plant productivity in the  equatorial region of the Pacific Ocean. The principal scientific objective was to understand why microscopic plant productivity involving phytoplankton is so limited in the Pacific compared to the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 92-135)
The Kennedy Space Center awarded three indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contracts for its Personal Computer Acquisition contract program. The three winners were to provide a range of personal computers, peripherals, and software packages and would be required to compete against each other for NASA orders throughout the duration of the contract, an arrangement designed to provide NASA with the most up-to-date equipment at the lowest cost. (Federal Computer Week, July 13/92)
NASA announced that it had awarded about $15 million for 124 microgravity research grants to develop the research potential of Space Station Freedom as one of the nation's premiere science and technology assets. The grants represent an increase of 70 percent in the number of investigators sponsored by NASA's microgravity division. The division now sponsors nearly 200 scientific investigators and plans to expand to at least 300 before the agency's planned Space Station becomes operational in the late 1990s. (NASA Release 92-167; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA engineers were preparing to do the first assembly of a large-scale, parabolic antenna in a huge water tank whose buoyancy lets researchers simulate working in the microgravity environment of space. The tests would help establish assembly times for such antennas, evaluate work procedures and task coordination, and check the compatibility of the hardware itself. (NASA Release 92-84)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
NASA awarded research grants to three universities to develop teacher training courses that would enable middle school teachers to incorporate aerospace topics and concepts into their classrooms and to create new and imaginative practices in learning. The Teacher Training Pre-Service Program is a two-year program. The following schools were selected from responses to a solicitation of proposals: Fayetteville State University, Eastern Michigan University, and the University of Alabama. Each was to receive a $83,000 grant and were expected to provide matching, non-Federal funds. (NASA Release 92-50)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope revealed an unusual new optical jet in the nucleus of the elliptical galaxy NGC 3862. NGC 3862, also known as 3C264, is a bright radio source and x-ray source. It is the sixth brightest galaxy in a rich cluster of galaxies known as Abell 1367, located at a distance of about 260 million light-years away in the constellation Leo. (NASA Release 92-61)
American space scientists said the hottest star ever recorded--33 times hotter than the sun--had been photographed in a faraway galaxy by the Hubble Space Telescope. Burning at 360,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the white star at the heart of a glowing red nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy is going out in a "blaze of glory," said Sally Heap, an astrophysicist with NASA. (NY Times, Apr 21/92; AP, Apr 21/92; W Times, Apr 21/92; USA Today, Apr 21/92)
NASA announced that scientists from the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and across the United States would participate in a Russian biomedical space mission later this month. The Cosmos '92 "biosatellite" was to be an unpiloted, recoverable spacecraft that carried plant and animal experiments. Cosmos '92 would become the eighth Russian biosatelite mission in which NASA had participated. (NASA Release 92-223)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
Dr. Mark M. Phillips, acting director of Cerro Tololo, an American operated observatory in Chile, said the New Technology Telescope developed in Europe was capturing images up to six times more revealing than those obtained by comparable American telescopes of conventional design. The new European telescope contained advanced optical elements that automatically correct the distortions caused by gravity and wind as the telescope moves. There was an uneasy feeling among some scientists that the salad days of United States astronomy were drawing to a close and that the new European telescopes would leave American astronomers far behind. (NY Times, Feb 4/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had revealed a chain of luminous knots in the core of the most distant known galaxy--one that existed in the infancy of the universe and is located more than 10 billion light-years from Earth. The new photos, taken with the telescope's wide field and planetary camera, reveal detail ten times better than photographs previously taken with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 92-203; W Times, Nov 14/92)
A space agency spokesman said that NASA had failed again to open the main antenna of its Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft. Engineers had heated the antenna with sunlight over three days in March, then cooled it in shade. They hoped the antenna would expand and then shrink enough to free its jammed parts, said Jim Wilson, a spokesman fot the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (P Inq, Apr 17/92; USA Today, Apr 17/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, speaking at the University of Hartford, Connecticut, said spending on space exploration was an investment in the future, but that the nation's space agency must get more for its money than it had in the past. NASA research has economic benefits for the nation, providing jobs and developing technologies with commercial applications, but just as important is the agency's role in supporting exploration that increases knowledge of the universe and provides hope for a better future, Goldin added. (Hartford Courant, Nov 18/92)
NASA scientists announced that they would use "telepresence" technology in the Antarctic this fall to see if life that existed millions of years ago on Earth could provide clues about organisms that once may have lived on Mars. A team was scheduled to travel to Antarctica in October to study sediment on the bottom of ice-covered Lake Hoare on Ross Island. (NASA Release 92-147)
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)
Hugo Wahlquist, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said that Italian and American scientists would spend nine to 12 months looking for signs of gravity waves--distortions in space and time caused by gigantic black holes--in tape recordings of radio transmissions between Ulysses and stations on Earth. Discovery of gravity waves would provide strong confirmation of Albert Einstein's theory of how the universe works, and could prove the existence of black holes. (W Times, Mar 19/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
A new bearingless rotor system developed by McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Company, Mesa, Arizona, which promised to be a significant advance in helicopter technology, was tested by NASA. The tests, conducted in Ames' Research Center wind tunnel, evaluated the rotor concept and gathered data to help develop computer programs needed to design a new generation of bearingless rotors. The new system, which eliminates hinges and bearings that usually connect the blades to the rotor shaft, is the key to the innovative system. The blades have advanced airfoils and are made of high strength composites. The technology was expected to have many benefits, including easier maintenance and lower fuel use. "The new rotor system would allow for faster, more agile, more cost effective and safer helicopters," said Steve Jacklin, Project Manager for the wind tunnel test at the Ames Research Center. (NASA Release 92-27)
A recent U. S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs oversight subcommittee report said that millions of dollars had been wasted in recent years because of poor auditing and contract management at 39 federally funded research and development centers. The report concluded that standard government accounting and auditing requirements were often "missing or ignored" at the privately owned but publicly funded research centers, which together received contracts worth more than $10 billion last year. Among the laboratories criticized was the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which received $1 billion in
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company received two NASA contracts worth $267 million for work on the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight systems contract, valued at $147 million, includes funds for servicing missions, the first of which was set for December 1993 and was to deliver an optical instrument to correct the telescope's flawed mirror. (WSJ, Sept 2/92)
Lockheed, a principal designer of NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, won $267 million in contracts to maintain, service, and help repair the orbiting observatory. (W Post, Sept 9/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, selected the New Mexico State University, Physical Science Laboratory of Las Cruces, New Mexico, to negotiate a cost contract for the operation and maintenance of scientific balloon facilities and engineering support for the NASA Balloon Program. The total cost for the 5-year program was $65 million. (NASA Release C92-6)
NASA officials said that the Galileo spacecraft and its atmospheric probe had passed the half-way mark on their voyage to Jupiter. The first full test results on November 20 and December 2 since launch three years ago showed that the probe's systems were in good working order. Galileo was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter in early December 1995. A major milestone in space communications was achieved recently when NASA scientists successfully transmitted laser signals to Galileo at a distance of 1.3 million miles. (NASA Releases 92-224 and 92-225; AP, Dec 16/92)
Scientists from the United States and Australia announced completion of the Southern Ocean Waves Experiment. From June 6 through June 18, the scientists observed how ocean winds and waves affect one another off the coast of Australia. Project findings were expected to improve the reliability of ocean wave forecasting and to improve measurements from the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite. This satellite, a joint U.S./French venture, was scheduled for launch in August 1992 and was to study ocean topography and circulation, leading to better understanding of the oceans' role in global climate change. (NASA Release 92-109)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealed a new class of object in the universe--a grouping of gigantic star clusters produced by the collision of galaxies. Images of the core of the peculiar galaxy Arp 220 show that stars are produced at a furious rate from the dust and gas supplied by the interaction of two galaxies. The discovery was made by Dr. Edward Shaya and graduate student Dan Dowling, University of Maryland, and the Wide Field/Planetary Camera Team. (NASA Release 92-80)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
NASA scientists were baffled by a brownish discoloration, representing some kind of growth, on the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) satellite. The LDEF was retrieved by a Space Shuttle in January 1990. Whatever the growth, it had formed in space and despite high ultraviolet radiation and the corrosive power of atomic oxygen. (W Times, Sept 9/92)
NASA scientists began a new attempt to open the stuck antenna on the Galileo space probe by rotating the satellite to point the antenna toward the sun. They hoped the warmth would expand the metal fittings and release the stuck mechanism. If this maneuver fails, they were prepared to turn the antenna's electric motors on and off at rapid intervals to "hammer" the jammed mechanism in a final bid to overpower what they believed were stuck pins and pop open the antenna. (W Post, Dec 26/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; The Sun, Dec 26/92, Dec 30/92, Dec 31/92; USA Today, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; UPI, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; P Inq, Dec 31/92; W Times, Dec 31/92)
Milan J. Krasnican, 68, a retired aerospace engineer with NASA, who was a member of the Project Mercury Space Task Group and a project engineer on the orbiting geophysical observatory spacecraft program at Goddard Space Flight Center, died at Sibley Hospital. A long-term resident of the Washington area, he lived in Bethesda. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Dr. Jon Holtzman, of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, led a team of scientists in discovering new clues to cataclysmic events in the history of the peculiar galaxy NGC 1275, located approximately 200 million light-years from Earth. The scientists discovered about 50 bright objects at the center of the galaxy which appear to be young massive globular star clusters. This discovery was surprising because most globular clusters are among the oldest objects in the universe. (NASA Release 92-9)
NASA-sponsored research into the biological effects of space flight at the University of Wisconsin suggested that astronauts may have to workout in space to protect their bones on long-duration flights. Dr. Arthur Vailas of the university's Biodynamics Laboratory based his conclusions on the metabolic processes in the bones of rats that had experienced days of weightlessness aboard the Space Shuttle. (UPI, Oct 21/92)
Paul Beaver, editor of the military affairs magazine Jane's Defense Weekly, said in an interview that the U. S. Air Force was operating a new generation of secret spy planes capable of reaching eight times the speed of sound. Code-named "Aurora," the plane was believed to operate at night and to incorporate the latest radar-evading technology. Pentagon officials denied that such an aircraft existed or was contemplated. For years, some scientists and aviation fans had speculated that a successor to the famed SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane was under development and testing. (The Sun, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 12/92)
David Wolf, Ray Schwarz, and Tinh Trinh of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) were selected by NASA's General Counsel Office to receive the Inventor of the Year Award for their development and design of a new class of horizontally rotating tissue culture systems--also known as the rotating wall bioreactor--that in some ways simulate microgravity. Bioreactors are cell maintenance devices used for research in growth and culturing cells or tissues and have been recognized as valuable tools for pioneering research in lung tissue, skin growth, intestinal disease, cartilage growth, colon cancer, brain tumor growth, and therapeutics. (NASA Release 92-33)
NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the U. S. Geological Survey in a published paper said that Mars was once very active tectonically and may still be shaken by quakes daily. The scientists said that although the planet is less seismically active than the earth, their studies, based on Viking photos, predict that about two marsquakes of magnitude five or greater occur per year, and about a hundred quakes of magnitude three or greater occur per year. (NASA Release 92-198; LA Times, Nov 6/92; W Times, Nov 7/92; P Inq, Nov 26/92)
China reported that it would send astronauts into space by the year 2000 as the first step toward launching its own Space Station. "Before the year 2000 China will have completed its research into experimental manned spacecraft and carrier rockets," said the State Commission on Science and Technology. (UPI, Apr 7/92; LA Times, Apr 8/92)
Daniel S. Goldin, the newly appointed Administrator NASA said he was a strong supporter of the controversial Space Station Freedom, which was being developed in part at the NASA Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. The Space Station Freedom, whose price had soared from $8 billion to $40 billion, was a frequent target of lawmakers looking to trim NASA's budget. But Goldin said, "I believe that there is a crying need for human interaction in space. If we are to fulfill our role of NASA and to have humans seek their destiny in space, we must understand the interactions of humans in a hostile space environment, the long-term impacts of zero gravity, microgravity, radiation." (News-Herald, Apr 23/92; Plain Dealer, Apr 23/92)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
The Kennedy Space Center, Florida, said it had awarded first-of-a-kind contracts to three firms under NASA's Personal Computer Acquisition Contract program. Throughout the five-year life of the contracts, the three companies would have to compete against each other for NASA orders to supply personal computer hardware and software to Kennedy Space Center and other NASA locations. NASA established this competitive arrangement so that the agency could be assured of a steady supply of high-quality products for the best price. (NASA Release C92-10)
NASA researchers found unexpectedly high productivity of microscopic plants near the equator in the Pacific Ocean during a recent airborne study aimed at increasing understanding of these plants in the region. The plants, called phytoplankton, play an important role in the absorption of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. (NASA Release 92-179)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that the Magellan spacecraft, already threatened with suspension of operations to save money, had developed serious transmitter trouble and for more than a week had been unable to send usable data and pictures for the completion of its mapping survey of the Venusian surface. Magellan's only functioning radio transmitter begun overheating, a repeat of similar trouble more than a year ago. Engineers hoped to devise a solution within a few days. (NY Times, Jul 15/92; NY Times, Jul 18/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
NASA scientists at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco said that a NASA satellite had provided overwhelming evidence that industrial pollutants were responsible for the hole in Earth's protective ozone layer above Antarctica. The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, launched in 1991, also had produced evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole may act as a "sink," sucking in and destroying ozone from much of the Southern Hemisphere. (AP, Dec 10/92)
Associated Press reported that three soldiers had burned to death as hundreds of construction troops rioted at Baiknour Space Center in Kazakhstan after complaining of "inhuman treatment" by their superiors. Baikonur was the main space launch site in the former Soviet Union. (P Inq, Feb 27/92)
NASA reported that a survey of the heavens with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was uncovering remote and unusual galaxies never before resolved by optical telescopes on Earth. HST revealed an unusual variety of shapes and structures in these distant galaxies, which previously had appeared as fuzzy blobs in ground-based sky surveys. The results might lead to much clearer understanding of the formation and evolution of galaxies. The results were presented by Dr. Richard Griffiths of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. (NASA Release 92-98)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
NASA announced that the Space Station Freedom program had initiated a new effort to reduce dramatically the time it would take to integrate small experiments on the Space Station. Called EXPRESS for Expedited Processing of Experiments to Space Station, NASA engineers hoped to reduce the time it takes to get a small payload flown aboard Freedom from up to five years to less than one. (NASA Release 92-191)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Paul F. Holloway, in addition to his responsibilities as Director of Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, would be assigned temporarily to NASA headquarters as a special assistant to the administrator. Goldin also announced the departure of Don G. Bush, assistant administrator for procurement, effective January 11, 1993. (NASA Release 92-292)
Astronomer Duncan Steel of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney warned of a possible collision between the Earth and  Comet Smith-Tuttle in the year 2116. Several years would be needed to track the comet to determine its orbit with accuracy and to decide whether or not a collision is likely. (The Sun, Oct 26/92; W Times, Oct 27/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with representatives from seven Historical Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), the latest recipients of NASA's Research Center grants. The awards were the latest approach to meeting some of NASA's present and future research and workforce needs and in tapping into scientific resources found among under-represented minority students and faculty at qualifying universities. (NASA Release 92-11)
According to some scientists, recent observations by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) have shown exceptionally high levels of chlorine monoxide (CIO) at high northern latitudes, raising the possibility of enhanced ozone depletion over populated areas of the Earth. UARS's Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) detected elevated levels of CIO over large areas of Europe and Asia north of about 50 degrees latitude. Dr. Joe Waters of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that high CIO levels were observed over Scandinavia and Northern Eurasia, including the cities of London, Moscow and Amsterdam. These CIO levels, approximately 1 part billion by volume, are comparable to levels observed within the Antarctic ozone hole. Waters said that sustained levels of CIO could lead to significant ozone destruction over the northern hemisphere and perhaps even lead to an ozone hole over the Arctic. (NASA Release 92-18)
Scientists probing river muck have discovered bacteria that can "eat" the main chemicals threatening the ozone layer, the U.S. Geological Survey reported. The bacteria that break down chlorofluorocarbons, known as CFCs, were found along the Potomac River in Virginia and in pond, marsh, and swamp sediments in Maryland, South Carolina, and Virginia. The CFC-eating bacteria are harmless to humans, but can operate only in the absence of oxygen, according to Derek Lovley, a microbiologist working at the Geololgical Survey in Reston, Virginia. (W Post, May 2/92)
A press briefing was scheduled to be held by a science team for the ATLAS-1 mission on March 23, 1992, at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama. The briefing was to discuss the mission's science activities and was to consist of two panels. (NASA Note N92-18)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
Solar scientists were puzzled by an unexpected "gamma ray afterglow" discovered on the sun by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The glow, a strong emanation of high-energy gamma rays, persisted for more than five hours after a solar flare explosion on June 11, 1991. A similar phenomenon occurred four days later. The scientists also announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had taken the first image of the sun in neutrons, the first picture of any celestial object ever made with neutrons, that is, matter, rather than light. Another scientist reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had found evidence of powerful beams of downward-streaming protons at the onset of a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more than 30 light-years away. Solar flares can produce magnetic storms on Earth that interfere with electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA Releases 92-112 and 92-113; NY Times, Jul 16/92; USA Today, Jul 16/92; The Sun, Jul 16/92; P Inq, Jul 16/92; UPI, Jul 15/92, Jul 17/92; W Post, Jul 20/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Scientists studying the effects of ozone depletion in Earth's atmosphere reported that the frequencies of light passing through a depleted ozone layer may not cause the widespread catastrophic damage to plants scientists previously predicted. They found that the kind of ultraviolet radiation that causes the most damage to alfalfa plants passes straight through the ozone layer, meaning a depleted ozone layer would not increase exposure to the most damaging light. Significant depletions in the ozone layer would certainly send up the cancer rate in humans quite substantially, biophysicist John Sutherland of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, said, but plants are not likely to be the most severely affected by the increased ultraviolet light hitting Earth because of a thinning protective layer. (UPI, Aug 13/92)
Loral Corporation became the first U.S. aerospace company to win government approval to buy advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. The Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Palo Alto, California, to import tiny electric satellite thrusters that are used to position satellites in space. Loral's Russian partners are Fakel Enterprises of Kaliningrad, which makes the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of Moscow. (WSJ, Apr 2/92)
Thomas O. Paine, 70 who was deputy administrator and administrator of NASA from 1968 to 1970, died of cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles.In 1985, President Reagan named him chairman of the National Commission on Space to set goals for future space exploration. He also was a member of Vice President Quayle's Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. After leaving NASA, he returned to GE where he became a vice president and power generation group manager. In 1982 he retired from the Northrop Corporation as its president. (W Post, May 8/92; NY Times, May 7/92)
It was reported that the Kennedy Space Center was about to break gground on a second Space Station project, a new building to service the outpost's propulsion modules. The 3,000 square foot building, to be located behind and south of the operations and checkout buildings in Kennedy Space Center's industrial area, would be the space center's third hazardous processing plant. This one was to be dedicated to servicing a single type of payload: 800-gallon modulles filled with propellant, which would be used to keep the space station positioned properly in orbit. The new buildingg wouldbe able to accomodate testing, cleaning, and servicing of two to four modules simultaneously. The Kennedy Space Center was soliciting bids for construction of the plant, which was to be 70 feet high, 135 feet longg and 65 feet wide. A contract, worth about $11 million, was expected to be awarded in June 1992, with construction beginning in July, said payload projects manager JoAnn Morgan. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study indicated that the ozone shield of the Northern Hemisphere was increasingly vulnerable to depletion by man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson of Harvard University, the study's Mission scientist, and 80 other scientists of the second Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE II) used two NASA aircraft to examine the ozone-related chemistry and air motions of the lower stratosphere from early October 1991 through late March 1992. The extensive measurements, combined with satellite and meteorological data, provide the first detailed picture of the factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer from fall, through winter, and into spring. (NASA Release 92-55; NASA Release 92-56)
Responding to evidence that Earth's protective ozone layer is thinning or disappearing faster than was forecast, environmental officials from 81 countries met in Copenhagen to consider revising the Montreal Protocol on the control of substances that attack ozone. The main point of the meeting, sponsored by the United Nations Environment Program, was to set a timetable for the phaseout of chlorofluorocarbons, halons, and carbon tetrachloride. (The Sun, Nov 22/92;
For the first time, virtually every nation with an interest in space or its practical benefits sent delegates to the World Space Congress. Meeting in Washington, D. C., at the invitation of President George Bush, almost 4,000 representatives began a week of meetings that were expected to usher in a new era of international cooperation in space exploration. The conference was sponsored by the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions, NASA, the U. S. Academy of Sciences, the International Astronautical Federation, and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (The Sun, Aug 31/92;  CSM, Aug 31/92)
NASA announced that it would kick-off a nationwide tour of its full-scale traveling Space Station Freedom model in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. The model, which is housed in two connected tractor trailers, features the U.S. living quarters and the U.S. laboratory module of the international space-based research facility. (NASA Note N92-47)
Newly-released photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope showed that the "Whirpool Galaxy" may have a black hole at its core and that the core of a powerful infrared radiating galaxy called Arp 220 supports vigorous star birth and supernova star explosions. Astronomers suspect that Arp 220 is the product of an earlier collision of two "parent" galaxies. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
The U.S. Air Force said that budget realities had necessitated cuts in plans to have the National Aero-Space Plane reach orbit and fly 25 times the speed of sound. The experimental hypersonic craft's top speed was likely to be cut from Mach 25 to Mach 12 or Mach 15 and its runway-to-space approach might be abandoned in favor of launch from the back of another airplane. Cost was projected to drop from $10 billion to $3 billion. (W Times, Dec 9/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
Scientists reported that the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines last June sent massive amounts of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, which in turn was contributing to erosion of Earth's protective ozone layer and to warming in the tropics. While the depletion could amount to 5 or 10 percent, the researchers expected the effect to be temporary.   Detailed observations of the ozone layer were being made by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite launched last year. (UPI, Aug 27/92)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company was awarded a three-year extension of its existing contract for payload ground operations services, valued at approximately $561.4 million, at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (NASA Release C92-21)
NASA announced plans to consolidate some management functions for the Space Station Freedom program and to create a contractor-led integration team to ensure the successful building and deployment of the international Space Station. The consolidations affected operations in Reston, Virginia, and at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The consolidation came amid charges of cost growth and delays at Johnson Space Center and among the center's team of contractors led by McDonnell Douglas. The problems associated with the $5 billion contract had prompted two audits and one investigation by NASA's inspector general. (NASA Release 92-214; W Post, Dec 2/92; Space News, Dec 7-13/92; AvWk, Dec 7/92)
The National Space Club named the NASA/TRW observatory team that built the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory the winner of the 1992 Nelson P. Jackson Award at an awards ceremony April 10 in Washington, D.C. This award honors the firm responsible for "an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft and space fields." (Business Wire, Apr 15/92)
A spokesman announced that NASA had failed in its latest attempt to fix the jammed main antenna on the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft, but the agency said it would try different repair methods next year. Engineers turned Galileo's main antenna toward the sun to warm it, then cooled it in shade, but the antenna remained stuck. The latest warming and cooling of the antenna was the seventh and final effort to open the antenna by thermally expanding or shrinking what NASA engineers think are stuck pins on three of the antenna's ribs. Despite the loss of the main antenna, NASA scientists expected to complete 70 percent of Galileo's mission by using a small antenna. The small antenna, however, is capable of transmitting only 1 percent as many computer "bits" as the main antenna would have sent. (AP, Jul 8/92)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were investigating the importance of gravity to life on Earth. They also were studying whether intermittent exposure to gravity might help keep future space explorers healthy. Volunteers were confined to their beds for 24-hours a day in the head-down position to induce the physical changes associated with exposure to the microgravity of space. Results of the study indicated that these volunteers could avoid the changes simply by standing quietly for 15 minutes of each hour over a 16-hour period. Standing for two hours a day or walking at three miles per hour were almost as effective, according to Dr. Joan Vernikos, the study's Principal Investigator and Acting Chief of Ames's Life Science Division. (NASA Release 92-67)
In the current issue of the British journal Nature, two scientists, Martin I. Hoffert of New York University and Curt Covey of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, reported new findings, largely developed from geological studies, on how Earth's climate responded to changes in atmospheric heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other influences in the distant past. Using climatic data from two periods in the past, one 20,000 years ago in the midst of the last ice age, and the other in the mid-Cretaceous period 100 million years ago, the two scientists found that if atmospheric carbon dioxide doubles from its present level, the average global climate will become about 4 degrees Fahrenheit warmer. These findings agree with computer models of climatic change. They are also compatible with earlier work by NASA scientists at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, whose climatic studies predicted that a doubling of carbon dioxide would reproduce a warming of about 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit. (NY Times, Dec 15/92)
Jeremiah Pearson, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said NASA planners were studying ways to cut up to 25 percent from the Space Shuttle budget by 1997, a much more extensive reduction than previously projected. The 25 percent cut would produce savings of about $3 billion, Pearson said. Managers at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida were already working to cut 10 percent from the Shuttle's 1994 budget. (Space News, Aug 24-30/92)
Project officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the Magellan spacecraft would use its backup transmitter to resume mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar on January 24, following a week of routine battery recharging. (NASA Release 92-8)
NASA's Cassini mission to Saturn passed a major milestone with the completion of a project-wide critical design review. The review included a comprehensive examination of the mission and spacecraft. (NASA Release 92-222)
NASA reported that an SR-71A "Blackbird" research aircraft will test a key propulsion system for the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The SR-71A would act as a high-speed testbed to prove the concept of burning hydrogen fuel outside the X-30's engine exhaust nozzles as a way to improve overall flight efficiency. If the program operations received approval, the SR-71A would be modified and flown at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The NASP Joint Program Office, Wright-Paterson AFB, Ohio, funded the preliminary design work for the experiment. The NASP program is a joint effort involving NASA, the Department of Defense, and a U.S. industry team. (NASA Release 92-29)
It was reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center plans to award a broad computer services contract later during the year to support the center's host computers, networks, workstations, application software and telecommunications systems. The contract, which analysts estimate will cost up to $180 million, was to include software acquisition, development and maintenance, installation, engineering, integration and costumer services. (Federal Computer Week, Feb 17/92)
In another article in Nature, scientists from NASA and Hughes STX Corporation in Lanham, Maryland, said that the uppermost part of Earth's protective ozone layer was about seven percent thinner in 1989 than it was in 1980. The conclusions were based on observations taken by the Nimbus-7 environmental research satellite launched in 1978 and refined by a calibration device on a Space Shuttle mission in October 1989. The new observations were consistent with previous projections of ozone depletion. (UPI Jul 9/92;
NASA reported that the agency would start supersonic flight tests of a new electronic control system that would improve the performance, reliability, and safety of high-speed military aircraft, future commercial supersonic transports, and the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane. A NASA F-15 research aircraft was to begin supersonic testing at the Performance Seeking Control in April 1992 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 92-44, Apr 1/92)
In his annual speech to the Aerospace Industries Association, President Donald Fuqua predicted another year of declining production and more layoffs. "The long-term outlook for the aerospace industry is for a continued decline in overall sales volume for the rest of the decade," Mr. Fuqua told industry officials in Washington, D. C. (The Sun, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 16/92)
NASA unveiled its high-flying, unpiloted atmospheric research aircraft called "Perseus" at Manassas, Virginia. Perseus-A is the first aircraft designed specifically for atmospheric science. It will carry up to 110 pounds of instruments to a maximum altitude of 82,000 feet and is expected to begin flying scientific missions in 1994. Perseus-A was built for NASA by Aurora Flight Services Corporation in Manassas at a cost of $1.5 million. Company engineers expected Perseus to break the world altitude record for unmanned aircraft and the record for altitude in horizonal flight by an airplane. (NASA Release 92-227; W Post, Dec 19/92, Dec 28/92)
NASA issued its strongest warning yet about the quickening deterioration of the ozone layer over large, populated areas in northern latitudes. Experts warned that thinning ozone will let in more harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun and lead to more skin cancer and cancer deaths. An ozone layer hole could appear as early March 1992 if certain meteorological and chemical conditions occur, said the scientists. Even if the hole does not appear right away, the chances are "very high" that it will occur over the next decade, said James Anderson, a Harvard University chemistry professor who is involved in the project. (WSJ, Feb 4/92; P Inq, Feb 4/92; NY Times, Feb 4/92; USA Today, Feb 4/92; W Post, Feb 4/92; W Times, Feb 4/92; LA Times, Feb 4/92; B Sun, Feb 4/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
Shuttle managers said budget-cutting goals recently mandated by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin could mean the loss of as many as 800 jobs on top of the 300 to 400 being phased out during the new fiscal year at the Kennedy Space Center. The cuts were part of Goldin's pledge to run a leaner, more efficient space agency. (O Sen Star, Sept 30/92)
Two American scientists presented a new theory on the evolution of Earth's continents and on early mass extinctions of life. Michael Rampino of New York University and Verne Oberbeck, a geologist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, discussed evidence that suggests that a huge asteroid struck Earth 250 million years ago, helping break up a super land mass called Gondwanaland and contributing to Earth's worst mass extinction of life forms. The new theory, presented during the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, was met by disbelief and skepticism, even by scientists who believe there is overwhelming evidence that another later asteroid impact wiped out the dinosaurs and other species by disrupting Earth's climate 65 million years ago. (P Inq, Dec 10/92; The Sun, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 20/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin appeared ready to abandon the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane program with its goal of constructing and flying a single-stage-to-orbit air-breathing vehicle in favor of a hypersonic research effort. The latter, the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility effort, centers on a manned, Mach 10-class reusable test aircraft launched from the back of a NASA/Lockheed SR-71A, and on an unmanned platform launched atop a rocket to explore physical phenomena at speeds approaching Mach 25. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
NASA engineers decided to stop operating the radar aboard the Magellan Venus mapping probe until early September in an attempt to preserve the spacecraft's one fully operational transmitter until Magellan swings over one of the large regions of the planet that it has not mapped. Ground controllers had relied on Magellan's backup transmitter since January, but the backup unit had developed radio noise that interfered with its periodic transmissions of scientific data. (Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at California Institute of Technology recently reported that they had found water ice on the planet Mercury. Radar beams aimed at both of the planet's poles bore telltale signs of having bounced off of frozen surfaces. (Time, Nov 2/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
NASA announced the selection of 321 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts under the agency's 1992 Small Business Innovation Research Program. The program aims to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally supported research innovations. (NASA Release 92-204)
Hubble Space Telescope scientists announced that Hubble has used a natural "zoom lens" it discovered in space to photograph an otherwise invisible distant galaxy and to chart concentrations of the mysterious dark matter that controls the fate of the universe. The astronomers said that the telescope was actually seeing a phenomenon known as a gravitational lens, which occurs when the gravitational field of a massive object bends light rays from a more distant source. They regarded the ability to discern in detail the structure of the distant magnified object as a major breakthrough in observing techniques. (W Post, Oct 9/92; UPI, Oct 8/92; NY Times, Oct 9/92; NASA Release 92-87 and 92-168)
NASA said that it was collaborating with Cray Research, Inc., of Eagan, Minnesota, to conduct joint research and development activities using the company's Cray T3D supercomputer. NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory expected to use the T3D system for applications that require high-power computers, such as turning planetary data from spacecraft into three-dimensional animations and analyzing Earth satellite data. (NASA Release 92-205; NY Times, Nov 17/92; WSJ, Nov 17/92; W Post, Nov 17/92)
