NASA announced that it had begun flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, using the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, were developing fiber optic systems that weighed less and took up less space than the copper wiring in today's aircraft. (NASA Release 93-199)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)
NASA announced that engineer Karl Anderson from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, had invented a process that yields more accurate, faster stress measurements. Anderson's method uses a circuit called a "constant current loop"; the system prevents errors caused by temperature changes in the wires that link instruments, called strain gauges, to recording devices. (NASA Release 93-002; AP, Jan 25/93; Antelope Valley Press, Jan 20/93)
The White House provided more details on President Clinton's plans to shift spending from defense to domestic "investment" priorities. The 1994 NASA budget request moved the agency away from big space flight projects involving humans toward development of new technologies with potential for practical use on the ground. The agency's total budget would go to $15.27 billion, an increase of almost $1 billion. Most of the increase would be spent on aeronautics and other technologies, for example, development of a fleet of high speed planes for public transport and high speed computing. (W Post, Apr 9/93)
The Freedom Forum, a group that funds journalism programs, presented a $100,000 grant to the Mercury Seven Foundation to establish a lecture series about space. The series, which was intended to help improve public understanding of space issues, was to be held annually in Florida's Brevard County, the location of the Kennedy Space Center. (AP, Mar 22/93)
NASA announced the selection of 317 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase 1 contracts in NASA's 1993 Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR).  Over 2,850 proposals were submitted by small, high technology businesses from all parts of the United States. (NASA Release  93-207)
NASA has begun full-scale development of the first spacecraft to rendezvous with and orbit an asteroid.  Called Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR), the mission received funding in the FY 1994 budget and was scheduled to be the first in NASA's new Discovery program of small-scale, cost-effective space exploration missions to be launched. (NASA Release 93-220)
A fighter plane shaped like an arrowhead flew into NASA's Langley Research Center this week. The plane, a heavily modified version of the Air Force F-16 fighter, has a wing that is narrow near the front of the plane and flares out near the tail. The plane was part of a program to build an efficient supersonic jetliner. (Daily Press, Apr 16/93)
NASA announced that scientists from the University of Hawaii and NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had determined that the planet Pluto is covered with surface ices that are 98 percent nitrogen.  The scientists concluded that with such abundant nitrogen surface ice, Pluto's thin atmosphere must be primarily gaseous nitrogen. (NASA Release 93-142)
The Space Shuttle Discovery, with five astronauts on board, was scheduled to lift off at 1:32 a.m. April 6 to study the condition of the Earth's ozone layer and sample 30 to 40 other gases. Three instruments in the Shuttle cargo bay would measure ozone, and four others would probe solar energy. A nighttime launch was necessary to put Discovery on the desired course for observing sunrises in the Northern Hemisphere. Meteorologists predicted an 80 percent chance of good weather. (W Post, Apr 5/93, Apr 6/93; W Times, Apr 5/93; LA Times, Apr 5/93; NY Times, Apr 4/93; AP, Apr 5/93; UPn, Apr 3/93; RTw, Apr 3/97)
In mid-June a new breed of spacecraft, the Delta Clipper Xl (DC-X), was scheduled to be launched for a brief test. If things go according to plan, the craft would hover briefly 100 feet in the air, and then settle back in its launching pad. The spacecraft, built by McDonald Douglas Aerospace, was to take off vertically and land the same way. Some experts in the field suggested that the DC-X might mark the next phase of U.S. space exploration. (Business Week, June 21/93)
NASA announced that NASA scientists were to spend October and November in Antarctica testing "telepresence technology" that might be used in the future to explore Mars. The research expedition was sponsored by a joint NASA-National Science Foundation Antarctic Space Analog Program and funded for NASA by the Offices of Space Science and Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-178; LA Times, Oct 3/93; UPI, Oct 4/93)
NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)
NASA announced that the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had been selected to design and build, in-house, the Space Station Furnace Facility, the first major element of Space Station scientific instrumentation and the focus of microgravity materials science research on the Space Station. (NASA Release 93-211)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
NASA officials said that the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to be functioning well, but that they would not know until February whether or not the Hubble's vision problems had been corrected. (W Times, Dec 16/93; Fla Today, Dec 14/93, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; UPn, Dec 15/93)
NASA contracted with Stanford University to do additional work on the Gravity Probe-B experiment. The experiment tests predictions of the general theory of relativity. Gravity Probe-B determines how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth and its rotation by measuring small changes in the spin of four gyroscopes in a satellite at 400 miles altitude in a Earth polar orbit. The first Shuttle test flight was scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release C93-b)
NASA announced that it had awarded Government Technology services Inc. of Chantilly a contract to provide Unix work station products to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland (W Times, Mar 4/93)
NASA announced that the agency would design and install an acoustic lining in the wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The improved wind tunnel ultimately would help U.S. industry design quiet engines for a future high-speed civil transport and for new helicopters. (NASA Release 93-81; San Francisco Examiner, May 9/93)
NASA held a marathon, 59-hour dress rehearsal of the agency's $251 million mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope and repair its flawed vision. The 11-day mission aboard the Shuttle Endeavour was planned for December 1.
The Associated Press announced that NASA engineers had searched for the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine compartment. The sound was heard as the Shuttle was being prepared for a June 3 launch. (AP, May 14/93)
Officials at the University of California, Berkeley,  announced that a violent overnight wind storm had destroyed a multimillion-dollar radio telescope. The 85-foot diameter dish, which was built in 1962, was located at the Hat Creek Observatory in the Lassen National Forest 70 miles northeast of Redding. NASA used the dish as part of its Crustal Dynamics Program, which measures motion of plates that compose the earth's crust. (UPI, Jan 22/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center Director Robert Crippen and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had signed an agreement that would transfer benefits derived from the U.S. space program to the private sector and industries in Florida.  The two parties agreed to set aside $1 million each for the next two years to implement projects under this agreement. (NASA Release 93-155)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-61 to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was scheduled for December 1, 1993. The flight was the first in a series of planned visits to the orbiting telescope. The 11-day mission was designed to accommodate a record five spacewalks with the capability for an additional two if needed.
NASA scientists said they were "ecstatic" over their progress in bringing the Hubble Space Telescope back to life after this month's repair mission. Hubble's ground handlers at NASA predicted that they would focus the observatory completely by the end of January, about two weeks quicker than expected. (H Post, Dec 23/93; APn, Dec 29/93; B Sun, Dec 25/93)
NASA announced that the material that keeps the Space Shuttle from burning up when it returns from space may help treat medical problems on earth. Researchers from NASA's Ames Research Center in California were working with physicians in San Antonio to determine whether the Space Shuttle's ceramic surface insulation materials could be used in bone transplants. (NASA Release 93-102)
Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)
Bad weather delayed the landing of Space Shuttle Endeavour at Kennedy Space Center. The landing was rescheduled for June 30, weather permitting. (UPI, June 29/93, June 30/93; W Post, June 30/93; USA Today, June 30/93; NY Times, June 30/93; B Sun, June 30/93; AP, June 30/93; RTw, June 30/93)
Air traffic controllers reported that their new  $839 million radar system has some serious flaws: planes vanish from screens, phantom images appear, and even a squirrel can chew up the network.  NASA said that it has received many complaints at its Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California, home of NASA's aviation safety reporting system. (AP, September 21/93
Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Edward Stone announced that the laboratory expected to eliminate l,000 of its 7,500 jobs in five years. The cuts resulted from the "realities of the federal budget" and the drop in aerospace work from defense contractors, according to Stone. (W Times, Feb 27/93)
The Department of Justice filed a complaint accusing Paul Buchanan, director of NASA's Biomedical Operations and Research Office at Kennedy Space Center, of submitting false vouchers claiming lodging expenses for time spent in Washington, DC, while on temporary duty for NASA. (Fla Today, Dec 4/93; C Trib, Dec 5/93)
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
NASA scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica in 1992 was as severe as in any previous year. Ozone is destroyed by chorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which are used as solvents, propellants, and coolants.  On September 23, 1992, the surface area of the ozone hole reached 8.9 million square miles. Measurements were taken by the Nimbus-7 and Meteor-3 Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) instruments. (NASA Release 93-14; UPI, Jan 19/93)
Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
Two NASA scientists told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that a cosmic collision as powerful as the one that many scientists think killed all the dinosaurs on Earth 65 million years ago may take place on the planet Jupiter in 1994. The scientists speculated that the impact might come from the comet Shoemaker-Levy, which last year came so close to Jupiter that the planet's powerful gravitational field shattered the comet into about a dozen large chunks. Recent calculations show that most of the comet's remaining chunks may hit Jupiter in July 1994. Because of uncertainties about the comet's orbit, however, it was possible that the collision might not occur at all. (C Trib, June 13/93; P Inq, June 20/93; W Post, June 28/93)
NASA announced that it would soon begin tests using a modified Convair 990 commercial jet airliner to expand the operational landing capabilities of the Space Shuttle system. The Convair has been undergoing modifications for two years in preparation for tests that would help Johnson Space Center researchers better understand the operational capabilities of the Shuttle system. (Desert Wings, Jan 8/93)
Galileo's controllers at the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, continued to work on unfurling the spacecraft's stuck high-gain antenna. If their attempts were unsuccessful, the craft's controllers would use Galileo's low-gain antenna to gather data, including data from a probe that would descend into Jupiter's atmosphere. Use of the back-up system would enable NASA to complete 70 percent of its mission, according to project manager William O'Neill. (CSM, Jan 13/93)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
NASA said that it planned to launch a repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope as planned next month despite a troublesome sensor on one of Shuttle Endeavour's wing flaps. The faulty sensor poses no safety problems, a Nasa spokesman said. (APn, Nov 19/93; RTw, Nov 19/93)
Astro D, a cooperative x-ray astronomy mission with Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) and NASA, was scheduled for launching February 11 from the ISAS Kagoshima Space Center in Japan.
Officials at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico announced that the Delta Clipper-Experimental rocket had successfully completed its first test flight, boosting backers's hopes that the single-stage design would be cheaper and more reliable than current space launch rockets. During the test flight, which lasted only about a minute, the rocket hovered briefly, flew about 350 feet to one side, and then touched down vertically on a landing pad. It was the first time a spacecraft had landed vertically on Earth.  A second test flight was tentatively set for Aug. 27. In that test, the rocket was scheduled to go up about 650 feet.  (AP, Aug 18/93; WSJ, Aug 19/93; H Chron, Aug 19/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; W Times, Aug 21/93; Time, Aug 30/93)
NASA has chosen 38 research proposals to be incorporated into phase II of its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The projects will be conducted by 36 small business from 18 states; the projects have a value of approximately $19 million. NASA will select approximately 100 additional research proposals in January and February 1993.
The Senate confirmed John H. Gibbons as President Clinton's science and technology adviser. Gibbons was scheduled to direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), which advises the president on issues such as global warming, AIDS research, and support of science education in schools. A nuclear physicist, Gibbons, 64, headed the congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) for 13 years. (W Post, Jan 29/93)
NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)
A New York Times editorial recommended that Congress eliminate the Space Station program because of the need to find deeper budget cuts and the fact that the program looked "more like pork-barrel spending for the aerospace industry than an exciting technological venture." The editorial noted that cutting the program would force the nation to reassess just what role humans should play in space. (NY Times, June 23/93)
NASA announced that it had selected SYSCON Services, Inc., Washington, D.C., for negotiations leading to the award of a contract to provide technical and support services at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California.  (NASA Release C93-j)
NASA announced that beginning in February, NASA would test "technology incubation," a new laboratory-to-market approach designed to help space technology contribute to U.S. industrial competitiveness. NASA was funding two centers, the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The three-year experiment, which was being operated by the University of Texas, Austin, was receiving funding of $800,000 this year. (NASA Release 93-037)
Eleven high school students participated in an eight-week Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP) at NASA's Dryden space center this summer.  Four days a week, the participants completed a regular eight-hour workday, working alongside engineers and others, learning firsthand what it takes to succeed in these careers.  The fifth day was spent in career exploration, perhaps a tour of different facilities at Edwards AFB or a visit to a university such as UCLA.  (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 12/93)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had created the first geographically precise image of the Earth "breathing"--removing and releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. The dynamic computer model shows monthly changes for carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere as microbes decompose plant debris in the Earth's soil. (NASA Release 93-223; UPI, Dec 20/93)
NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia, with a science mission paid for and directed by Germany, was scheduled to be launched on April 24. The launch was scheduled to take place just seven days after Discovery's return from an atmospheric research flight. An engine shutdown March 22 halted Columbia's launch with just three seconds to go. (AP, 4/21; 93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 21/93; USA Today, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 22/93)
Executives from two major players in the aircraft industry, United Technologies Corporation and General Electric Company, said that job cuts and productivity improvement programs won't by themselves pull the industry out of its downturn. They were beginning to hint that they would like to team up with each other, perhaps through more joint research and development projects. Such hints might be merely a means of testing how far the Clinton administration would let them bend antitrust laws. However, even the suggestion of cooperation revealed the turmoil in the jet engine market, which was suffering because of slumping airline order and deep cuts in government spending on military aircraft. (WSJ, Jan 29/93)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were measuring how the human body reacted to exercise done on Earth and comparing those measurements to the exercise measurements of astronauts working in the microgravity environment of space. The goal was to try to improve the productivity of astronauts involved in space walks. (NASA Release 93-93)
Writing in the Washington Post, columnist Michael Schrage reported that physicist John H. Gibbons, White House science and technology policy advisor, was facing some tough choices. He soon had to decide whether science and technology would play a leadership role in the Clinton Administration's economic agenda or merely a supporting one. That choice appeared to be as yet unmade. (W Post, Apr 30/93)
NASA officials said that Germany was being charged only $150 million of the $400 million cost of launching a science mission aboard Shuttle Columbia on February 25. Columbia's crew was expected to include two German researchers and a laboratory of German science experiments. The price was agreed upon in 1986 under a pricing policy NASA officials admitted was outdated. (O Sen Star, Feb 4/93)
NASA scientists were scheduled to test an "intelligent" computer on the 14-day Spacelab Life Sciences mission, scheduled for launch in early October. The computer, known as the Astronaut Science Advisor, was designed to help astronauts work more efficiently and improve the quality of science in space. (NASA Release 93-180)
NASA announced that scientists using the Earth-orbiting Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had discovered a powerful pulsar that had become one of the brightest x-ray sources in the sky during the past two weeks. (NASA Release 93-141)
The Spacelab Life Sciences-2 (SLS-2) mission scheduled for October would offer scientists unprecedented opportunities to learn more about how life adapts to the microgravity environment of space flight.  For the first time in the history of space flight, scientists were to collect tissues during the mission.  Crew members were to draw blood samples from both themselves and rats and were to dissect five rats in space.  (NASA Release 93-173)
According to Space News, seven months after a NASA-appointed Management Review Team reported that lax security had created a high risk of espionage at the Ames Research Center in Northern California further investigations by the FBI and NASA's inspector general had not substantiated those charge. In the meantime, however, Ames had implemented many of the team's recommendations. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
The New York Times reported that an Orion rocket being prepared for launch at the European Space Range in Kiruna, Sweden, ignited while on its flatbed and shot through two buildings, killing a technician and injuring three others. The 20-foot rocket was to have measured the earth's ozone layer, using equipment from a German Space organization. (NY Times, Mar 1/93; RT, Feb 27/93)
In 1989, NASA embarked on a vast program, the Mission to Planet Earth, which set out to monitor the effects of climate change on Earth's atmosphere, land surface, and oceans. The centerpiece of this program was to be the Earth Observing System, or EOPS, a group of 30,000-pound space platforms that could cost as much as $30 billion to build, launch, and operate. The platforms were projected to beam home one trillion bits of data each day, ranging from the flux of solar radiation into the atmosphere to the growth of plankton beneath the ocean surface.
Marshall Engineers and Scientists Association President Wesley Darbro said that it appeared that the Marshall Space Flight Center would lay off about 478 workers, all associated with the Space Station program. (Huntsville Times, Sep 20/93)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
Hughes Aircraft and Perkin-Elmer Corporation agreed to pay $25 million to head off a threatened government lawsuit, charging them with liability for the defect that crippled the $2-billion Hubble Space Telescope, the Justice Department announced. (UPI, Oct 4/93; AP, Oct 5/93; NY Times, Oct 5/93; B Sun, Oct 5/93, Oct 8/93; W Post, Oct 5/93; WSJ, Oct 5/93; LA Times, Oct 5/93)
NASA announced that it would participate in the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People's (NAACP) national Afro-Academic Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics (ACT-SO) competition, to be held in conjunction with the groups's annual convention in July.  Two thousand high school students, representing 600 cities, were scheduled to compete for national honors.  NASA scientists and engineers were to participate as science fair judges.  National winner would receive certificates from NASA and a sponsored visit to a NASA field center.
Space scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, think they have identified what matter in deep space is absorbing certain wavelengths of light from distant stars. Researchers Farid Salama and Louis Allamandola demonstrated that the light is absorbed by unexpectedly large organic molecules spread throughout the vacuum of space. These molecules, shaped like chicken wire, are called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
The W Times reported that a joint U.S.-German experimental fighter jet had completed a revolutionary rapid turn in flight. The aircraft slowed from a speed of about 300 miles an hour and reversed direction in only nine seconds using a tight, looping turn. According to the Pentagon, the turn was far beyond the aerodynamic capability of any conventional fixed-wing aircraft. The test flight took place at Edwards Air Force Base, California.
NASA scientists reported that ozone-destroying forms of chlorine had  existed for much longer in the Arctic stratosphere this winter than last. Northern Hemisphere ozone abundance also was observed to be some 10 percent below that measured during the same period last year, with some areas 20 percent lower. NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) provided the information. (NASA Release 93-068; NY Times, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 14/93)
NASA announced that the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and California wine growers would use aerial and satellite images to battle an insect problem encountered by California's wine industry. Sensitive electronic scanners on aircraft and satellites would help a group from government, industry, and several universities map and analyze root louse damage in northern California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA Release 93-55; UPI, Mar 31/93; SF Chron, Mar 31/93; P Inq, May 2/93)
Writing in Sports Illustrated, Robert H. Boyle took to task those members of the media who have asserted that environmental problems such as depletion of the ozone layer and acid rain don't exist, that they were cooked up by scientists greedy for funding. Boyle pointed the finger at talk show host Ross Limbaugh but said that mainstream publications such as the Washington Post and the Wall Street Journal had also been guilty of misrepresenting environmental problems.  (Sports Illustrated, Jul 12/93)
Robert S. Harrington, 50, an astronomer with the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, died of cancer January 23 at George Washington University Hospital. Dr. Harrington was known for his work concerning the possible existence of a 10th planet beyond the orbit of Plato. He also focused on precise stellar distances, solar system dynamics, and multiple star dynamics.
On December 23, Bill Clinton picked John H. Gibbons, head of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, to be his science and technology advisor. Gibbons planned to emphasize civilian-sector competitiveness; he also hoped to broaden industry's input into White House policy making while making sure that companies invested serious money into government-backed projects. (Bus Wk, Jan 18/93)
NASA announced that it had joined with American Bio-Technologies Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, in an attempt to arrive at a better understanding of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The goal was to use advanced x-ray technology and expertise developed by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, to advance knowledge of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and AIDS, to develop new therapeutic approaches for HIV and AIDS, and to develop superior biological materials for vaccine development and HIV detection. (NASA Release 93-88)
An official of Japan's Science and Technology Agency announced that it would spend $4.6 billion developing an unmanned Space Shuttle that would repair satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro-gravity experiments. (Rtw, Jul 7/93)
NASA announced that a study at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, might lead to a reduction in the lightheadness astronauts feel after returning to earth from space. A reduced level of plasma was believed to contribute to the tendency to feel faint. (NASA Release 93-030)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
NASA announced that Salisbury State University had become the first college in Maryland named to participate in a joint study program with NASA. The university was expected to receive a $110,000 grant over three years from NASA's Joint Venture Institutions program. (B Sun, June 4/93)
The Boeing Company and the four leading European aerospace companies, partners in the Airbus Industrie consortium, reached an agreement to conduct a one-year study of the feasibility of jointly building a superjumbo airliner capable of carrying up to 800 passengers. (NY Times, Jan 28/93)
The Delta Clipper-Experimental, a 42-foot prototype for a new generation of reusable spacecraft, climbed to about 300 feet, hovered, moved laterally about 350 feet, then made a vertical landing at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.  This was the spacecraft's second successful test flight. (B Sun, Sep 12/93; National Journal, Oct 2/93)
Miles "Mike" Ross, former deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center, died of cancer Wednesday at his home.  He was 74.  Mr. Ross joined NASA in 1967 as deputy director of the center's engineering and technical operations.  He became deputy center director in 1970. (Fl Today, Oct 15/93)
The Washington Post reported that ozone layer problem appeared to be on the way to a solution. Thanks to the Montreal Protocol, an international treaty obligating signatory countries to phase our ozone-destroying chemicals, scientists expected the threat of ozone destruction to peak in 2000. In that year, according to the latest scientific projections, the ozone layer should start slowly getting thicker and better able to block the sun's harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. (W Post, Apr 15/93)
NASA announced that researchers at the NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed a new and unique group of ceramic processing chemicals that might revolutionize the ceramic industry.  The new processing chemicals might lead to high purity ceramic products that could better withstand temperatures over 2102 degrees F (1200 degrees Celsius). (NASA Release 93-143)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:29 a.m., ET, on an eight-day mission to study Earth's endangered ozone layer. Thursday's liftoff followed an earlier aborted launch. According to reports, the Shuttle, which carried a crew of five, lit up the night like a huge blowtorch as it rocketed into orbit. (AP, April 4/93; RT, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 4/93; USA Today, Apr 8/93; W Post, Apr 8/93; B Sun, Apr 8/93)
The House Space, Science, and Technology Committee passed a $15.16 billion authorization for NASA, in effect rejecting the attempt to kill the Space Station. The authorization would give the Space Station $1.9 billion a year for the next six fiscal years and $1.3 billion in the fiscal year 2000. Congressional opponents of the station, however, vowed to take the fight to the House floor. (NY Times, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; USA Today, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93)
Dr. Lonnie Reid, a fluid dynamics expert at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, was scheduled to be inducted into the Ohio Science Technology and Industry Hall of Fame in Columbus on February 7.
NASA said that scientists at the NASA-Langley Research Center had developed a radar that can detect wind shear before pilots fly into it. The FAA considers the Langley device an improvement over other wind shear radar on the market, according to an FAA spokesperson. NASA nominated Langley's radar work for the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy, a national award given annually by he  National Aeronautics Association to those who have made the greatest achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. (Daily Press, Nov 22/93)
NASA announced that it planned to launch Shuttle Endeavour and seven astronauts on December 1 on a  mission to repair the troubled Hubble Space Telescope. (UPI, Oct 21/93)
During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on April 26, daughters of Johnson Space Center employees got to see where astronauts prepare for space flights and were even able to test the pressurized spacesuit gloves worn by astronauts. Daughters were also welcomed at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, where they toured the control room, investigated an SE-71 cockpit, and crawled around inside a modified Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr 29/93)
The magazine Science reported that some researchers were complaining that NASA was overselling its satellites' products. They cited as an example news stories that fueled excitement about images of what NASA called black holes. Referring to an image featured on the front page of a November issue of the New York Times, one expert said that labeling the pictured cloud of dust a black hole was largely wishful thinking on the part of the observers and the backers of the space telescope. Science noted that outside astronomers often criticized NASA press releases, charging that they were misleading. (Science, June 4/93)
NASA announced that 40 college students had started a six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The summer residence training program was for college students interested in life sciences, bioengineering, ecology, or related fields. (NASA Release 93-117)
The Washington Post reported that the Space Station Freedom redesign team was struggling over a key issue: how to cut the facility's costs while retaining enough power to make the facility worth building. In 1985, NASA engineers envisioned a power system that supplied 135,000 kilowatts (kWs), far more than any other spacecraft. The basic outline of the original plan remained, but the planned capacity had dropped to about 57kW. President Clinton could select a new space design by mid-June. (W Post, May 31/93; USA Today, June 2/93)
Richard T. Barrett, a senior design engineer at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, was awarded the Federal Laboratory Consortium Award of Excellence in Technology Transfer for 1993. (NASA Release 93-73)
Rockwell International Corporation Chairman and CEO Donald R. Beall presented the Chairman's Team Award to National Aero-Space Plane engineers in recognition of the Engine Flowpath Team's significant contributions to hypersonic propulsion development in the United States. The team was composed of 11 engineers from General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Pratt & Whitney, Rockwell's Rocketdyne and North American Aircraft businesses, and NASA's Langely Research Center. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 26/93)
Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Joint Astronomy Centre, Hilo, Hawaii, discovered an unexpected type of molecule in the ices of a star-forming cloud.  The scientists have detected large amounts of molecular hydrogen frozen into the ice grains in a dense molecular cloud in Rho Ophiuchus. Rho Ophiuchus is known as a stellar nursery, a region in the Milky Way galaxy where new stars are being formed. (NASA Release 93-187)
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)
Researchers hoped that the lead coffins buried beneath the floor of the 17th-century Great Brick Chapel in St. Mary's City, Maryland, contained 300-year-old air. However, according to Joel Levine, the scientist who headed the team analyzing the air at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the coffins appeared to contain modern air, as signalled by the presence of Chlorofluorocarbons, which were first manufactured in the 1940s.
NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that a NASA advisory panel had found that the Hubble Space Telescope would have had even more component failure in orbit if the launch had not slipped from 1986 to 1990 as a result of the Challenger accident. The delay enabled technicians to do additional testing that revealed suspect parts. (AvWk, May 24/93)
Charles H. Vermillion, chief of the international data systems office at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was charged in a six-count indictment with violating federal conflict-of-interest laws and converting government property to his own use. Vermillion, who said he was innocent, was charged with taking NASA-developed plans for a programmable frame synchronizer, assembling the synchronizers at his own plant, and selling them privately. (W Post, Jul 23/93)
NASA announced that findings by scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, challenge the theories of how galaxies evolve. The  U.S. team included a scientist from the Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany.
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had provided the most detailed look yet at comet Shoemaker-Levy 5, which was hurtling toward a July  1994 collision with the planet Jupiter.  Hubble's high resolution images showed that the approximately 20 objects that make up the comet are much smaller than originally estimated from observations with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 93-188; USA Today, Oct 15/93; S F Chron, Oct 15/93; RTw, Oct 14/93; W Post, Oct 25/93)
NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)
NASA announced that in one of the deepest celestial surveys yet made by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers had discovered a small group of previously unknown interacting galaxies estimated to be three billion light-years away. Because Hubble caught the galaxies in an early stage of evolution, they offer new clues as to how galaxies have changed over time. (NASA Release 93-203)
NASA announced that it had tested helicopter rotor performance in icing conditions.  The tests were performed in the Icing Research Tunnel at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.  The new experimental database resulting from these tests was to be used to further refine and validate a computer code that predicts helicopter rotor performance loss occurring when ice accumulates on the rotors during an icing encounter. (NASA Release 93-147)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, announced that he had accepted an appointment as the Zachry Professor of Engineering at Texas A&M University and would retire from NASA on August 20. Cohen joined NASA in 1962.  He became Director of the Johnson Space Center in 1986. (NASA Release 93-131; AP, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 16/93; UPn, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have been able to see a double star whose existence they had known only by the intermittent bursts of x-rays recorded over the last 20 years. The binary star, made up of a neutron star and a white dwarf, is 30.000 light-years away from Earth. The report of the discovery was recently published in Astrophysical Journal Letters. (NY Times, Sep 7/93; W Times, Sep 5/93; W Post, Sep 13/93).
A Utah State university group sponsored by NASA's National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program Office was scheduled to launch a high-altitude research balloon on January 11 to measure ozone distribution and wind parameters in the Earth's stratosphere. The balloon, which was to fly across the Gulf of Mexico to Florida, was the eleventh launched by this team and the first of 24-hours duration.
The Plain Dealer reported that a group of African-American employees at NASA's Lewis Research Center had charged that the materials used in a pilot program intended to promote better communication between employees of differing cultural groups instead fostered racism. NASA was investigating. (The Plain Dealer, May 25/93; Space News, May 31-June 6/93)
Federal Computer Week reported that a small woman-owned Florida firm had protested Marshall Space Flight Center's decision to let companies with up to 1,500 employees bid on a small, disadvantaged business (SDB) set-aside program there. Challenger Engineering Inc., St. Petersburg, Florida, maintained that NASA's procurement policy was unfair to smaller minority-owned firms that could not compete with larger companies. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 1/93)
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
According to  Luke Dones, a visiting Assistant Research Astronomer at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, the Earth's rotation rate may be caused by early collisions with rocks as large as Mars. Without the large impacts, the Earth would rotate only every 200 hours instead of the 24 hours it rotates today, said Dones. (NASA Release 93-012; AP, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Jan 19/93)
NASA officials announced that further testing on the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II (WF/PCII), an instrument scheduled to fly on the Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission in December, might be necessary. Tests had cleared the camera of suspicion that it was flawed, but NASA asked for one last independent review of the data just to make completely sure.  (NASA Release  93-169; W Post, Sep 28/93)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, had awarded the Space Shuttle Orbiter Avionics Software contract to IBM Corporation, Houston.  The contract was for the development and maintenance of the primary avionics support software, tool development and maintenance, and certification of primary flight software. (NASA Release C93-s)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)
NASA announced that the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, would lead a multi-year research program effort to develop technology for a future high-speed civil transport. According to Louis Williams, Director of the High-Speed Research Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., "The program is laying a technical foundation for an environmentally compatible, economically practical commercial transport that could contribute up to 140,000 jobs and $200 billion to the national economy in the next century." (NASA Release 93-52; Daily Press, May 24/93)
President Clinton dissolved the Cabinet-level National Space Council as part of staff cuts to reduce the budget. The duties of the space council were to come under the umbrella of a broader policy-making group called the Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by new presidential science adviser Jack Gibbons. (H Chronicle, Feb 10/93; Space News, Feb 15/93)
NASA announced that the December flight of the Endeavor Space Shuttle mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope was scheduled to last ll days and to involve a record five spacewalks, with the possibility of two additional walks, if needed. (NASA Release 93-76; W Times, Apr 25/93)
The Hook Telescope on Mt. Wilson in California, which once ranked as the world's biggest, was written off as an astronomical anachronism eight years ago. However, using the latest electronic sensors and image-enhancers, scientists and philanthropists led by Robert Jastrow of the Mt. Wilson Institute and the founder of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Flight, were reported working to salvage the Hooker Telescope.  Jastrow had raised $250,000 for repairs and was seeking another $250,00 to make the telescope useful into the 21st century. (LA Times, Aug 2/93)
NASA announced that it had selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Applied Technology Division, Falls Church, Virginia, to negotiate a contract for scientific computing operations, maintenance, and communication services in support of the Center Scientific Computing Complex (CSCC) at the Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA (NASA Release C93-1; W Times, Jul 22/93))
Director Dale Compton and Deputy Director Victor Peterson, the two top directors at NASA's Ames Research Center, were scheduled to retire at the of the year. The retirements come at a time when women and members of minority groups have complained that the center's top jobs are reserved for an "old boy network" of white men. (San Jose Mercury News, Dec 11/93)
Using the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), NASA scientists measured thermal radiation differences across the universe and come up with more conclusive evidence than ever to support the "Big Bang" theory that the universe was created by a single blast 15 billion years ago. Measurements made by COBE revealed that 99.97 percent of the early radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year after the Big Bang itself. "This is the ultimate in tracing one's cosmic roots," said NASA scientist John C. Mather, who announced the findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society. (NASA Release 93-5; USA Today, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 8/93; AP, Jan 8/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
Jack Gibbons, President Bill Clinton's science advisor, said that the Clinton administration was debating various options for space policy management. Central was the question of whether to centralize control of the space program in a single White House office or spread out military, individual, and commercial space policy among several high-level councils. The role of science and technology in the Clinton administration was scheduled to be discussed during a January 30-31 meeting in Maryland. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
The first test flight of a re-usable single-stage rocket, called the Delta Clipper Experimental, was scheduled to occur shortly at the White Sands test facility, a Federal site in the New Mexico desert.  The 42-foot, 20-ton prototype was built by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for the Defense Department. (NY Times, Aug 10/93)
By firing small jets 10 times in one-minute bursts, NASA engineers have raised the orbit of the giant Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory by 66 miles and saved it from crashing to Earth. The observatory was scheduled to travel around Earth in an egg-shaped orbit until late November when a second series of firings was to circularize its travels so that it would be at 280 miles altitude all around the globe. (AP, Oct 19/93)
NASA officials said that its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had yielded three major breakthroughs, two of which would enable scientists to unmask hidden supernovae buried deep in the center of the Milky Way.  The third discovery pinpoints a source of the mysterious cosmic rays in this galaxy that have puzzled researchers since the rays first were detected more than 80 years ago. (NASA Release 93-182)
Scientists failed in a new attempt to get the Mars Observer spacecraft to re-establish contact with Earth, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said. The spacecraft did not respond to commands to turn on its primary telecommunications equipment. A proposal to try to restart the Observer's central computer was rejected because it was thought to pose an unnecessary risk to telecommunications with other spacecraft. (RTw, Aug 30/93; W Post, Aug 31/93; AP, Aug 31/93l CSM, Sept 1/93)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Magellan Project officials announced the successful first-of-a kind experiment to "aerobrake" a spacecraft by dipping it into the atmosphere of a planet.  The Magellan spacecraft's orbit was changed from highly elliptical to nearly circular by dragging it through the top of the thick Venusian atmosphere repeatedly over a period of 70 days, ending on August 3, 1997.
NASA announced the formation of an International Mars Exploration Working Group. In addition to NASA, members included the European Space Agency, the Russian Space Research Institute, the Italian Space Agency, the German Space Agency, and the French Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. The group would focus on producing an international strategy for the exploration of Mars after the year 2000. (NASA Release 93-87)
NASA announced that it would fund three new university research centers charged with fostering the next generation of researchers and engineers in hypersonic aeronautics--flight at more than five times the speed of sound.  Scheduled to receive $200,000 annually for three years were Syracuse University, New York; the University of Maryland, College Park; and the University of Texas at Arlington. (NASA Release 93-152)
Orbital Sciences Corporation said its Orbital Imaging Corporation unit had been awarded a two-year, $7 million contract to provide atmospheric research data to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center.  (W Times, August 31/93)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation of Germantown, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract. The seven-year, $91 million contract would provide instrument support services to the Engineering Directorate at Goddard. (NASA Release C93-h; W Post, June 15/93)
Writing in the journal Nature, U.S. scientist Walter Jaffe said that his team had taken pictures of a so-called nuclear accretion disk, which scientists have long theorized surrounds a black hole.  The idea is that matter swirls around the black hole as it is being pulled in, forming an accretion disk, a flat ellipse resembling a round Danish pastry.  The disk was discovered through use of the planetary camera on the Hubble Space Telescope. (RTw, Jul 14/93)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had reported that recent NASA Hubble Space Telescope observations of a class of active galaxies further supported the theory that they are fueled by a massive black hole at the center. (NASA Release 93-130; RTw, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
NASA announced that it had started flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, which used the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft, took place at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 93-199)
Under its High-Speed Research Program (HSRP), which began in 1990, NASA was doing basic research on developing a "clean" supersonic airliner, including preliminary studies of the potential of new materials. As part of this work, NASA was studying the atmospheric effects of supersonic aircraft in the stratosphere. The third report from this study, still in draft form and unlikely to be published in 1993, promised to dampen the optimism of previous research. (New Scientist, Aug 14/93)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, hosted six three-day sessions of Aerospace for Kids, designed to teach children about aerospace technology and Goodard this summer.  The program was to host 150 children over a six-week period this summer. (Prince George's Sentinel, Jul 29/93)
NASA announced that under a recently signed agreement NASA engineers and Learjet Inc. engineers, based in  Wichita, Kansas, would work on the development of a new high performance business jet. The engineers were to study aircraft size and aerodynamics to create the plane; they would use state-of-the-art supercomputers and wind tunnels at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-46; AP, Mar 15/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the establishment of a study team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to explore possibilities for a return mission to Mars to recover some of the scientific objectives of the Mars Observer mission, if communications with that spacecraft could not be reestablished. (NASA Release 93-157; UPI, Sep 1/93; AP, Sep 1/93)
NASA reported that it had lost all contact with Shuttle Columbia for 80 minutes on May 4 because of an erroneous computer command sent to the Shuttle. The blackout led to the loss of some science data but did not cause any major problems; NASA officials, however, reviewed procedures for creating and sending commands to the Shuttle antenna.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and a team based at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages most planetary flights, have examined a variety of options for a new mission to Mars to achieve the scientific goals of the lost Mars Observer at less cost.  The flight would be launched no earlier than 1996. (W Post, Nov 13/93)
NASA announced that NASA scientists had direct evidence that red supergiants--the largest stars known--end their existence in massive explosions known as supernovae. Until this week, astronomers could only speculate that these explosions represented the death of such stars. NASA's international Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite obtained the new evidence through observations of a new supernova on March 30. (NASA Release 93-63)
According to officials at NASA, a bad lot of batteries made by Gates Aerospace Battery Company, might shut down several satellites, including the $3633 million Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) sooner than expected. To make sure that UARS would finish its minimum 18-month mission, NASA scientists had to adjust the satellite's hardware. Instead of gathering extra data from UARS for 10 to 12 years as expected, scientists now estimate that contact with the satellite would last only four or five years. (Science, Feb 12/93)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it had selected NSI Technology Services Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for integration and test support services. The contract, which covered seven years, had an estimated value of $200 million and would provide services to all of Goddard and portions of NASA's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release C93-e)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
LTX Corporation announced that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had taken delivery of a Synchro mixed signal test system for use in the radiation effects and testing laboratory in Pasadena, California. (PR NEWSWIRE, Aug 11/93)
NASA announced that it had officially kicked off Phase II of its High-Speed Research Program, a partnership with U.S. industry to develop technology that could enable the development of a next-generation supersonic airliner. (NASA Release 93-202)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
A White House panel recently called for the American space program to cut back its program significantly. The panel's report, issued on December 17, said that duplication among agencies had to be eliminated and cold-war secrecy reduced. The panel added that the United States should seek to make international cooperation an essential component of its space exploration strategy. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)
NASA, the Alaskan Volcano Observatory (AVO) and Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, have agreed to a second robotic volcano exploration involving Dante, an eight-legged robot that attempted to explore Mt. Erebus in Antarctica earlier this year. (NASA Release 93-195; AP, Oct 26/93; W Times, Oct 31/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) contract award protests were settled. EG & G Florida, Inc; BAMSI, Inc.; and Westinghouse KSC Company, Inc. protested the awarding of the contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, charging that there were deficiencies in the agency's activities during the original proposal submission. As part of the settlement, NASA agreed to rescind its original selection and said that each of the four competitors would be able to submit a revised proposal. (NASA Release 93-18; WSJ, Feb 2/93; AP, February 2/93; O Sen Star, Jan 19/93; Fla Today, Jan 29/93)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts blasted off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission. The team was scheduled to carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments and undertake three space walks.  This was the fourth joint Russian-French space flight since 1982. (RTw, Jul 1/93; RT, Jul 1/93)
NASA awarded 20 universities grants for the first phase of a new training program that ultimately would create a cadre of young engineers skilled in multi-disciplinary design and analysis methods. Each university was to get about $50,000 to define a multi-disciplinary curriculum and graduate-level research program in the aeronautics field that would be accomplished with industry. The universities also were to prepare proposals for Phase II of the effort. (NASA Release 93-210)
John H. Gibbons, Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy, outlined to the members-designate of the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station, three budget options. The three options are a low option of $5 billion, a mid-range option of $7 billion, and a high option of $9 billion. Each option would cover the total expenditures for the Space Station from fiscal year 1994 through 1988. (NASA Release 93-64)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, selected Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Corporation, Houston, for the Engineering, Test and Analysis contract worth $12.5 billion over 10 years, beginning January 1, 1994.  (NASA Release C93-y)
NASA announced that Marta Bohn-Meyer, an aeronautical engineer at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, was one of 10 federal government employees chosen to receive the 1992 Arthur S. Flemming Award. The reward "recognizes U.S. government employees for outstanding and meritorious work," according to NASA.
Martin Marietta Corporation reported that its Martin Marietta Astronautics Group had received a $35 million contract from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build the propulsion module subsystem for NASA's Cassini spacecraft mission that was to study Saturn, its moon Titan, and the rest of the Saturnian system. The Cassini was scheduled for launch in October 1997. (W Times, Apr 13/93)
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
NASA announced a new initiative to commercialize NASA inventions by using top graduate students at Case Western to come up with new product ideas and strategies. NASA's Lewis Research Center, the Battelle Memorial Institute, and Case Western Reserve University, all based in Cleveland, Ohio, were involved in the program. (NASA Release 93-91)
NASA announced the selection of 130 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The SBIR goals are to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small businesses (including minority and disadvantaged firms) in meeting federal research and development needs and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. (NASA Release 93-219)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Dr. France Anne Cordova, head of the Astronomy and Astrophysics Department, Pennsylvania State University, was scheduled to assume the responsibilities of NASA Chief Scientist effective mid-October. She was to be on extended detail from the University to NASA. (NASA Release 93-162)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the California Institute of Technology announced that they had developed a computer software system to catalog and analyze the estimated half billion sky objects in the second Palomar Observatory sky survey. (NASA Release 93-067)
Robert McClure of Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in Victoria, British Columbia, said that Canadian and U.S. astronomers had used a telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, to obtain the first clear pictures showing galaxies colliding and merging on "a really grand scale." The pictures supported a theory that postulates that elliptical galaxies were formed by galactic mergers such as those observed. (W Times, June 20/93)
Three major aerospace companies announced cutbacks yesterday, with Connecticut and Washington State losing most of the jobs. Pratt & Whitney, a jet engine manufacturer whose plants are mainly in Connecticut, said that 6,700 jobs would be eliminated over the next 12 months. The Boeing Company announced that it would cut back production of all models of jet airliners. Such a downsizing could result in as many as 30,000 lost jobs. McDonnell Douglas, which had already announced that 8,700 jobs would soon be eliminated, most of them production jobs in its California factories, said that 1,500 white-collar jobs would disappear from its St. Louis headquarters. (NY Times, Jan 27/93; WSJ, Jan 27/93)
Throughout the balloon's flight, teams of amateur radio operators in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida were to receive information from the balloon's gondola; this information was to be relayed by high-frequency radio to the Utah State University team. Other flights of an longer duration were scheduled to be launched from Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Central America. (NASA Release 93-8)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor-derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had looked into the nucleus of a galaxy created by the collision of two galaxies and had discovered a pinwheel-shaped disk of gas surrounded by clusters of young stars born as result of the collision. "This may unlock the key for understanding how all globular clusters formed in ellipticals," said Dr. Brad Whitmore of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.
Some NASA scientists, following the "faster, better, cheaper" advice of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden, want to send two small space probes to study Pluto, the solar system's last known unexplored planet. The Plato mission could cost $600 million to $1 billion, depending on whether the probes were reached by Russian or U.S. rockets, respectively. By comparison, NASA expected to spend more than $2 billion to launch a spaceship in 1997 to explore Saturn. (AP, Feb 8/93)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered a group of stars that apparently had been cannibalized of their cooler outer gas layers by other passing stars, resulting in stellar "naked cores" with surface temperatures five times hotter than Earth's sun. (NASA Release 93-109; NY Times, June 10/93; P Inq, June 10/93; B Sun, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93; Science, June 14/93)
SBIR attempts to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small businesses to help federal agencies meet their research and development needs. (NASA Release 93-003)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that an SR-71 Blackbird reconnaissance aircraft, once used as a spy plane, took off this week on its maiden science flight. The plane was equipped with an ultra-violet camera to study stars and comets.
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) recommended eliminating the JPL Edwards Test Facility, staffed by 28 JPL employees and 18 contractors, at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert. If NASA managers accepted the recommendation, the facility could shut down by 1996. (UPI, Feb 8/93; Feb 9/Antelope Valley Press, Feb 9/93)
NASA announced that a NASA F/A-18, modified to test the newest and most advanced system technologies, made its first research flight on May 21 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The Systems Research Aircraft (SRA) was evaluating technologies that would benefit both civilian and military aircraft. (NASA Release 93-95; Mojave Desert News, May 27/93)
A team of astronomers using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope discovered a "double nucleus" in the center of the neighboring spiral galaxy M31, located in the constellation Andromeda.  Hubble shows that the M31 nucleus is much more complex than previously though, according to Dr. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, Tucson, Arizona.
Preliminary results from a U.S. Russian scientific expedition have shed new light on the geology of eastern Russian.  The data was obtained in August and September by NASA and Russian scientists using NASA's Learjet Model 23 based at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. The expedition studied a variety of sites on the Kamchatkan peninsula; the data were to be used to study the geologic evolution of the volcanoes on the peninsula as well as the impact of large volcanic eruptions on the atmosphere and its chemistry. The data were also to be used to model thermal and dynamical aspects of volcanoes. (NASA Release 93-198)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute were scheduled to host a conference in Cleveland, March 30 and 30, focusing on the new world of Cyberspace. The conference, called the Vision 21 Symposium on Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace, would provide "a panoramic view of the research and technology that will assist humans in exploration activities," said Dr. Sheila Bailey, conference chairperson. (NASA Release 93-50)
The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)
An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)
NASA, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and the Southern California Small Business Utilization Council were  scheduled to co-sponsor the 1993 High Technology and Small Business Development Procurement Conference on March 1-2 in Los Angeles. About 200 government prime contractors, federal agencies, and other large procurement organizations were expected to participate in the conference. (NASA Release 93-029)
The Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of five landed January 19 at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Endeavour circled Earth 96 times and traveled 2,501,277 miles during its six-day flight. The Shuttle and its five crew members were said to be in good shape. (LA Times, Jan 20/93; W Times, Jan 20/93; NY Times, Jan 20/93; B Sun, Jan 20/93)
NASA reported that the agency had overcome a thruster glitch to successfully complete the reboost of its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO), adding five years to the spacecraft's on-orbit lifetime. (Defense Daily, Dec 22/93)
NASA announced that during the third week in July  it had delivered the first data sets from the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to the National Space Science Data Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. As a result, researchers from around the world now have access to the COBE data that provided the scientific community with an unprecedented look at how the universe began. (NASA Release 93-145)
A study by James W. Elkins of the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration found that worldwide emissions of the two worst ozone-destroying chemicals were slowing sooner than researchers had expected, and the gradual repair of Earth's ozone layer could begin by 2000. This news came as NASA satellite data indicated that the stratospheric ozone layer that shields the Earth from cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation had dropped to its lowest levels ever. A NASA official said that even with the peak in emissions of chlorofluorocarbons by 2000, it would take about a century for the ozone layer to recover to what it was before ozone-destroying chemicals began to be widely used in the 1960s and 1970s. (AP, Aug 25/93; USA Today, Aug 26/93; W Post, Aug 26/93; NY Times, Aug 30/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Office of Space Flight would assume responsibility for management of the Space Station Program.  Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Associate Administrator of Space Flight, was scheduled to lead the integration of these major programs.  (NASA Release  93-1291; AP, Oct 20/93)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
NASA announced that researchers at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed an ion exchange material that in laboratory tests effectively removed contaminants from water. Tests showed that the new material was easy to use and inexpensive to produce. (NASA Release 93-86)
U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93)
The Christian Science Monitor reported that astronomers who study the evolution of the cosmos hoped that the Hubble space telescope, if it could be repaired as planned this December, would help them resolve a paradox relating to the universe's age. Current research implies that the universe is younger than the oldest stars. One of the Hubble's key missions was to refine what had become the foundation for many cosmic distance scales. (CSM, May 12/93)
NASA announced that researchers had recorded unexpected, huge flashes of light in the upper atmosphere that might affect atmospheric ozone and present potential problems for high-altitude research planes. The flashes occurred above a severe thunderstorm in the Midwest in the summer and were recorded aboard NASA's DC-8 Airborne Laboratory, based at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-167; W Post, Sep 24/93; AP, Sep 23/93)
After a one-day weather delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour lifted off before dawn on a mission to repair the out-of-focus $3 billion Hubble Space Telescope. Four members of the Shuttle crew, made up of six men and one woman, were to take five planned day-long spacewalks in an attempt to restore the full capability of the Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; TRw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; NY Times, Dec 3/93; APn, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93)
NASA announced that a NASAF-15 research aircraft made a touchdown on April 21, using only engine power for control. The plane landed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The flight was part of NASA's attempt to develop a computer-assisted engine control system that lets a plane land safely with only engine power if its normal control surfaces are disabled. (NASA Release 93-75)
Louis Williams, director of high-speed research for NASA, lectured at NASA's Langely Research Center about an environmentally safe, economically sound supersonic transport (SST) that is within the nation's technological reach. The plane, which would ferry 300 people across the Pacific Ocean in four hours, would go twice as fast as the Concord and carry three times as many people. Government research on the project began in 1990 and was scheduled to run another two years; early research focused on the project's environmental goals, which Williams maintained were being met. The federal government gave $450 million to the project.
NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPLA), Pasadena, California, announced the selection of two major aerospace companies as the associate contractors for the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network Phase B1 study and MESUIR Pathfinder support effort.  The companies were Hughes Aircraft Company; Hughes Spacecraft & Communications , El Segundo, California; and Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division, Downey, California.  (NASA Release C93-r)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA's Langely Research Center in Virginia was searching for an easy-listening
NASA announced that a task force established by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to review plans for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission had concluded that "the mission is achievable." The servicing mission was currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA Release 93-96)
Twenty-six Prince George's Country students with physical, mental, or learning disabilities spent six weeks in a jobs program at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, during the summer.  The program, which was under the auspices of the President's Commission on Employment for Persons With Disabilities, aimed to steer more young people into fields like science, engineering, and computer programming. (W Post, Aug 12/93)
NASA engineers believed that they had identified the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine section. A Kennedy Space Center spokesman said that probably a
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected NYMA, Inc., Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for scientific, engineering, technical, administrative, and related support activities of Lewis' mission responsibilities. (NASA Release C93-q)
NASA announced that starting in January 1994, the NASA Science Internet (NSI) would connect research sites in the United States with Russia's Space Research Institute (IKI) in Moscow.  Nine additional Russian space-related institutions were to be connected through what is called the Russian Space Science Internet (RSSI). (NASA Release 93-196)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Jackson and Tull Chartered Engineers of Washington, D.C. for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for multidisciplinary research and development. (NASA Release C93-p)
NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)
Bryan O'Connor, a former astronaut and deputy director of the redesign team and deputy associate administrator of the office of space flight at NASA, said that NASA engineers planned to have three new design options ready by June. O'Connor said that two plans could cut the cost of the project by 50 percent or more. The third plan, which would be based on the current Space Station Freedom concept, would cost more. Whether the redesign effort could be done quickly and cheaply was still in doubt, O'Connor said. (AP, Apr 6/93; W Post, Apr 6/93)
A rocky asteroid, rather than an icy comet, probably caused a huge explosion over Siberia in 1908 that flattened at least 40,000 trees over about 850 square miles. A research team from NASA and the University of Wisconsin used a computer simulation to determine that an asteroid measuring about 65 yards was a better explanation than the comet; the simulation revealed that comets would explode much too high in the sky to fit the projected altitude of the Tunguska blast. (B Sun, Jan 7/93; NY Times, Jan 7/93; LA Times, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 11/93; P Inq, Jan 7/93; WP, Jan 11/93)
NASA announced that NASA and industry engineers had designed and built a new measuring device that would save American taxpayers more than $1 million on a NASA project. The device, an improved "inlet rake,"  measures the air flowing into one of the engines on the F/AS-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle (HARV), based at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Engineers would be able to use the air flow data to help give fighter-type aircraft more power and better handling qualities. (NASA Release 93-035; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 19/93)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, scientists have developed a multifunctional glass that detects pollutants in the air by a dramatic change in color.  Dr. Albert Stiegman, a JPL chemist, and his associates described the development in a paper in the journal Chemistry of Materials. (NASA Release 93-209)
Richard B. Hoover of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was named NASA inventor of the year for his invention of the Water-Window Imaging x-ray Microscope. This instrument should enable researchers to see in great detail high contrast x-ray images of proteins, chromosomes, and other tiny carbon structures inside living cells. (NASA Release 93-024)
Reuter reported that Australian rocket scientists had completed the world's first successful test flight of a model scramjet, a supersonic air-breathing engine that might make sub-orbital space flight common. (RTw, May 31/93)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA announced that it had selected the Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, Maryland, to negotiate a cost-plus-fee contract for the Visiting Scientists Program at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The five-year contract was expected to take effect September 1, 1993; the proposed cost for the five-year period was $31 million. (NASA Release C93-g)
NASA announced that a specially modified NASA F-15 research aircraft had arrived at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The F-15 was to be involved in a research program aimed at substantially advancing the cruising efficiency and flight maneuverability of future U.S. aircraft. (NASA Release 93-115)
NASA announced that Guy Gardner, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight Russian programs, had been put in charge of overseeing two joint missions with the Russian space program.
Writing in the Baltimore Sun, Gwynne Dyer, syndicated columnist, described the plan for "terraforming" Mars held by a group of scientists loosely called "The Mars underground."  One of the leaders of the group was Christopher McKay of NASA's Ames Research Center in California.
Space Shuttle Columbia was fueled for the third launch attempt of a science mission chartered by Germany. The mission, which was years behind schedule, was scheduled for launch Monday, April 26 at 10:52 a.m. (UPI, Apr 25/93; AP, Apr 26/93; NY Times, Apr 26/93; USA Today, Apr 26/93; RTw, Apr 26/93
The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
NASA announced that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of color in space, had resigned to pursue interests in "teaching, mentoring, health care issues, and increasing participation in science and technology of those who have traditionally been left out."  Jemison, who joined the astronaut program in 1987, was a science mission specialist on STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 1992, a cooperative mission with the Japanese to study life sciences and materials processing. (NASA Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar 7/93; B Sun, Mar 7/93; W Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar 7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; People Magazine, Apr/93)
After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California announced that nearly two dozen engineers from the center would visit 22 schools in the Antelope Valley next week to celebrate National Engineer's Week. (LA Times, Feb 13/93)
The Navy announced that it was turning over the Moffett Naval Air Station, located 40 miles south of San Francisco, California, to NASA's Ames Research Center, which is located on the base. The Center was to continue developing and testing space and aircraft-related technologies. The center's wind tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test generations of spacecraft and commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. (AP, Jan 4/93)
Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
In his keynote address at the inaugural University of Southern California Engineering Day, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, emphasized that space exploration involved risks but that they were worth taking. He also said that NASA's specific challenge was to "win back our credibility through performance." ( LA Times, May 21/93)
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)
By using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have concluded that the Markarian 315 galaxy, a galaxy that has been observed for ten years, is in reality composed of two merged galaxies; the collision of the two galaxies is thought to have provided new fuel for a massive black hole, which has a "tail" of gas 240,000 light-years long. (NASA Release 93-006; W Times, Jan 8, 1993)
NASA announced the selection of 11 new science mission concepts in the Discovery Program for further study during this fiscal year. The Discovery missions were selected from 73 concepts discussed at the Discovery Mission Workshop held last November. The potential projects were those thought to have the highest scientific value as well as a reasonable chance of meeting budgetary guidelines.	 Discovery missions were designed to proceed from development to flight in less than three years.
NASA scientists reported in the British journal Nature that a supernova may have caused a huge void known as the "Local Bubble" that envelopes the solar system and many nearby stars. Researchers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that evidence suggests that the bubble, an area about 300 light-years across, was formed by the supernova or explosion of a star about 340,000 years ago. The blast was strong enough that its radiation could have disrupted earth's protective ozone layer and caused extra sunburns on the ancestors of modern humans. (NASA Release 93-036; USA Today, Feb 25/93; NY Times, Feb 25; P Inq, Mar 5/93)
A National Research Council (NCR) study found that Space Shuttle computer software programs were flawed by lax attention to safety by NASA engineers. Nancy Leveson, who headed the NRC committee that prepared the report, said that "many of the same kinds of mistakes that played a role in the Challenger accident are now being repeated with the shuttle flight software." NASA, which requested the study, was considering some of the report's recommendations. (AP, June 28/93; USA Today, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas to become the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Integrated Physiology. The new center would focus on arriving at a better understanding of how different organ systems of various species react to space flight. (NASA Release 93-040)
NASA announced that an ER-2 aircraft, an updated version of the U-2 spy plane, would spend seven months next year researching the ozone hole over Antarctica. The study, part of a joint New Zealand-U.S. atmospheric study into ozone depletion, would explore the extent of the hole in the ozone layer. NASA research pilot Jim Barrilleaux was to fly the NASA-owned ER-2 aircraft. The work was scheduled to begin in late March 1994. (RTw, Mar 4/93)
A November Discovery flight, the second Spacehab flight of the year, was scheduled to carry the Wake Shield Facility (WSF), designed to be released from the payload bay to create an atomic oxygen wake as it circled the Earth. Discovery astronauts would conduct experiments to determine the effect the "space wake" had on them. The December flight of Endeavour was scheduled to be the first servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release 93-10)
William F. Ballhaus Jr. was named president of the Martin Marietta Corporation's Aero & Naval Systems division in Maryland. Ballhaus was director of NASA's Ames Research Center for a number of years. (B Sun, May 3/93)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
Vigyan Corporation, Hampton, Virginia, last week asked the General Services Administration's Board of Contract Appeals to overturn what was thought to be the largest minority-set-aside contract ever, a $180 million pact with Nyma Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for engineering support services at NASA's Lewis Research Center. Vigyan specifically charged both Nyna and NASA with conflict of interest, saying the company's winning proposal listed a current NASA employee "who possesses both proprietary and source-selection information" relevant to Vigyan's bid." (Federal Gomputing Week, Aug 23/93)
NASA announced that astronomers working with the Hubble Space Telescope had some success in their attempts to measure the Hubble Constant and the age of the universe. The Hubble Constant (HO) is the ratio of the recession velocities of galaxies to their distances in the expanding universe. The age of the universe can be estimated from the Hubble Constant and currently is thought to lie between 10 and 20 billion years. A more precise measurement of the Hubble Constant is required to narrow this range. (NASA Release 93-108; P Inq, June 10/93; RTw, June 9/93)
Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)
Nasa announced the selection of 111 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). These proposals and the 38 previously selected proposals came from 130 small, high technology firms located in 27 states. The SBIR program is intended to stimulate technological innovation by using small businesses, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development requirements and to encourage the commercial application of federally funded research innovations. (NASA Release 93-33; Washington Technology, Feb 25/93)
After conferring with Space Station contractor McDonnell Douglas, space officials confirmed that a cost overrun of at least $500 million was expected if costs were not brought under control. They told a congressional panel that the Station was now a $31.3 billion project. The increases appeared to be mainly in the Johnson Space Center portion of the program. NASA's Marty Kress, the Space Station project's new deputy director, said managers were determined to lower costs and were considering various means for doing so. Key congressional aides expressed anger at the news of the overrun, noting that for years NASA had ignored their advice on a design strategy to lower costs. (W Post, Jan 31/93; Space News, Feb 1-7/93; O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)
Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)
NASA released two new Hubble space telescope photographs that show a bullet of gas streaking across the sky. According to J. Jeff Hester, an Arizona State University astronomer, the new pictures show a "shock wave from a colossal explosion of a star 15,000 years ago smashing into a pocket of interstellar gas, heating the gas and causing it to glow." Following the blast wave is a shaft of gas traveling at more than 3 million miles an hour. The images show the structure behind the shock waves in the Cygnus Loop supernova remnant. The Hubble photos are giving astronomers their first detailed look at the anatomy of the powerful astrophysical shock wave generated by a supernova. (NASA Release N93-002; B Sun, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 18/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
Donald Yeomans of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that "There is almost no question" that major chunks of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 would hit the planet Jupiter in late July  of 1994. Astronomers planned to aim virtually every telescope in the world at Jupiter in late July  to see what happens when big chunks of a shattered comet crash into the largest known planet at almost 40 miles a second. Astronomers predicted that the chunks would explode with the energy equivalent to almost a billion megatons of TNT. (W Post, Jul 5/93; W Times, Oct 5/93)
The U.S. Postal Service unveiled a new $2.90 stamp featuring the image of a futuristic spaceship. Deputy Postmaster General Michael Coughlin and ex-astronaut Robert Crippen, director of the Kennedy Space Center, dedicated the stamp at a brief ceremony that was to have occurred the same day as the launch of Shuttle Endeavour. That launch was delayed for two weeks because of engine problems. (AP, June 3/93)
NASA selected Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, a small disadvantaged business, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for Computational Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services to support NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C93-t)
NASA announced that it planned to launch a $550 million-plus mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. Observers viewed the mission as very important for NASA's future; failure to repair the telescope would not only be a blow to astronomy but also would fuel the debate in Congress about NASA's ability to build Space Station Freedom later in the decade. The concern over the repair mission led to extensive oversight, numerous internal debates about the mission, and talk of a possible lengthening of the duration of the mission in order to allow for as many as six spacewalks. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93; Science, Feb 12/93; RTw, Mar 11; B Sun Magazine, Mar 14/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
NASA selected Hughes STX Corporation, Lanham, Maryland, to negotiate a five-year contract, proposed at $121,7 million, to provide support of computer systems management for Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C93-m)
Space Shuttle Columbia was launched on Monday, April 26, on a German science mission that had been delayed for over two months. This was the third attempt at launching the
Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)
According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
A team of astronomers from the University of Massachusetts in Amherst and Arizona's Kitt Peak Observatory announced at a gathering of the American Astronomical Society in Phoenix that they had gotten a glimpse of hundreds of sun-like stars shortly after the stars emerged from the clouds of dust that would have obscured their birth. The team found that many stars begin life in small, tight-knit families and at that stage are surrounded by orbiting disks of dust grains and gas. Scientists believe that this is the material from which planets like Earth are derived. (W Post, Jan 11/93)
NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was to receive a scheduled boost to a higher orbit beginning on October 4, to prevent the spacecraft from reentering the Earth's atmosphere. The reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit decay, which is the result of solar activity slowly pushing the satellite toward Earth over a period of time, said NASA officials. (NASA Release 93-179)
