NASA's appointment of France Cordova as the agency Senior Scientific Adviser, on a three-year leave of absence from Pennsylvania State University was featured. She was to serve as the principal link between NASA and the science community and ensure that NASA programs were regarded as scientifically and technologically well-founded. She was also to coordinate an integrated strategic plan for all the scientific disciplines within NASA. (The Penn Stater, Feb/94)
NASA announced its selection of Brown & Root Services Corporation, Houston, as a contractor to provide minor construction, modification, and rehabilitation to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-y)
NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center began moving into a new $72 million building where all U.S., European, Japanese, and Canadian station hardware were to be prepared for launch. The modern computers and equipment in the new control rooms were commended particularly in the media. (Fla Today, May 13/94; B Sun, Jun 2/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; O Sen Star, Jun 2/94; CSM, Jun 3/94)
On February 9, the Discovery was to launch the Orbital Debris Radar Calibration Spheres, designed to help locate "little junk" orbiting in space, which could pose a hazard to space flight. (CSM, Feb 7/94)
Numerous federal agencies, including NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), were accused in a Senate report of "offloading" by devising elaborate practices for circumventing federal law so that hundreds of millions of dollars in government business could go to favored companies. The Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee on oversight of government management said they had "abused and misused" the law and otherwise could have cut costs by half. (W Post, Jan 28/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a committee to develop a plan to identify and catalogue, to the extent practicable within 10 years, all comets and asteroids that might threaten the Earth. Eugene Shoemaker, an astronomer with the Lowell Observatory, was appointed chairman of the eight-member Near-Earth Object Search Committee. The committee was formed in response to congressional direction to NASA to develop a plan in coordination with the Department of Defense and the space agencies of other countries. Gregory Benford, professor of physics at the University of California, Irvine, commented on the congressional charge by saying that publicizing such tracking would be an opportunity for NASA for "smart public relations and smart science." (NASA Release 94-128; LA Times, Aug 21/94; B Sun, Aug 24/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
NASA Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn L. Huntoon announced a number of changes designed to assure the success of the Shuttle and International Space Station programs. Changes included the establishment of a new Projects Office, a new Business Management Directorate, and a new Information Systems Directorate; encouragement of rotational assignments and "teaming"; and new leadership appointments. Larry Bourgeois became head of the Projects Office, Terrence Hesse became director of the Business Management Directorate, and Jane Stearns became director of the Information Systems Directorate. A number of other appointments also were announced. (NASA Release 94-036; H Chron, Jun 17/94; H Post, Jun 17/94)
Swales and Associates, Inc., Beltsville, Maryland, received an eight-year small-business set-aside cost-plus-award-fee contract of $275 million to support the Mechanical Systems Division of the Goddard Engineering Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). (NASA Release C94d)
NASA's Office of Space Communications announced the installation of a Video Teleconference System facility at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, to expand video teleconferencing coverage to Russia. The installation supplemented the university's existing video teleconferencing capabilities with the Russian Institute of Space Research in Moscow. The new facility allowed NASA scientists and engineers to work directly with Soviet researchers. (NASA Release 94-28)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, released photos of the Chicxulub crater on the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. The photos, taken from NASA's spaceborne radar, showed the site where scientists considered an impact 65 million years ago might have caused climatic changes that killed the dinosaurs. (USA Today, Jul 29/94)
The Wide Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) spacecraft was designed to use recent advances in large format infrared technology to answer some key questions concerning the formation of stars. The project--the fifth in a series of NASA Small Explorer program missions--was being designed to observe starburst galaxies about 500 times fainter than those recorded at 25 microns by the Infrared Astronomical Satellite in 1983. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory worked with the Space Dynamics Laboratory at Utah State University to build the cryogenically cooled infrared telescope. The three-axis spacecraft, which would be provided by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center--would be the same design Goddard developed for the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite, a Small Explorer mission planned for 1995. The WIRE spacecraft was to be launched on an Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL, which was scheduled to be air-dropped from an L-1011 carrier aircraft. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had taken an important step toward determining the age and size of the universe. They had been able to calculate with considerable precision the distance to a remote galaxy, M100, in the Virgo cluster of galaxies. This measurement established the distance to the cluster as 56 million light-years (with an uncertainty of +/- 6 million light-years). The research results, which were to be further refined, were being published in the October 27 issue of Nature. The overall conclusion was that the universe was only 8 billion to 12 billion years old. (NASA Release 94-180; Reuters, Oct 26/94; NY Times, Oct 27/94; W Post, Oct 27/94; USA Today, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; C Trib, Oct 27/94; Bakersfield Californian, Oct 27/94; CSM, Oct 28/94; W Times, Oct 29/94; Time, Nov 7/94; U.S. News and World Report, Nov 7/94)
NASA announced the selection of a research consortium headed by IBM to carry out research and test computer systems for a new national aeroscience research program using parallel computer technology. NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was to be the main computational site for the new program (NASA Release C94-k)
Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)
On April 9-10, radio astronomy experts from Stanford University and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena sent a signal from the Clementine spacecraft, which was engaged in a moon-mapping mission for the Pentagon, into a huge crater on the lunar South Pole. NASA's Deep Space Network picked up the reflection of the signal, and the Pentagon was scheduled to undertake a preliminary review of the data to determine whether the moon contained ice. (AP, Apr 16/94)
Gregory Reck, Acting Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT), said that NASA had tasked an industry team with reviewing the direction of its research and development (R&D) efforts in space communications technologies. The group, which was to be composed of satellite manufacturers such as Hughes and Space Systems/Loral, ground station builders like Harris Corporation, and small aerospace firms like Orbital Sciences Corporation, was to identify future space-based systems, both in low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, and how they might tie into the National Information Infrastructure. NASA's role in the activity was to be directed by Samuel Venneri, head of spacecraft and remote sensing in OACT. The consensus findings of the team were to be used in relation to NASA fiscal year budgets. According to the NASA officials, the key motivation behind the initiative was to minimize inroads by European and Japanese competitors into the 60 percent market share held by U.S. firms in satellite communications. (Defense Daily, Apr 7/94)
An article described awards of the National Science Foundation (NSF) to historically black colleges and universities and institutions serving Latinos and Native Americans. Specific reference was made to Clark-Atlanta University in Georgia, which had built a multimillion-dollar science research facility, doubled its science faculty, increased the number of students in science and mathematics, and attracted large federal grants, including funds from NASA. As a result of its efforts, Clark-Atlanta was now a finalist for one of six $25 million NSF grants. (C Trib, Oct 22/94)
NASA announced that it and the National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU) had agreed July 13 to explore possible cooperation in remote sensing and Earth sciences, telemedicine, space biology, space welding, advanced concepts and technology, and student and scientist exchanges. Robert W. Clarke, NASA Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations, headed the U.S. delegation and Valeriy G. Komarov, Deputy Director General of NSAU, headed the Ukrainian delegation. (NASA Release 94-119)
SETI Institute President Frank Drake announced that the organization in Mountain View, California, will work with private backing, despite cancellation by NASA due to a funding cut by Congress. SETI--the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence--was to continue as the new Project Phoenix, with some NASA scientists doing the latter half of the former NASA project, which had been a sky survey by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and a targeted search by NASA's Ames Research Center. They planned to target areas around 1,000 nearby sun-like stars. The NASA project was begun as a $100-million, ten-year project on October 12, 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus' landing in the Americas, but was stopped less than one year into its planned ten-year life. Observations were now planned to last into the next century. Major donors included Arthur C. Clarke through the British Interplanetary Society (BIS) and the founders of Hewlett-Packard, Intel, and Microsoft. It was announced that $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the next year had been raised. (Reuters, Jan 12/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1994 activities and provided a chronology of major space events. Of particular note were the flight of a Russian cosmonaut aboard a U.S. spacecraft for the first time and a spectacular cosmic collision that occurred on Jupiter. However, it was the work of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope that dominated NASA news in 1994. Among Hubble results were the following: evidence of a massive black hole in the center of a galaxy 50 million light-years away, supporting Einstein's theory of relativity; observations of huge pancake-shaped disks of dust, raw material for planet formation, swirling around half the stars in the Orion Nebula; confirmation of a critical prediction of the Big Bang theory that helium should be widespread in the early universe; and significant progress in determining the age of the universe--between 8 and 12 billion years--and its size. (NASA Release 94-216; UPI, Dec 22/94)
A feature article described the Voyager spacecraft and the work of Paul Schenk, who had been a college summer intern at NASA'S Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California and was now with the Lunar and Planetary Institute (LPI) in Houston. Schenk became fascinated with Voyager and its images. With his colleagues, Daniel G. Wilson and Robert D. Morris of LPI and Jeffrey M. Moore of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, he created stereo views of various bodies in the outer solar system using images provided by Voyager. (Science News, Nov 12/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
After three years of testing by NASA's Langley, Virginia research center, the airline industry, industry suppliers, and the Federal Aviation Administration, a new device was approved to alert pilots of wind shear danger. Called the Bendix RDR-4B, it was made by Allied Signal Inc. in Morristown, New Jersey and was being installed by various commercial airlines. The device complements ground-based wind-shear detection systems, known as Terminal Doppler Weather Radars, being installed at 47 major U.S. airports. (W Times, Dec 6/94)
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)
The Analytic Sciences Corporation (TASC) signed a three-year cooperative agreement with NASA to make NASA's space and Earth science data available to elementary school students and their teachers over the Internet. TASC was scheduled to work with the staff at Franconia Elementary School in Fairfax County, Virginia, to design and develop software allowing kindergarten through 6th grade students to access NASA's vast remote sensing weather data. Fritz Hasler, manager of the project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said that the project should not only help students learn about the weather but also improve their knowledge of the information highway. (PR Newswire, Oct 19/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin presented Congressman Louis Stokes with the National Association of Small Disadvantaged Businesses Meritorious Award "for his outstanding contributions in the performance of contracts at the NASA Lewis Research Center and turning NASA Lewis Research Center around." (Call and Post, Oct 20/94)
Alumni of the Aerospace Human Factors Division office of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, south of San Francisco, reportedly were exerting pressure to maintain the division as a separate entity in the restructuring taking place under new director Ken K. Munechika. These alumni had prominent positions in the airline industry, aircraft manufacturing, and government. Moreover, NASA created human factors research and a human factors pioneer such as John Lauber, of the National Transportation Safety Board, maintained that a separate organizational structure, combining computer sciences, engineering, psychology, medicine, and other disciplines, was essential. (W Post, Jun 24/94)
Although the November 3 mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis would be devoted primarily to the study of Earth's ozone layer, it would also entail a study of mammalian development in space, based on research on ten pregnant laboratory rats and their twin offsprings. The countdown for the launch was to begin on October 31. (Fla Today, Oct 22/94; AP, Oct 31/94; Tass, Nov 1/94)
NASA announced the resignation of Jeremiah W. Pearson as Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight and the appointment of Wayne Littles as new Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 94-191; AP, Nov 16/94; H Post, Nov 17/94; W Post, Nov 18/94; NY Times, Nov 21/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
The U.S. attorney confirmed that David R. Proctor, an engineer assigned to the Life Sciences Project Division, was the first NASA Johnson Space Center employee indicted as part of the FBI's Operation Lightning Strike. The Operation began in December 1991 as an undercover probe into aerospace contractors. Proctor was indicted on charges of conspiracy and bribery, among others. (UP, Jun 9/94)
Following a final flight ceremony at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA retired its last F-104 fighter jet of the 1950s. NASA used the plane, known as the Starfighter, for biomedical research and to simulate the X-15 jet. The F-15 was to replace Lockheed's Starfighter. (Bakersfield Californian, Feb 4/94)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
NASA researchers were to go underground on April 11 in Lechuguilla Cave in Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico to try to replicate conditions on Mars. NASA engineer Larry Lemke was mainly interested in the technology aspect of developing robots to collect the microorganisms in Lechuguilla if it proved a useful source. NASA planetary scientist Chris McKay and contract microbiologist Penny Boston wanted to see if microorganisms living inside Lechuguilla could reveal life that might exist on Mars. Bacteria in the cave get their energy from sulfur and iron, believed to be two main ingredients of Mars's soil. Samples taken during the five-day underground stay that ended on April 16 were to be analyzed at the U.S. Geological Survey laboratory in Denver, a NASA-contracted laboratory in Boulder, Colorado, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. (AP, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 13/94; AP, Apr 18/94)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, announced the award to Gilcrest Electric and Supply Company, Elyria, Ohio, of a contract to provide technical and fabrication services for the Center's in-house research and development program. The Lewis Center also announced the selection of R&R International, Akron, Ohio, for a contract for facilities operations and technical support services. (NASA Release C94-o; NASA Release C94-p)
As a result of an investigation by NASA's Inspector General, Omniplan Corporation, with offices near the Johnson Space Center, four related companies, and five employees, together with the Chief Executive Officer Ralph Montijo Jr. and his wife, Guillermina, were named in a federal grand jury indictment. They were charged with conspiracy to present false claims to NASA, embezzling from an employee benefits plan, money laundering, and making false statements to NASA, the Internal Revenue Service, the Small Business Administration, and the Defense Contract Audit Agency. The company had been previously indicted for allegedly swindling $4 million from NASA and its own employees. Omniplan subcontracted through Rockwell Space Operations Company to write flight plan documentation for the Space Shuttle. The government filed a lawsuit to try to recover $3.75 million. (H Post, May 28/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Wesley T. Huntress announced two new science missions, both aboard small, relatively inexpensive spacecraft. The first, the Transitional Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE), would observe the sun to study the connection between its magnetic fields and the heating of the sun's corona. TRACE, scheduled for launch in 1997, would have Alan Title of the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, California, as the principal investigator. The second spacecraft, the Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE), scheduled for launch in 1998 to study the evolution of galaxies, would be headed by Perry B. Hacking of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The two missions were part of NASA's Small Explorer Program for highly focused science missions. Small Explorer spacecraft weigh approximately 500 pounds, and the missions were expected to cost approximately $50 million for design, development, and operations through the first 30 days in orbit. (NASA Release 94-152)
NASA and contractor engineers were studying a number of existing engine designs as they tried to lower the propulsion technology risk for private development of a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) in the early 2000s. Operability rather than performance would be the key to any RLV engine. According to Len Worlund, director of the Advanced Transportation Technology Office at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to get reusability, NASA and its partners were working to build components that better withstood repeated firings. They were also trying to lower the high turbine temperatures that had saddled the Shuttle's engines with crack-prone cooling shields that required frequent repairs. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a Phase One Program Office at the Johnsonn Space Center, Houston, to direct upcoming Shuttle flights to the Russian Mir Station. Tommy Holloway was appointed manager of the office. (NASA Release 94-172)
NASA announced that two teams of astronomers, working independently with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, had ruled out the possibility that red dwarf stars consituted the invisible matter, called dark matter, believed to account for more than 90 percent of the mass of the universe. The results increased the mystery of the missing mass because whatever dark matter was, its gravitational pull ultimately would determine whether the universe would expand forever or would someday collapse. Bruce H. Margon, an astrophysicist at the University of Washington at Seattle, in discussing the mystery of the missing matter, said "It's a fairly embarrassing situation to admit that we can't find 90 percent of the universe." Various theories had been proposed by physicists, such as that neutrinos, electrically neutral subatomic particles produced prolifically in the Big Bang, had mass, or that the value of the cosmological constant, a concept invented by Albert Einstein, was low, helping to account for the difference between the observed density of matter and the critical density. (NASA Release 94-188; Reuters, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 16/94; H Chron, Nov 16/94; C Trib, Nov 16/94; CSM, Nov 17/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94)
NASA announced the selection of six Hispanic-Serving universities to receive five-year, Institutional Research Award grants for multidisciplinary research in science and engineering. The universities were to receive $400,000 the first year, $600,000 the second year, $800,000 the third year, and $1 million in the fourth and fifth years, for a total of $3.8 million over the five-year period. The universities selected were: California State University at Los Angeles; Florida International University, Miami; New Mexico Highlands University, Las Vegas; City College of New York; University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras; and University of Texas at San Antonio. (NASA Release 94-85)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
The Boeing Company announced that it planned to cut about 900 jobs at its plant in Huntsville, Alabama, because it lost an eight-year, $1.05 billion contract with NASA. However, Boeing anticipated that Computer Sciences Corporation, which won the NASA contract, would hire most of the affected workers. (NY Times, May 10/94)
NASA announced the selection of BDM Federal, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to form a Remote Sensing Public Access Center for demonstrating, testing, and transferring technology to help provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-131; Federal Computer Week, Aug 22/94)
Bowman Cutter, deputy assistant to the President for economic policy, took a lead in developing a space policy for the administration, according to a statement he made on May 26. As a first step, he convened a meeting May 13 at the White House with a diverse and bipartisan group of industry representatives, NASA managers, military officers, and academicians to discuss the space program's future. Although there was some talk about the Space Station, the major emphasis was on longer-term policy. Rather than new programs, White House officials said the focus was to be on streamlining NASA's bureaucracy, focusing research and development to help private industry, and pushing small missions to demonstrate advanced technologies. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, awarded the Engineering Design Group, Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma, a contract for engineering, construction and environmental services in the rehabilitation, modification and construction of research and institutional facilities and systems. This small-business cost-plus-fee contract had a two-year basic period and three one-year renewals, a base value of $13.6 million, and a total value of $45 million. (NASA Release C94-e)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
NASA announced the selection of Raytheon Service Company, Burlington, Massachusetts, to provide logistics support to the Mission Operation and Data Systems Directorate at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-h)
Joseph P. Martino, senior research scientist at the University of Dayton Research Institute, examined space launch costs in a study released by the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation. Because of high costs, he noted that the United States was now farther away from having people on the moon than when President Kennedy launched the Apollo program. In 1994 it cost $3,500 per pound to put items into orbit. The cost increase started in the 1950s, when high performance of ballistic missiles was needed at any price and has been continued by NASA's policy of developing new technology for each new mission. Launch costs must be lowered and can be by three new approaches: use of commercial practices for vehicle construction, long production runs of single designs, and designing launchers to be reusable like aircraft instead of producing single-use like missiles. (W Times, Jan 25/94)
NASA announced the selection of 38 college students for an intensive six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The summer residence training program was for undergraduate students majoring in life sciences, bioengineering, and related science and engineering fields. (NASA Release 94-95)
Flight tests of new terminal automation software confirmed that airline traffic could be routed to arrive at a gate within 20 seconds or less of a scheduled time, while enabling fuel-efficient descents initiated at pilots' discretion. According to NASA researchers, when deployed at hub airports, the complete Center-Tracon Automation System (CTAS) would optimize the flow of aircraft and improve air traffic control productivity significantly. Recent evaluations dealt with the Descent Advisor portion of CTAS but other parts of CTAS provided air traffic controllers with the data they needed to ensure efficient and safe operations. The recent flight tests were performed under a joint research and development effort involving the Federal Aviation Administration, NASA's Ames and Langley Research Centers, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, several contractors, and United Airlines. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
An example was given of the way in which NASA-sponsored research in aeronautics, in this case at the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, had practical applications in daily life. The example involved a redesign of big rig trucks, based on Ed Saltzman's research, which made the trucks more fuel efficient. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Oct 16/94)
Former NASA Space Station Director Richard Kohrs was a member of a team to revamp the Cassini mission for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also contacted him, reportedly asking that he look at the troubled Space Station program. (SP News, Mar 28-Apr 3/94)
NASA announced the development at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, of a new tile known as Toughened Uni-Piece Fibrous Insulation (TUFI). The low-density composite thermal insulation was to undergo its first flight test on the Endeavour in April. (NASA Release 94-54)
One of NASA's high-altitude, remote-controlled, Perseus research aircraft crashed, severely damaging the plane. NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center operated the craft, which was used to collect data from the upper reaches of the atmosphere--it could fly up to an altitude of 90,000 feet. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 23/94; H Chron, Dec 5/94; LA Times, Dec 5/94)
Glenn Cunningham, manager of the new program at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said NASA planned a new program of Mars exploration. The program was to begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996. Launchings were to occur every 25 months over the next 10 years, using relatively low-cost spacecraft. Funds in the current NASA budget were to go for designing the first of the orbiting craft, the Mars Surveyor. Another Mars program, the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR), was to establish a seismic network on Mars. The program was to begin with the already authorized $175 million Pathfinder mission. (NY Times, Feb 15/94; CSM, Feb 16/94)
NASA announced that some 50 U.S., Canadian, and European scientists had begun the second phase of a detailed ecological study of the forests of Canada and the role these forests played in climate change. The Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study (BOREAS) was a large-scale, ground-based, and remote-sensing investigation of the way the forests and the atmosphere exchange energy, heat, water, carbon dioxide, and other trace gases. From April 11 to May 2, scientists were to study the forests during the annual snowmelt. The Focused Field Campaign-Thaw, the second of five parts of BOREAS, was to build on spaceborne data resulting from the first flight of the Space Radar Laboratory (SRL) aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour. BOREAS and SRL formed part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 94-65)
In discussing the role of the South Pole infrared explorer (SPIREX), and two other projects operated by the National Science Foundation's Center for Astrophysical Research in Antarctica (CARA), a comparison was made of the way in which work from the South Pole on the ground resembled work of the Hubble Telescope in space. The astronomers involved, together with those at the Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore were seeking NASA support for a design and cost study of a balloon that would float 40,000 feet above the South Pole and carry a powerful telescope. (AP, Apr 22/94)
Boyce Mix, deputy manager for the Shuttle main engine program at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, said that technicians at Paragon Precision Products of Valencia, California, had used a super-strength glue for as many as six years to make unauthorized repairs on Space Shuttle engines, without the knowledge of company officers. A January inspection revealed the glue and the situation was corrected. (AP, Feb 11/94; Reuters, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; NY Times, Feb 13/94; USA Today, Feb 14/94)
NASA researchers hoped that, among other things, Endeavour's comparison radar images from its second environmental voyage would enable them to peer through the mists of Rwanda to track the imperiled mountain gorilla. In the category of experiments, shortly after liftoff, the crew of Endeavour were scheduled to engage in mixing up a batch of special order concrete, which was to be allowed to harden during the 10-day voyage. After the flight, Master Builders Inc. of Cleveland, who had prepared the ingredients, were to test the concrete to determine the critical particle dispersion that ensured hardness for possible future construction on the moon or elsewhere. An experiment in earthquake forecasting also was planned. Another planned experiment was the dumping of oil and algae byproducts into the North Sea off Denmark to see if Endeavour's radar could detect them. The countdown for the flight began August 15. (AP, Aug 13/94; AP, Aug 15/94; UP, Aug 15/94; Reuters, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 16/94; USA Today, Aug 16/94; AP, Aug 17/94; Reuters, Aug 17/94; NY Times, Aug 18/94; W Times, Aug 18/94; W Post, Aug 18/94; USA Today, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94)
Some 100 astronomers from around the world, including Tim Livengood from the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, traveled to the European Southern Observatory at La Silla in the mountains of northern Chile, to view the collision of the comet with Jupiter in July. (W Times, Aug 7/94)
Sayed Z. Shariq, director of the Office of Commercial Technology at NASA's Ames Research Center, said NASA had reshaped its technology transfer program so as to make it an integral part of NASA's business relationships with the private sector. In this regard, Shariq said that Government should adapt to industry's practices and both NASA and industry should work together during the research and development, product planning, prototyping, and fabrication stages. In addition, agency staff performance evaluations, incentives, and awards should be structured to foster commitment to the commercial program. One of the first signs of NASA's commercialization mission was the Aerospace Industry Technology Program, funded at $20 million for fiscal 1994. (AvWk, May 16/94)
Scientists of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which managed the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanography satellite, had been studying data it developed. The findings from two years of monitoring the oceans, which were to be announced at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had risen about 0.12 inches a year from December 1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indicator of global change and supported theories than an increase in "greenhouse" gases was causing long-term global warming. (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced the award of a grant to Sierra College, Rocklin, California, for a hands-on community college engineering curriculum as part of the government's technology reinvestment project. (NASA Release 94-63)
NASA announced the selection of ten organizations to receive a total of $6.8 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to stimulate public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-194)
The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, selected Pioneer Contract Services for a five-year, $42 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for logistics support, such as all handling of property, warehouse, and bondroom operations. (NASA Release C94f)
The Mars Observer spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. NASA officials reported the probable cause of communication loss as a rupture in the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine--MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have put the craft in a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. Goldin asked Dr. Wes Huntress, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science, to conduct a thorough review of the findings and recommendations and to report back in the near future on corrective actions to be taken by NASA. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
NASA's Office of Space Science was scheduled to use the Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Island Flight Facility to manage a Sounding Rocket Program of almost 50 missions worldwide in 1994. One study over Fairbanks, Alaska, was to examine auroras by using eight unguided suborbital sounding rockets at altitudes of 55 to 287 miles. One rocket was to carry a 21-foot-long payload called the Auroral Turbulence Rocket, with 28 instruments on a main payload and two subpayloads. The latter two would be deployed from the main payload in space, and simultaneous measurements from the three spacecraft would permit a study during 9 of the 12 minutes of flight. They were to measure the acceleration process that energizes particles and causes the emission of light called auroras. (NASA Release 94-12)
Two NASA-sponsored scientists, Scott Hudson of Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, and Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, created the first three-dimensional model of an asteroid based on radar data. The asteroid was the double-lobed 4769 Castalia, discovered by Eleanor Helen of JPL at the Palomar Observatory in 1989. The model and resulting pictures appeared in the February 18 issue of Science magazine. (NASA Release 94-26)
NASA ground controllers were to send final commands to the Magellan space probe on October 7 to send it crashing to its death in the atmosphere of Venus on October 11. The robot had been in a highly successful Venus orbit since 1990 but its solar panels were failing and its gyroscopes worn out. On October 12 NASA announced that Magellan was expected to burn up within two days. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, declared Magellan dead on October 12. However, Magellan lasted long enough to radio back telemetry showing how much rocket power would be required to offset the increasing atmospheric turbulence, which was useful data for future designers seeking to use the atmosphere of Mars for orbit purposes. (LA Times, Oct 6/94; AP, Oct 6/94; USA Today, Oct 7/94; C Trib, Oct 9/94; W Post, Oct 10/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 11/94; Reuters, Oct 11/94; W Times, Oct 12/94; LA Times, Oct 12/94; CSM, Oct 12/94; NASA Release 94-170; Fla Today, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 12/94; W Post, Oct 13/94; NY Times, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA was to award a Program Information System Mission Services (PrISMS) contract worth up to $800 million by May 1. Three companies were seeking to win the eight-year Marshall Space Flight Center contract: Computer Sciences Corporation, Harris Corporation, and incumbent Boeing Computer Services, Inc. The winning PrISMS vendor was to manage NASAwide communications, provide some NASAwide information management services, and run extensive computational services at Marshall. PrISMS had a two-year base with six one-year options; 10 percent of the work was to be set aside for small, disadvantaged businesses. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 25/94)
NASA announced the near completion of a $115 million restoration of a unique NASA wind tunnel located at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, which began operating nearly 50 years ago. (NASA Release 94-193)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT) scheduled a one-day forum, including an Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP), to encourage high-risk, high-payoff technology development. NASA responsiveness to industry's need was shown by industry participation in all aspects and phases of the AITP program, with representatives making presentations on both program content and structure. The fiscal 1994 budget allocation for this technology initiative was $20 million. (NASA Note to Editors N94-6)
Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)
NASA officials indicated that details of scientific evidence supporting the theory that man-made chlorine was causing the ozone hole above Antarctica would be released on December 19. The evidence was based on three years of data from NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). UARS instruments had found chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in electronics and refrigeration systems in the stratosphere. The stratospheric ozone layer was responsible for protecting people, animals, and plants from too much ultraviolet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA Release 94-215; UP, Dec 19/94; Reuters, Dec 19/94; LA Times, Dec 20/94; NY Times, Dec 20/94; W Post, Dec 20/94; W Times, Dec 20/94; USA Today, Dec 20/94; WSJ, Dec 20/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94; H Chron, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 20/94; C Trib, Dec 20/94; AP, Dec 20/94)
William Baragar, Boeing Company's corporate director of congressional affairs, said that Boeing planned to help NASA develop a High Speed Arm Transport (HSAT) that could cut flying time from Los Angeles to Tokyo from 12 hours to four. Baragar said NASA had asked Congress for $220 million for research on the plane, which could fly at about 2.4 times the speed of sound or slightly faster than the Concorde and carry about 300 people. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also discussed the project with a British newspaper. (Antelope Valley Press, May 17/94; Financial Times of London, May 30/94; LA Times, Jun 1/94)
Two groups of astronomers, one centered at Indiana University and the other at Harvard University, announced, based on findings from the Hubble Space Telescope, that the universe was billions of years younger than previously estimated. The Indiana group said the universe could be as little as 7 billion years old whereas the Harvard group estimated the age of the universe at between 9 billion and 14 billion years. The Indiana study was published in the September 29 issue of Nature and the Harvard study in the current Astrophysical Journal. According to Stephen Maran, a senior astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Center and a spokesman for the American Astronomical Society, the findings should lead to further research to explain the discrepancy beween the oldest stars and the age of the universe. (LA Times, Sep 29/94)
A retrospective article looked at the role that NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California had played in the past, beginning with its establishment in 1947. It asserted that although now Dryden was used only for Space Shuttle landings when bad weather prevented the Shuttle from landing in Florida, it still managed to keep some 1,000 government and civilian employees busy. (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 30/94)
Terri Bracher, Patrick Air Force Base spokeswoman, said the first nighttime practice rescue operation for Space Shuttle crew who might be downed at sea is to be conducted on May 18 near Kennedy Space Center. More than 200 members of the Air Force, Air National Guard, Marines, Air Force Reserve, Coast Guard, and NASA were to take part. Rescuers were to use night vision goggles and NAVSTAR Global Positioning System receivers to find the floating crew members. (O Sen Star, May 17/94)
NASA announced the signing of a collaborative agreement of the chief executive officers of the nation's 28 largest aerospace contractors, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Education in a plan to improve the nation's mathematics, science, and technology education goals. The agreement was in furtherance of President Clinton's Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which he signed March 31, 1994. (NASA Release 94-190)
NASA announced that high-speed information technologies it had developed could support physicians in remote locations on a new medical information superhighway by providing them instant access to information and treatment strategies for their patients. The new, integrated computing and telecommunications technologies developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were scheduled to be demonstrated to members of Congress and the Clinton Administration on September 20 by the National Information Infrastructure Testbed, a non-profit consortium of corporations, universities, and government agencies. (NASA Release 94-156)
Kevin Zahnle, a research scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was quoted concerning the large amount of information gathered by spacecraft Galileo about Jupiter that would be lost because of the crippling of Galileo's communications capabilities. Nevertheless, much remained to be learned from the data already transmitted, as was seen at the recent meeting of the Planetary Sciences Division of the American Astronomical Society held in Bethesda, Maryland. (Contra Costa Times, Nov 20/94)
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
In a report by the House Government Operations Committee it concluded that NASA's sloppy management had resulted in some $14 billion of NASA equipment--including computers and construction equipment--ending up in the hands of contractors. Moreover, NASA had failed to curb unallowable contract costs. Furthermore, NASA's recordkeeping was so bad that it was almost impossible to edit NASA's books. In addition, Committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, said NASA's "planning is so unrealistic that budgets are hopelessly optimistic." A report in another context concerning Houston's Johnson Space Center, dealt with equipment failures and human errors resulting from carelessness or stupidity. (Tampa Tribune, Nov 24/94; O Sen Star, Nov 24/94; H Post, Nov 30/94)
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to develop and manufacture an improved, lighter version of the Space Shuttle External Tank. The Super Lightweight External Tank was to be made of aluminum alloys and weigh 8,000 pounds less than the current model. (NASA Release 94-32; AP, Feb 28/94; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
NASA announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had yielded data indicating that gamma-ray bursts show relative "time-dilation"--"a result of the General Theory of Relativity"--suggesting they occur not only near the Milky Way Galaxy but also far away, and thus indicating expansion of the universe. (NASA Release 94-10)
Jon Linderman, a National Research Council fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, said that based on experiments with rats, exercise combined with growth hormone may help prevent muscle atrophy in astronauts, seniors, and patients confined to bed following illness or injury. Russian cosmonauts discovered that extensive exercise alone was insufficient to prevent muscle atrophy. (UP, May 27/94; UP, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced that it had released the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Cassini mission to Saturn, which would be available for public review and comment over a 45-day period. Cassini was a cooperative scientific mission of the U.S. and European space agencies scheduled for launch in October 1997 for a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey to Saturn. (NASA Release 94-174)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope took new images of the planet Uranus that revealed the planet's rings, at least five of the inner moons, and bright clouds and a high altitude haze above the planet's south pole. (NASA Release N94-78)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used the European Space Agency's Faint Object Camera on the Hubble Space Telescope to confirm a prediction of the Big Bang theory--that helium should be widespread in the early universe. The July 7 issue of the British science journal Nature reported the way in which the helium was detected. (NASA Release 94-109)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science told the NASA Advisory Council that NASA wanted to launch one Discovery mission every 12 to 15 months on a Delta or smaller expendable launch vehicle (ELV). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center planned to issue a competitive procurement later in the year for up to 15 ELVs, paying $25 million to $30 million per vehicle. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology announced its solicitation of proposals from all sources for industry-led research and development projects under the Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP aims to develop and apply advanced technology rapidly in the aerospace industry and in the non-aerospace commercial marketplace. (NASA Release 94-91)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that members of the NASA Hubble Space Telescope Recovery Team would receive the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association on May 6 for their outstanding work. (NASA Release 94-71; H Post, May 6/94)
Jack Anderson's column indicated that the ties of Isadore Hyde, convicted in 1993 of defrauding the federal government, to Senator Trent Lott, Democrat from Mississippi, were investigated by NASA officials among others. Hyde's company received a contract in 1984 to provide security services at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, and diverted more than $186,000 for personal use. Former Hyde employees alleged that Hyde used NASA resources to do political favors for Lott and put Lott's mother, who was 71 at the time, on the company's payroll. (W Post, Apr 25/94)
John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)
NASA announced the discovery in the southern constellation Scorpius of an unusually bright X-ray source by an instrument aboard NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. It remained to be determined whether the new source was a black hole, a pulsar, or some new object, according to B. Alan Harmon of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 94-140)
The official newspaper, China Daily, quoted a spokesman for the China Aerospace Corporation as expressing confidence it would fulfill all launch services for overseas clients in 1994. China launched the Apstar-1 satellite made by U.S. Hughes Aircraft, from the Xichang Space Center in southwest China on July 21. An Australian satellite was scheduled to be launched in August. China sought a larger share of the commercial space market dominated by NASA, Europe's Arianespace, and Russian launchers. (UPI, Jul 30/94)
The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)
NASA announced that the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) was awarding the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon management team the CNES Medal in recognition of their achievements. Seven team members from NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, and the CNES project office received the awards.Launched August 10, 1992, TOPEX/Poseidon continued to study the topography of the oceans. (NASA Release 94-132)
NASA announced that its Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, Washington, D.C., was to receive valuable data from a flight test in June of a new laser-diode initiated ordnance system on Orbital Science Corporation's Pegasus air-launch space booster. (The intent is that space flight operations be safer and more efficient than with present electrical systems.) (NASA Release 94-36)
The Boeing Company denied any intentional wrongdoing but paid the U.S. Government $75 million to settle accusations that it systematically overcharged and mischarged the Government on military contracts. U.S. Attorney Kate Pflaumer said the most egregious mischarging was in Boeing's divisions that explored artificial intelligence applications to robotics, military command and control, high-speed jets, and Space Stations. Boeing admitted having improperly charged the Government several million dollars in costs incurred in selling aircraft overseas and having charged the Government millions of dollars for hazardous-waste disposal. (NY Times, Apr 30/94; WSJ, Apr 30/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
NASA announced that Jack Farmer, a paleontologist and geologist at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a strategy to search for microfossils on the planet Mars. Farmer presented his strategy, which was based on principles of Precambrian paleontology, at the Geological Society Meeting of America in San Bernardino, California. (NASA Release 94-49)
NASA announced the selection of 42 additional proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The programs supplemented the 130 firms announced in December 1993. (NASA Release 94-18)
A scale model of Boeing's High Speed Commercial Transport was undergoing testing in the supersonic wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)
NASA announced the selection of a system to control microbial contamination in drinking water as both the NASA 1993 Invention of the Year and the NASA 1993 Commercial Invention of the Year. NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Deputy Chief of the Biomedical Operations and Research Branch Richard L. Sauer developed the system together with Gerald V. Colombo and Clifford D. Jolly of Umpqua Research Company, Myrtle Creek, Oregon. The process had applications for long-term space flight as well as commercial use in developing nations particularly. (NASA Release 94-33)
An Air Force panel was completing the space launch modernization study mandated by Congress; and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy was preparing recommendations on vehicle developments. The trade Aviation Week & Space Technology publication advocated the United States' developing a modern expendable launch vehicle with money both from government and industry. The next step, which would need multi-billion-dollar investment, would require "leapfrog technology" such as the use of propulsion, and could benefit from cooperation with the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AvWk, Mar 21/94)
NASA announced that as a result of a 10-year joint NASA-Army research program (the UH-60 Airloads Program) at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on helicopter rotor vibration, noise, motion, and airflows, future helicopters would be quieter and more efficient. (NASA Release 94-21; UPI, Feb 9/94)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)
Flight tests of the X-31 at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base were featured. Dryden director Kenneth J. Szalai noted that the X-31 had completed more flights than any other experimental aircraft, demonstrating methods of enhancing fighter maneuverability. Gary Trippensee was NASA project manager and director of the International Test Organization that included the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Navy, Air Force, Rockwell Aerospace, the German government, and Deutsche Aerospace. The program focused on technology transfer--industrial use of data gathered during government research projects. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/94; Bakersfield Californian, Apr 21/94)
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had found a new quasar, a mere 600 million light years away in Earth's cosmic backyard, as opposed to other quasars that were billions of light years away. The discovery of a quasar in galaxy Cygnus A would give astronomers their first opportunity for detailed study of a quasar. (NASA Release 94-160)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
Retired Air Force Colonel Ken Munechika, former chief of Onizuka Air Force Base's Satellite Test Center, was designated the new chief of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC). (Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)
Richard DalBello, assistant director for space programs in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that NASA's competion for a reusable rocket to replace the Space Shuttle was on hold while White House budget officials mulled over the technical, financial, and political prospects for the program. The White House Office of Management and Budget must sign off on the NASA plan before NASA officials invited the U.S. aerospace industry to submit competing designs for the rocket. Most U.S. aerospace firms already had competing blueprints for a reusable rocket. (SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)
JoBea Way, a radar scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, came up with the idea for KidSat in November 1993 while working with scholarship students in NASA's Space Radar Laboratory program. KidSat was a project to establish a permanent orbiting research payload that only students could operate to broaden their educational horizons. Sally Ride, director of the California Space Institute at the University of California, San Diego, was backing the project, which would enlist help from NASA and other organizations such as the National Science Foundation and private charitable foundations. The aim would be to begin the first KidSat classroom lessons in the 1995-96 school year. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)
The Russian embassy in Washington announced that during Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin's visit to the United States the week of June 20, an agreement on joint space exploration was scheduled to be signed. (Reuters, Jun 20/94; USA Today, Jun 21/94; AP, Jun 21/94
The Clinton Administration authorized NASA to be an advocate for satellites in the evolving National Information Infrastructure/Global Information Infrastructure (NII/GII), the so-called information superhighway. The Administration wanted to ensure that industry--satellite builders and operators and telecommunications users--was intimately involved in formulating satellites' role in the NII/GII. Industry in turn wanted NASA to provide research and development on "pre-competitive technologies." (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
A feature article described the potential scenario envisaged by David Morrison, chief of space science research at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, and Clark Chapman of the Planetary Science Institute and Science Applications International Corporation, Tucson. Their 20-year study of asteroids led them to predict that the Earth was on a calamitous collision course with an asteroid that could kill 1 billion or 2 billion people. The odds of the collision in any one year were 1 in 500,000. (USA Today, Feb 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston as his first stop on a fall tour of all NASA facilities. In a tough speech to all employees, he said he wanted more innovation and less bureaucracy. He stressed that in a time of tight government budgets, "every single person is going to have to justify their activity--all the time." In emphasizing the need to improve business practices, he cited the NASA worker-to-manager ratio on some projects as 2-to-1, whereas 12-to-1 was the private sector goal. (H Post, Sep 13/94; H Post, Sep 14/94)
Paul F. Holloway, Director of NASA's Langley Research Center, said the Center had no desire to serve as a site for the two new wind tunnels. The Center feared its existing research would suffer if the new structures were located there. California, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Washington were vying as wind tunnel sites. (Daily Press, Apr 27/94)
Dr. Carolyn Huntoon, the new Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), appointed George W.S. Abbey as Deputy Director of JSC. He succeeded Paul J. "P.J." Weitz, who was to serve as Acting Associate Director during transition of the new Center management team and who had been the Center's Deputy Director since 1987 and Acting Director since August 1993. (NASA Release 94-26; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
Russia inherited the Soviet Union's ambitions in space but lacked its main launch pads. Russian President Boris Yeltsin in a visit to his Kazakh counterpart, Nursultan Nazarbayev, hoped to sign a 30-year lease on the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The outcome was a 20-year lease with an option to renew for 10 more years, and an annual payment of about $115 million. However, should this effort proved unsuccessful, Russia was developing other sites. Russian space scientists considered the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Far North unsuitable for manned flights, but Colonel General Vladimir Ivanov told the Itar-Tass news agency that Russia planned to build a major new space center in the Far East at Svobodny, north of Blagoveshchensk. (LA Times, Mar 28/94; Reuters, Mar 28/94; W Post, Mar 29/94)
McDonnell Douglas awarded Computer Sciences Corp (CSC), with EER Systems and CTA, Inc., a five-year, $49 million subcontract to support NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The Systems Engineering, Integration and Management Support Services contract would support several space observation missions. (Def Daily, 12 Jan/94)
Although NASA as yet lacked congressional approval for a proposed $2 billion wind tunnel complex for testing commercial aircraft, California's congressional delegation lobbied NASA's Administrator Daniel Goldin to have the wind tunnel built in California at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View. Goldin refused to discuss the subject. Virginia also expressed interest in being a site for the wind tunnels, according to Representative Robert C. Scott. (LA Times, Apr 12/94; SF Chron, Apr 12/94; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 12/94; LA Times, Apr 12/94; Daily Press, Apr 20/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
Space Shuttle Columbia was moved to the launch pad to begin preparations for a July launching at Kennedy Space Center. (Reuters, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 18/94)
The French national space agency CNES proposed for government approval developing a series of small spacecraft to broaden science mission opportunities at lower cost. If approved in 1995, France would invite other European countries or the United States to participate. According to Pierre Contreras, head of the System Engineering Division at the CNES Toulouse Space Center, satellites weighing about 500 kilograms were contemplated. The first flight would be a radar altimeter spacecraft designed as a follow-on to the NASA/CNES TOPEX/Poseidon sea surface topography mission currently underway. The chairman of the European Space Agency's (ESA) Space Science Advisory Committee, Lodewijk Woltjer, said that all ESA members "like the idea of small missions because of their low costs, but for most of ESA's objectives small satellites are too small." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA announced the selection of Honeywell, Inc., for a contract for developing flight deck technologies in support of NASA's High Speed Research program. NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was to manage the eight-year project. The advanced technologies to be developed included design for a potential future High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C94-r)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, announced the selection of EG&G Langley, Inc., Hampton, Virginia, for a contract to provide maintenance, construction, and engineering support for the Center. (NASA Release C94-m)
Kenneth Iliff, NASA Dryden Flight Research Center's first chief scientist, was featured. He developed a mathematical methodology used by nearly all the free world's flight test organizations to study flight dynamics, performance, and aerothermodynamics. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 1/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
A feature article described three women engineers who worked at the Kennedy Space Center and were among the 120 finalists being interviewed by NASA's astronaut selection board for assignment as astronaut candidates. (Fla Today, Oct 7/94)
The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)
In connection with its April mission, Space Shuttle Endeavour was to carry a radar imaging experiment that would collect data on surface texture in several areas of the globe, including California's Mojave Desert and Death Valley. The movement of sand was determined by a complex interrelationship among wind velocity, wind intensity, and the surface texture of the ground. Diane Evans, a geologist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, explained that if the experiment works well it might become a permanent part of NASA's comprehensive study of global change. The experiment also was to study vegetation around the world; in order to see as much of the Earth as possible, the Endeavour was to be launched on a trajectory that would cover most of the globe, with the orbit ranging from 57 degrees north of the equator to 57 degrees south. (LA Times, Mar 28/94)
NASA announced that the first cooperative space flight research between NASA and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) was intended to help scientists better understand the effects of microgravity on the growth of human bone and muscle cells during space flight. It might also increase understanding of changes in muscle and bone on Earth after severe injury, certain degenerative diseases, or prolonged bedrest. This research was to be a part of the April Space Shuttle mission. (NASA Release 94-55)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
In anticipation of spending cuts when the new fiscal year would begin October 1, NASA had begun to cut civil service and contractor positions at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at Cape Canaveral. Although NASA was eliminating four times as many jobs as in the previous two years, KSC contractors were obliged to let 17 workers go for every government job eliminated. These cuts were taking place despite NASA's plan for eight Shuttle launches in the coming year. (O Sen Star, Aug 14/94)
Celebrating National Engineers Week, more than 20 engineers from NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center visited classrooms around Antelope Valley to discuss their careers. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Space Grant Consortiums: Virginia and Colorado, and two universities: Pennsylvania and Cincinnati, to participate in the Student Launch Program. The program was intended to provide undergraduate students hands-on experience in flying space and Earth science experiments on suborbital sounding rockets and scientific balloons. (NASA Release 94-113)
A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)
Possible evidence of a new planetary system only 52 light-years away arising from observation of a star named Beta Pictoris was published in Nature. Harold F. Levinson and colleagues at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio showed how a system of planets and comets could account for the phenomena seen near the star. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled some of these new discoveries. Planet hunter Charles M. Telesco at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama said of Levinson's work, "Whenever you can put a body of evidence into a coherent picture like that, everybody feels much better." (CSM, Dec 1/94; H Post, Dec 1/94)
NASA's Astrophysical Data Service allowed access to an astronomical data base that ultimately was to contain nearly a billion stars and several million galaxies. The data resulted from the comprehensive National Geographic Sky Survey made by the Mount Palomar Observatory in the 1950s. To this Mount Palomar added a second survey, underway for several years, of the northern sky covering more than 50 million galaxies and nearly 2 billion stars. (W Times, Feb 13/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California, chairman of the House Science Committee, sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin asking that NASA develop cost estimates for upgrading the infrastructure surrounding Russia's Baikonur Cosmodrome. He also requested that NASA explore options for establishing direct relations with Kazakhstan in the areas of science and technology. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
Commenting on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's urging of space scientists to search for a habitable planet among the stars, science columnist Robert C. Cowen viewed such a quest as feasible in view of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. He saw the next phase of the search as involving a look for signs of gravitational interaction of a star and planets. (CSM, Jun 22/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Winston-Salem State University faculty members to participate in the NASA/University Joint Venture Program (JOVE). The program enabled faculty and students to become involved in space science research. NASA was to invest $138,000 over three years to support Winston-Salem State's program participation. As part of the program, two faculty members would spend 10 weeks in the summer of 1994 at NASA field centers being "mentored" by NASA scientists. (NASA Release 94-48)
In a press release, Jim Waterman, Boeing Space Station manufacturing manager, said that Boeing had built 18,700 pounds of hardware to date for the International Space Station and was on schedule to complete almost 50,000 pounds of hardware within the next year. Using the manufacturing facility at Marshall Space Flight Center originally built for fabricating Saturn rocket stages, it had made a good start on three pressurized modules for the Station as well as hatches and experiment racks. (Aerospace Daily, Oct 26/94)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, and Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan, announced they had concluded a two-year cooperative agreement for the transfer of NASA-developed technology to improve the design and engineering of Ford vehicles. This was the first broad technology transfer process between NASA and any automotive manufacturer. (NASA Release 94-166; H Post, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 13/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and astronaut James D. Halsell gave a talk at California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). Both men stressed the importance of education and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. The talk ended with congratulations to CSLA electrical engineering professor Helen Boussalis, who won a $3.8 million grant for her project to design and build a model space segmented telescope. (University Times, Oct 27/94)
Jim Doyle, spokesman for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that additional federal funding would allow the Magellan Spacecraft to continue studying Venus's interior and atmosphere at least through September 1994. Space Shuttle Atlantis launched Magellan in May 1989, and it arrived at Venus 15 months later. (AP, Feb 28/94; W Post, Mar 1/94)
New Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich indicated in an interview that he favored a NASA confined to research and development, with remaining functions contracted out to the private sector as far as possible. His overriding mission for NASA was drastically reducing the cost of getting into space. Gingrich praised NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's efforts to reshape NASA but considered the agency still to be "a people-heavy, obsolescent bureaucracy." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
NASA created or saved an estimated 5,300 direct and indirect jobs in the U.S. economy in the preceding 18 months because of technology transfer programs at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Of these, some 1,170 were in Alabama, according to Harry Craft Jr., manager of the MSFC Technology Transfer Office, 1,078 in Pennsylvania, and 430 in Tennessee. Most of the companies helped by the Office were small businesses. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 24/94)
Boeing Company of Seattle, prime contractor for the International Space Station, submitted a proposal to NASA outlining work that would be performed under a final contract and the cost of each task. NASA was to review the proposal and then begin negotiations. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA announced the identification of nine proposals to begin cooperative agreement negotiations in NASA's Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP was established to focus industry's research and development efforts on dual-purpose aerospace technologies that showed potential for strong commercial applications that might also benefit NASA's programs. In addition to NASA funding, each project also would involve 50 percent or more in non-government cost-sharing. (NASA Release 94-165)
Lawrence Dietlein, assistant director for life sciences at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, said that in 1963 and 1974 the Center conducted experiments involving the use of very small doses of radiation on humans. The experiments, done with the consent of the subjects, concerned bone loss and weightlessness during space flight. (Reuters, Feb 17/94; W Times, Feb 18/94; USA Today, Feb 18/94)
Dr. Robert Wingate of NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, as chairman of an investigation board appointed by Jeremiah Pearson, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, released a study of the cause of an anomaly on Shuttle Discovery--STS-51. During deployment of the ACTS communication satellite, commands for firing a single explosive cord caused the firing of both primary and backup cords, which ruptured a containment tube and released debris into the cargo bay. The study described the primary and contributing causes--a ten-year-old design flaw--and made recommendations for corrections. (NASA Note to Editors 94-8, USA Today, Jan 28/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
NASA's budget was scheduled to face possible major cuts according to top congressional sources. The Space Station, Earth Observing System, International Ultraviolet Explorer, Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer, Cosmic Background Explorer, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, Mission Operations and Data Analysis, Cassini, AXAF, and two $1 billion wind tunnels for the High Speed Civil Transport program could be affected.
A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA announced that the U.S. component of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) program, the Wind and Polar spacecraft, would experience launch delays to give NASA a chance to examine the materials and process used to build two power subsystem electronic boxes on each spacecraft similar in design to those determined to be the cause of the NOAA-13 spacecraft failure in 1993. The decision followed a GGS technical review at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Instead of launches occurring in April and June 1994, they probably would occur in the next fiscal year. (NASA Release 94-30; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
NASA announced the selection of a team led by Lockheed Space Operations, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a contract to provide propulsion test and technical services at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Hancock County, Mississippi. (NASA Release C94-aa)
A 20-month long Justice Department sting operation centered on NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston resulted in criminal fraud and bribery charges against nine men and one contractor. Two other contractors, General Electric Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, which had employed two of those charged, agreed to pay the government $1 million to cover cost of the undercover operation, code named Operation Lightning Strike. The two firms cooperated with the probe and might continue to do business with the government. Among the charged were Astro International Corporation of League City, Texas, and two NASA employees. The sting, conducted by the FBI, NASA's Office of Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and Life Sciences Division in Houston. In October 1993 NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud investigations underway. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; W Post, Feb 23/94; W Times, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 23/94; NY Times, Feb 23/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94; WSJ, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 23/94; C Trib, Feb 23/94)
A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)
Wilbur Trafton, NASA's Space Station program director, who was in Houston to attend the Space Exploration 94 conference sponsored by the NASA Alumni League, said several Chinese officials attending a gathering of aerospace professionals in Huntsville, Alabama, asked informally about joining the U.S.-led International Space Station program. They were urged to pursue their goal through diplomatic channels. (H Chron, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94)
A laudatory assessment was given of NASA's Technology Transfer program with specific reference to the Marshall Space Flight Center. According to Harry Craft, Jr., Technology Transfer office manager, the program had three elements: Industrial Outreach, Space Act Cooperative Agreements, and Dual Use Programs. Each was intended to increase cooperation between government and industry. In the Industrial Outreach area, industries came to NASA with problems they needed to resolve, requiring less than 40 hours work. For more complex problems, Space Act Cooperative Agreements were used. The Dual Use Program was a technology reinvestment program in which both government and industry contributed funds and technology to benefit both parties. (Huntsville News, Nov 30/94)
A NASA engineering team succeeded in lifting the endangered Compton gamma-ray observatory to a safe orbit after its propulsion system malfunctioned. NASA said the reboost had extended the mission life of the observatory by five years, thus meeting its original two-to-eight-year life span--it was launched on April 5, 1991. (CSM, Feb 23/94)
NASA announced that based on technology developed for its Hubble Space Telescope, a new, non-surgical breast biopsy technique had been developed. The new technique, known as stereotactic large-core needle biopsy, was predicted to reduce national health care costs by about $1 billion annually. The technique involved an improvement to digital imaging technology called a Charge Coupled Device, a high tech silicon chip that converted light directly into an electronic image. (NASA Release 94-107)
Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division, Seattle, Washington, for a contract to provide the Shuttle Upper Stage system with related integration and launch support services for the space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). (NASA Release C94-q)
NASA announced its selection of 15 organizations to receive a total of $20 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. The remote sensing database applications would make the information more accessible to a wider audience than in the past. (NASA Release 94-138)
NASA announced the successful completion of the first and largest of eight mirrors for the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The mirror was scheduled to be a part of the AXAF telescope which was to be launched in 1998. (NASA Release 94-139)
Bernadette Cardenas, an aerospace engineer at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, filed a civil suit against astronaut Lt. Col. Charles (Sam) Gemar and his wife Charlene, also a NASA employee. The suit claimed the Gemars had harassed her mentally and physically; Mrs. Cardenas wanted to force Col. Gemar to submit to blood tests to establish paternity for her two-year-old son. NASA said the lawsuit would not prevent Gemar's participation in the forthcoming shuttle mission. (AP, Feb 24/94; NY Times, Feb 25/94; B Sun, Feb 25/94; USA Today, Feb 25/94)
NASA determined it was cheaper to tear down the giant hammerhead crane originally built for the Apollo moon landing program rather than to refurbish it. Therefore, the crane was in the process of being dismantled at the Kennedy Space Center launch pad. (Fla Today, Dec 11/94)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
As part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program, NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) was using its National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex to study and curb the noise from the takeoff exhaust or "plume" of turbulent air in the wake of future supersonic jetliners without affecting takeoff performance. Project Manager Paul Soderman, an aeronautical and acoustical engineer, said that such future aircraft would have to comply with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. An exhaust nozzle of an "ejector suppressor" type was being studied by laser and infrared video. (NASA Release, Jan 31/94)
A photograph was featured of the first node of NASA's international laboratory designed as part of the International Space Station. It was being manufactured by Boeing at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. (Fla Today, Oct 2/94)
A federal grand jury indicted Ram Bachan Ram, chairman of the mathematics department at Hampton University, on seven counts of mail fraud related to alleged plagiarism in submitting a proposal for a research grant to NASA. The proposal concerned "Implications of Pressure Diffusion for Shock Waves," and for it Ram received $100,810 from NASA's Langley Research Center. However, it developed that Ram had stolen the proposal and findings from the work of a professor at Clemson University in South Carolina. (Virginia Pilot, Mar 9/94)
Students and teachers at Alvin High School in Texas, with the assistance of a neighboring community college and members of the Consortium for Aerospace Technology Education (CATE), were building their own space center similar to that at the Control Center Complex of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC). Frank Hughes, chief of the Flight Training Division at JSC, initiated the CATE program, which integrated cooperation from industry (Rockwell) with that of community colleges and universities. (H Chron, Dec 14/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
Russia marked its Space Day in a subdued mood, with the Baikonur Cosmodrome having become part of Kazakhstan and Russia's cosmonaut team decreased from 100 to 40 people. The Buran Space Shuttle was ended after its only unmanned test flight in 1988. But workers remaining at the Molniya complex in northwestern Moscow, established to construct Buran, hoped to work on the MAKS project involving small shuttles launched from the giant An-225 Mriya transport plane to carry cargo into space. (AP, Apr 12/94)
NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft, the first probe to explore the sun's environment at high altitudes, had completed a pass on November 5 over the southern solar pole, ending the first phase of its primary mission. Members of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, reported the development including the fact that Ulysses found a uniform magnetic field at the sun rather than any magnetic poles. In the sun's polar regions, the solar wind was found to be flowing at a very high velocity of about 750 kilometers per second, nearly double the speed of the solar wind at lower latitudes. (NASA Release 94-187; LA Times, Dec 4/94; UPI, Dec 5/94)
NASA announced that its Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had provided new insights into how stars might have been formed billions of years ago in the early universe. A preliminary assessment of HST observations indicated that a pair of clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud instead of containing fewer than 1,000 stars as earlier thought, contained nearly 10,000 stars. If this were true billions of years ago, it would have altered drastically the early history of the universe, according to Nino Panagia of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-171)
NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center (SSC), Hancock County, Mississippi, announced the award of a contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida, to provide propulsion and technical services at SSC. (NASA Release C94-dd)
The six pilots at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base believed that they had the best flying job in the world. Their work entailed a great deal of variety, flying in different types of planes and conducting numerous research experiments. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Apr 18/94)
Astronomer Alexander Wolszczan at Pennsylvania State University in an article published in Science magazine, claimed "irrefutable evidence" of at least two planets orbiting a nearby star--the first confirmed observation of planets outside the Earth's solar system. The planets were in orbit around an unusual neutron star located 1,200 light-years away in the constellation Virgo. Various NASA staff members commented on the discovery. Robert Millis, director of the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, said NASA had a major effort underway to search for planets around stars but its program focused on ordinary stars like the sun. (LA Times, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; P Inq, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94)
"Destiny in Space," the latest IMAX space film, being shown in Langley Theater in the National Air and Space Museum, took viewers on a 40-minute hi-tech space ride that examines space exploration by astronauts and robots. (Journal, Jun 24/94)
NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)
More than 700 Space Shuttle support personnel at NASA's Kennedy Space Center had been on strike for 15 weeks in a labor dispute with contractor EG&G Corporation. The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, the labor union representing the striking workers, said negotiations were deadlocked over an EG&G demand to limit health insurance benefits for its employees. NASA denied charges that safety had been compromised during the three Shuttle flights launched since the strike began July 5. On October 21 negotiators reached a tentative agreement in their meeting at the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service headquarters in Washington, D.C. The contract proposal covered health insurance, wages, and pensions. The contract remained to be approved by three EG&G subcontractors and then ratified by the striking union members. (Defense Daily, Oct 14/94; AP, Oct 21/94)
NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)
NASA was learning to "fly leaner" as a result of a shrinking budget. Examples given were that launches now were no longer scheduled on weekends when overtime would need to be paid and if the weather were bad, liftoff was called off before fueling, saving $400,000 in tanking costs. More than 1,400 Shuttle-processing jobs had been eliminated at the Kennedy Space Center in the previous three years and various Shuttle improvements had been deferred. (W Times, Nov 13/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a joint government research program that might result in developing plants that could withstand drought, unseasonable temperatures, soil salinity, and other adverse growth conditions. The program, called the Research Network on Plant Sensory Systems, was supported by NASA and the National Science Foundation. The program also was selected as NASA's ninth Specialized Center of Research and Training. (NASA Release 94-213)
Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) was making components and expected to integrate the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) by early June 1995. NEAR was the second mission approved in NASA's Discovery program but would be the first to be launched. To make a scheduled January 1999 encounter with 433 Eros--a silicate rock asteroid--NEAR would need to be launched within a two-week period beginning February 17, 1996. It would be launched on a Delta 2 and would swing by Earth in 1998 so that its plane could be changed to match that of Eros. The spacecraft would carry four instruments: a visible imager, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a near infrared spectrograph, and a magnetometer. In entrusting to APL its first planetary science mission to be developed outside the agency, NASA turned to a laboratory experienced in rapid, inexpensive space programs. APL was responsible for three other proposals that NASA was considering under the Discovery program. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
Space Tec Ventures, a Hampton, Virginia, company created by Joseph Casas, helped NASA's Langley Research Center in Virginia build a laser scheduled to be be used to monitor Earth's environment from space. The laser was to measure the amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and was to be aimed at Earth from Space Shuttle Endeavour's cargo bay. The firm built two other lasers that were scheduled for NASA flights in August and September.
Fifty-four minority high school students, mostly African Americans, from the Los Angeles area, began a four-week stay at Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, studying computer science, Earth sciences, and mathematics. NASA sponsored the $300,000 Earth to L.A. program in order to encourage minority students to pursue such courses at traditionally black colleges and universities. Following the courses at Central State, the students would spend two weeks visiting 12 black colleges, looking toward future college entrance. (LA Times, Jul 21/94)
NASA announced that it, a team of U.S. aircraft and engine manufacturers, and the Russian aircraft firm, Tupolev Design Bureau, planned to use a Russian Tu-144 supersonic transport as a flying testbed for conducting flight research on high-speed enabling technologies. Included in the U.S. team were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell International, General Electric, and Pratt and Whitney. (NASA Release 94-143; Antelope Valley Press, Sep 1/94)
Major Oleg Kulakovsky of the Military Space Forces, the branch of the Russian army that runs Baikonur Cosmodrome, was quoted as saying that people were leaving adjacent Leninsk because "There's nothing to stay for." The population was said to have fallen from 100,000 to 45,000 since Kazakhstan gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kazakhstan has a severe energy crisis and a chronic water shortage, which contribute to the harsh life for the population. Since the first Soviet manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin in 1961, Baikonur has averaged one launch a month, according to General Oleg Goryushkin, space center deputy commander. However, the space industry appears to be undergoing a crisis of confidence, and in view of Russia's economic crisis, the cost of maintaining Baikonur is being questioned. (UP, May 26/94)
NASA announced that it would negotiate contracts with 15 small companies to enable them to fully develop innovative new high technology products they had proposed for application in the aerospace industry. The contracts would be financed under NASA's Small Business Technology Transfer Program. (NASA Release 94-111)
Jeffrey E. Carr, a spokesman at NASA's Johnson Space Center, confirmed that NASA had ordered a safety investigation of a medical experiment scheduled for spaceflight in 1995 after an astronaut collapsed and required emergency treatment during a test of a chemical used in the research. It was later revealed that the incident occurred to Bonnie J. Dunbar, while in Houston for training in October; a review board was to examine the incident. (AP, Nov 3/94; H Post, Nov 4/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, announced the selection of Robert P. Madison International for an engineering, construction, and environmental services contract at the Lewis Research Center and at Plum Brook Station, Sandusky, Ohio. (NASA Release C94-i; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
NASA announced the development by the Ames Fatigue Countermeasures Program of a training course that taught pilots steps to be used against fatigue. The first workshop was to be held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on May 18-19. (NASA Release 94-64)
Russian and U.S. Mars mission planners were meeting the week of June 6 at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to define how the two countries could best cooperate in a proposed multinational space exploration program to be called "Mars Together." France, Germany, and Italy were also considering joining the new 1998 mission to Mars. The new mission resulted from Russia's delay in its originally proposed "Mars 94" and "Mars 96" flights. The idea would be to combine major technological elements on which individual nations were already working. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)
An article analyzed the role played by lasers in advancing atmospheric science. Reference was made to the end of the last Space Shuttle flight when NASA was gathering data simultaneously from different altitudes over the same spot on Earth with three laser systems--one on Discovery and two on research aircraft. A fourth, ground-based Lidar (light detection and ranging) at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, also gathered data concurrently. This combination should significantly advance technology toward the goal of a permanent, automated Lidar satellite. The article provided scientific details of the flights undertaken and Discovery's operation of Lite, the Lidar In-space Technology Experiment. (AvWk, Oct 3/94)
Sandy Valenti, project team leader at NASA's Lewis Research Center, said the Center had compiled an inventory of space-related technology that has relevance to biotechnology and the work of medical researchers in northeastern Ohio. NASA's goal was to support existing organizations in he community, such as local hospitals and universities. Five specific research areas in which NASA could provide technological support were fluid mechanics, electronics, communication and instrumentation, materials development and structural design, surface modification, and energy storage systems. (Crain's Cleveland Business, May 30/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center obtained an Andros robot to increase the safety of its workforce and save time and money. The robot could perform such tasks as deflating Space Shuttle tires and checking for bombs, which would be dangerous for humans. (Fla Today, Oct 30/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
The impact of a huge Fragment G, a two-mile-wide piece of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, was as great as 6 million megatons of TNT when it hit Jupiter early July 18, according to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. A similar piece hit late July 18, and a further piece was expected on July 20. In contrast the total energy that could be created on Earth with atomic bombs was 10,000 megatons. The comet left a scar larger than Earth's diameter on Jupiter's gaseous surface. Scientists began to study the long-term effects on Jupiter of the comet's impact. The media also focused on the work of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in tracking developments on Jupiter and the excellent view of Jupiter for astronomers at the South Pole. In the final stage of the comet barrage that ended late July 21, four large comet fragments hit Jupiter, creating tremendous fireworks for watching astronomers. Furthermore, as a result of the scars made by the fragments, white hot gases from the planet's interior erupted through the holes in great fireballs. In measuring the dazzling light produced, astronomers believed they had detected hydrogen sulfide, which could contribute to Jupiter's colors. The potential dangers associated with the comet collision with Jupiter led the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology to propose legislation that, if passed, would direct NASA to submit a plan by February 1995 for a 10-year program to catalog "all comets and asteroids that are greater than one kilometer in diameter" traveling along orbits that intersect that of the Earth. (LA Times, Jul 18/94; C Trib, Jul 18/94; LA Times, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; W Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; B Sun, Jul 19/94; C Trib, Jul 19/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; W Times, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 20/94; B Sun, Jul 20/94; CSM, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; P Inq, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; C Trib, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 22/94; NY Times, Jul 22/94; W Post, Jul 22/94; B Sun, Jul 22/94; USA Today, Jul 22/94; W Times, Jul 22/94; Time, Jul 25/94; LA Times, Jul 26/94; NY Times, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 26/94; CSM, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Aug 1/94)
At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)
Officials at NASA, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said mission designers were being discouraged from including Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) in future satellites. RTGs were plutonium-powered and were used most frequently on spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because solar panels became increasingly less efficient the farther they were from the sun. Scientists and engineers planning NASA's proposed Pluto Fast Flyby mission wanted to use an RTG, but thus far approval had been refused. The scientists were concerned that NASA was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA officials and the White House denied there was a policy decision to end the use of RTGs. In late June, a Technology Challenge team headed by Dwight Duston, director of science and technology for the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, "unanimously recommended the use of an RTG without reservation" for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94)
NASA announced that it had selected 412 small business research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts up to $70,000 to perform a six-month feasibility study under its 1994 Small Business Innovation Research Program. Successful completion of Phase I would make companies eligible to compete in 1995 for two-year contracts in the amount of $600,000. (NASA Release 94-176; Huntsville News, Oct 26/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
The Space Telescope Institute released photographs made by the repaired Hubble Space Telescope of comet fragments that were to smash into the planet Jupiter in July. The fragments were projected to strike with the force of 100 million hydrogen bombs, with the explosions so bright that the light would be reflected off Jupiter's moons. (Reuters, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94; AP, Feb 9/94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
A Youth Science Symposium, "Your Place in Space," drew 400 middle school students to the California Museum of Science and Industry. Randii Wessen, a science systems engineer with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, was an instructor in one of the space-age exercises. Other students launched rockets and learned the fundamentals of comets and rockets. (LA Times, Dec 16/94)
NASA's Cleveland Lewis Research Center was scheduled to work with the Russians on a project to use the sun's rays to power the Russian Mir Space Station. In addition, the Lewis Center was to direct the building of two wind tunnels desired by the commercial aircraft industry to help design airliners that fly at 2.4 times the speed of sound. The two projects would help compensate for jobs lost at Lewis by funding cuts. (Plain Dealer, Feb 11/94)
Following a protest ruling in its favor, Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, received payment for its Computational, Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services contract with NASA's Lewis Research Center. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 7/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)
The research of engineers at NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was featured, together with its applications to industry. Specifically, pistons were discussed and the benefits of making them from carbon instead of aluminum. NASA had "working agreements" with Ford, General Motors, lawn mower engine maker Briggs & Stratton Inc., and engine maker K&B Manufacturing Company, that would allow them to use Langley piston technology if they should decide to make the pistons. (Daily Press, Oct 23/94)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, announced the award of a contract for information and communications support services for Ames to I-Net, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-bb (sic); duplicates number on contract announcement of August 3)
Roger Bonnet, science director of the European Space Agency (ESA), stated in an interview that the ESA, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, sought some $350 million from member states to fund the first in a series of lunar programs that could end in a manned moon station within 25 years. The first European emissary to the moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (Lunar European Demonstration Approach), could land on the moon by 2001. LEDA would carry instruments to measure the darkness of the lunar sky, the frequency of meteorite impacts, and the stability of the ground, factors that would affect the functioning of a future astronomical observatory. LEDA would also need to analyze lunar soil for components to be used in the construction and operation of a permanent station. Such a European approach would bypass NASA's plans for an orbiting Space Station, a plan with which many European countries had become disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
NASA announced the preliminary findings of the investigating team at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, California. The findings indicated that a faulty vertical gyro was responsible for the accident November 22 that resulted in severe damage to a Perseus remotely piloted research aircraft. (NASA Release 94-218)
NASA announced that a small quantity of nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) was accidentally released from the Thermochemical Test Area at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, during a test setup. The resulting cloud of N2O4 gradually dissipated, but area traffic was halted briefly and some 46 people were treated in local medical facilities for mild respiratory symptoms. Nitrogen tetroxide is an oxidizer used in some rocket engines. (NASA Release 94-030; AP, Apr 21/94; Reuters, Apr 21/94; H Chron, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; UP, Apr 22/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)
Johnson Space Center denied one of its largest prime contractors, Martin Marietta Services of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, an "award fee" or profit on its contract for the six-month period ending March 31, 1994. The action resulted from a much more stringent contract compliance policy by NASA and the fact that the contractor did not control its labor costs under the terms of the contract. (H Chron, Dec 3/94)
NASA announced that it had begun resurfacing the runway at the Kennedy Space Center, which would improve the wear on Shuttle tires and potentially lead to an expansion of the Return to Launch Site landing crosswind flight rule beyond the present constraint of 15 knots. (NASA Release 94-153)
Kathryn Hire, who worked at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) for Lockheed Space Operations Company, became the first KSC worker to be selected as a future astronaut. (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
NASA announced that Suzanne Smrekar, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, who had been working on data from NASA's Magellan mission, had found that the planet Venus was still geologically active in places, even though radar images of its surface indicated little change in the past half-billion years. Data suggested that there were at least two, and possibly more, active hot spots on Venus. (NASA Release 94-105)
Harry Holloway, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications, stressed that both the Spacelab and Mir were critical elements in NASA's orbital research program. During the next three years, NASA was scheduled to fly four Spacelab missions and five of the scheduled 10 Shuttle flights to Mir were to use the long Spacelab module to conduct priority research in fluid physics and combustion. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)
Intermetrics, Inc., of McLean, VA, was awarded an $81 million, 10-year contract as part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. It provide Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of the Earth-Observing system (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), for the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland. EOS was projected to generate about 1 trillion bytes of new data per day, offering access to data on the Earth's ecosystem, permitting scientists to distinguish natural from human-made changes. (NASA Release C94-b)
NASA announced the development and testing of a new integrated flight and propulsion control system to help pilots land under difficult conditions. Aerospace engineers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, were developing the digital fly-by-wire control system to reduce a pilot's workload and help stabilize landing aircraft. NASA was testing the new system in the Vertical/Short Takeoff and Landing (V/STOL) Systems Research Aircraft (VSRA) to improve takeoff and landing capabilities for V/STOL aircraft in reduced visibility. The VSRA was a modified version of the U.S. Marine Corps' AV-8B Harrier jet fighter, which could take off and land vertically. (NASA Release 94-209)
The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced the selection of Loral Space Information Systems of League City, Texas, to provide support services for JSC's Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance Office. (NASA Release C94-cc)
NASA and the California Institute of Technology (CIT) signed a five-year, five-billion-dollar, cost-plus-award-fee contract to manage NASA's 7,300-member Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). This contract consolidated two previous contracts for CIT, which has managed JPL since NASA's inception in 1958. JPL, NASA's lead site for solar-system exploration, designed and built the Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WF/PC II) recently installed on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). It also runs programs such as NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, its Galileo mission to Jupiter, and the Magellan mission to Venus, as well as the U.S. half of the NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the sun, the NASA/CNES TOPEX/POSEIDON, and the SIR-C/X-SAR radar system on the Shuttle. (NASA Release C94-c)
NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)
France's national space agency CNES launched a public relations campaign featuring its astronauts in order to improve strained relations between CNES and the inhabitants of French Guiana on South America's northeast coast, where the Ariane rocket series was launched. The Guiana space center gave France independent launch capacity for civilian and military satellites. (Reuters, Nov 19/94)
NASA was scheduled to deliver in late October for Clinton Administration review a comprehensive plan for the United States to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV). Proposals were contemplated that would be funded by business with NASA providing the needed technologies, for two RLVs: the X-34 for small payloads and the X-33 single-stage-to-orbit that could lead to a replacement of the Shuttle. The goal was, eventually, to replace expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). With a declining budget NASA's future depended on cheap space transportation and thus far there was little evidence that such RLVs were likely in the near future. In late November it was reported that Boeing Company and McDonnell Douglas Corporation would announce on November 29 that they were joining to compete for initial contracts to build a next-generation Space Shuttle based on reusable rockets. McDonnell Douglas had led in the development of single-stage-to-orbit launch systems and Boeing was a major integrator of complex programs. (AvWk, Nov 7/94; WSJ, Nov 29/94; Reuters, Nov 29/94; AP, Nov 29/94; LA Times, Nov 30/94; USA Today, Nov 30/94; H Post, Nov 30/94; Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94; SP News, Dec 5-11/94; CSM, Dec 6/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, and Lockheed Corporation of Calabasas, California, reached agreement to merge and create the world's largest space and defense company. The agreement remained to be approved by shareholders and regulators. According to Lockheed chairman Daniel M. Tellep the merger would result in "significant reduction of costs to the government." Biographic data on Norman R. Augustine, chairman and chief executive of Martin Marietta and president-designate of Lockheed Martin Corporation, were included. (W Post, Aug 30/94; CSM, Sep 1/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; U.S. News and World Report, Sep 12/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, in addressing a Maryland Space Business Roundtable, warned aerospace contractors that congressional budget cutters were targeting NASA's Space Station; meanwhile other congressional members supported increased funds for human services programs and sought to cut from science and technology projects. Senator Mikulski stressed the importance of investments in science and technology within the framework of a balanced budget. (B Sun, Feb 16/94)
Astronaut Tom Jones on Space Shuttle Endeavour answered questions about radar mapping and the Earth's ozone layer from students at his former school in Stemmers Run. Among the areas Endeavour radar was mapping were traces of ancient rivers beneath the Sahara Desert. Other areas being targeted for mapping were the Andes and the East Australian Current as well as fires in China south of the Yellow River and flooding in the Midwest. Astronauts assured C-span television questioners that the mapping radar was strictly for scientific not military purposes. At the halfway point of the mission, NASA said Endeavour already had collected 95 percent of the data it was to gather. The astronauts were divided into two shifts of three persons each in order to work round the clock monitoring radar performance, taking pictures of the Earth, and recording observations on tape. An air pollution monitor aboard Endeavour found surprisingly high level of carbon monoxide in the Northern Hemisphere, according to NASA. NASA scientists on the ground were delighted with the quality of pictures and other data beamed by radar.
NASA was scheduled to open a new facility, the Global Hydrology and Climate Center, in Cummings Research Park West in Huntsville, Alabama, October 27. The focus of the Center's $15 million annual program was to study Earth's water cycle and the ways in which it affected climate. Research would involve collection and analysis of rainfall, lightning, and temperature data on a global scale, according to Center director Ron Greenwood. The Center was to house 42 scientists from Marshall Space Flight Center, 59 from the Universities Space Research Association, and 46 faculty, staff, and students from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was present to open the Center, which was to operate in cooperation with the other institutions mentioned and to concentrate on studying water vapor. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 25/94; Htsvl Tms, Oct 27/94)
NASA showed photographs taken by Galileo spacecraft revealing for the first time an asteroid orbited by its own moon. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory released the photos of asteroid Ida. (NASA Release 94-50; Reuters, Mar 23/94; P Inq, Mar 24/94; LA Times, Mar 24/94; W Post, Mar 24/94; USA Today, Mar 24/94; NY Times, Mar 24/94)
NASA scientists would like to send an unmanned spacecraft to look for ice inside craters on Mercury, the solar system's hottest planet with temperatures reaching 800 degrees at its equator. However, inside the craters at Mercury's poles the temperatures were 235 below zero and scientists conceived that life might exist. Robert M. Nelson of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena discussed JPL's proposal for a mission to Mercury, named Hermes, which NASA was considering. The discussion occurred at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union. (AP, Dec 6/94)
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight center, Huntsville, Alabama, had discovered unusual gamma-ray flashes in the upper atmosphere high above thunderstorms. The heretofore unseen flashes were detected by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, a Marshall instrument aboard NASA's orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (NASA Release 94-86; W Post, May 30/94)
A feature article described the work of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. The astronomers devised plans for a Polar Stratospheric Telescope (POST) intended to reveal stars and galaxies in twice the detail possible with the Hubble Telescope and do so more cheaply. The telescope, which was to hang from a blimp tethered over the South Pole, was to be the prototype for a new generation of observatories that could follow Hubble into space. The Institute, together with Johns Hopkins University, a consortium of other universities, and two private manufacturers, planned to ask NASA for $500,000 to $1,000,000 for a six-month design and cost study. (B Sun, Feb 22/94)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)
In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of a contract for logistics services to Pioneer Contract Services, Inc., Houston. (NASA Release C94-ee)
According to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, NASA received 28 outstanding proposals from universities, the aerospace industry, and government laboratories for smaller, less expensive planetary science missions under its new Discovery program. By January 1995 NASA was to select a few to pursue seriously with the expectation that one or two would be developed and launched by the period 1999-2001. NASA set forth specific funding limitations and wanted models of streamlined management of such projects while demanding high quality. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the New York Medical College (NYMC) in Valhalla, New York, were using satellite remote sensing and computer technology to predict the risk of Lyme disease transmission. The NASA team, working with Dr. Durland Fish of NYMC and Westchester County Health Department investigators, found that the higher the proportion of vegetated residential area next to woods within a municipality, the higher the transmission risk. (NASA Release 94-123)
Abe Martinez, assistant U.S. attorney in Houston, said that one corporation and eight individuals, including a NASA contracting officer, Stephen Cleland, had pleaded guilty to criminal charges in connection with Operation Lightning Strike at NASA's Johnson Space Center. The U.S. attorney's office was to ask a grand jury to indict another Johnson official, David Proctor. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)
NASA announced its selection of NSI Technology Services of Sunnyvale, California, for a contract to provide engineering, technical, logistical, and administrative technical services to support two airborne science aircraft at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-bb)
Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, received the Distinguished Executive Presidential Rank Award. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 6/94)
A lengthy review of the four-hour TBS documentary film "Moon Shot," described the extraordinary footage obtained from NASA, primarily from the Johnson Space Center, and the story behind the U.S. 10-year race to beat the Soviet Union to the moon. (TV Times, Jul 10-16/94)
Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report on the Mars mission to NASA. The spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. Despite lack of any communication with the craft, the board found that the probable cause of the loss of communication was a rupture of the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine - MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have caused the craft to enter a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. The board discussed a number of other concerns of a procedural nature. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
Disagreements continued to exist between the United States and Russia over the Salyut FGB "space tug" with regard both to the tug's price and the cost of launching it, which Russia wanted the United States to pay. Khrunichev Machine Building Enterprise was in the early stage of working on the tug. An agreement was worked out on November 10 about the medical certification process for joint flights, under which each country would accept the medical certification of the other's space flight personnel until prelaunch examinations were performed 30-45 days in advance of Russian Soyuz flights and 10 days in advance of U.S. Shuttle flights. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA Program Manager for Human Systems Technology in the Office of Aeronautics, Washington, D.C. announced that NASA was designing an electronic chart to make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often fly in potentially dangerous conditions above forest fires. The Electronic Chart Display being developed at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, shows pilots an area's terrain and obstacles on a computer screen. (NASA Release 94-69)
Andrea Donnellan, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, stated that Oat Mountain in the Santa Susana range, north of the San Fernando Valley, had jumped several inches during the 6.6 earthquake that hit Los Angeles January 17. NASA collected data from a global network of 45 stations. (NASA Release 94-19; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 13/94; National Black Review, Feb/Mar/94)
NASA in a cooperative agreement notice called on third parties to develop public-use applications of its remote sensing databases in order to make use of the reams of Earth and space science data collected to date. Paul Hunter, Program Manager for NASA's Information Infrastructure Technology Applications program, said NASA planned to grant about eight to 10 large awards of $500,000 to $1.5 million per year, and eight to 20 smaller awards of about $100,000 to $300,000. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a life sciences support services contract to Dynamac Corporation, Rockville, Maryland. The contract supported Kennedy's Biomedical Operations and Research Office and the Payload Management and Operations Directorate in program management support for life sciences activities. The work included processing medical, biomedical, and biological flight experiments for launch and landing in addition to continuing research on NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support System, a bioregenerative concept for long-term space travel. In addition, Dynamac would be responsible for environmental and ecological monitoring of Kennedy's premises, located on a national wildlife refuge. (NASA Release C94-kk)
The General Accounting Office, in a report to Congress, said that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology, was poorly controlled and lost about $1 million in property annually. (Reuters, May 10/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 11/94; AP, May 11/94)
NASA encountered difficulties in its desire to deliver planetary video data to microcomputer users because of the limitations of the technology. Mike Martin, a science data systems technologist with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that so far he and his colleagues had been unable to incorporate Apple Quick Time video into multimedia presentations to run on the Macintosh and multimedia PCs. (Government Computer News, Mar 21/94)
NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center released their annual economic impact statement in terms of the effect of the Center on Brevard County. Despite budget cuts, the 1994 impact on the economy was $1.18 billion in comparison to $1.32 billion in 1992; the total workforce (including contractors, civil service, and construction) was 16,500 in 1994 in contrast with 18,700 in 1992. The review of NASA operations should result in more job cuts, which would occur in early 1995. (Fla Today, Nov 24/94)
The Hubble Space Telescope enabled a team led by Rice University astrophysicist Robert O'Dell to survey 110 young stars in a field of 3,000 in the Orion Nebula, which was 1,500 light-years from Earth. As a result, O'Dell reported at a NASA news conference, scientists found that the material required to create planets was common around stars; the same would be true of Earth's home galaxy, the Milky Way. (Reuters, Jun 13/94; W Post, Jun 14/94; B Sun, Jun 14/94; NY Times, Jun 14/94; LA Times, Jun 14/94; USA Today, Jun 14/94; H Post, Jun 14/94)
NASA continued tests of the Research External Vision Display (REVD), a new optical system allowing pilots to see a runway during nose-high landings without computer-generated views. The REVD, basically an upside-down periscope, is a system of lenses and mirrors that reflects the view of the runway under the aircraft nose to the pilot. NASA started the first of up to 20 tests on the device on an F-104 aircraft at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The REVD approach differs from that used in the European Concorde and Russian Tu-144 supersonic transports, which drop the entire nose of the aircraft in front of the windshield. It could be used on a future U.S. supersonic airliner. (NASA Release, 94-2)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had obtained the clearest views yet of distant galaxies that existed when the universe was a fraction of its current age. Hubble findings suggested that elliptical galaxies developed quickly into their present shapes. However, spiral galaxies in large clusters evolved over a much longer period. (NASA Release 94-201; Reuters, Dec 6/94; NY Times, Dec 7/94; W Post, Dec 7/94; W Times, Dec 7/94; H Chron, Dec 7/94; USA Today, Dec 7/94; CSM, Dec 7/94; H Post, Dec 7/94; Newsweek, Dec 19/94)
NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
Scientists said that the first spacecraft to fly over the sun's south pole--the Ulysses probe, a joint project of the European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA--reached the climax of a 3 billion-kilometer journey through space the week of September 12. As it did so, 80 of the project's 120 scientists met at ESA's research center in the Dutch town of Noordwijk to assess data gained during the four-year space odyssey. Ulysses' chief scientist Richard Marsden believed that the mission would give scientists greater insight into how the solar wind interfered with radio communications and electrical devices on Earth. (Reuters, Sep 16/94)
NASA announced that aerospace industry engineers were finding NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT) at the Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, was saving them time and money in testing a model of a next-generation supersonic transport. The RAWT was equipped with a computer and video camera that allowed them to send real-time test data to engineers at aerospace companies nationwide. (NASA Release 94-186)
Businessman James Robertson of James M. Beggs Associates consulting firm of Arlington, Virginia, pleaded guilty to accepting inside bid information involving NASA contracts at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (AP, Mar 2/94)
As the astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia neared and passed the halfway point of their mission, they continued medical and metal research experiments, growth studies with protein crystals, and physical exercises. Lettuce and other seeds flown on Columbia were to be planted after the shuttle returned and then tested. Apart from the desire for a hot shower, the astronauts had no complaints and hoped they might break the U.S. record of time in space flight. The study of spacecraft glow on March 12 experienced difficulty when the ultraviolet light detector malfunctioned. On March 14, the astronauts began tests of a robot arm targeting system. On March 17, the astronauts started packing up experiments in preparation for landing the following day. Columbia landed uneventfully on March 18, having completed 223 orbits over 5.8 million miles. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 10/94; AP, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 11/94; AP, Mar 11/94; UP, Mar 11/94; B Sun, Mar 12/94; W Post, Mar 12/94; NY Times, Mar 12/94; Reuters, Mar 12/94; W Times, Mar 12/94; LA Times, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 13/94; Reuters, Mar 13/94; UP, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 14/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; USA Today, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 14/94; UP, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 15/94; Reuters, Mar 15/94; UP, Mar 15/94; W Post, Mar 16/94; AP, Mar 16/94; C Trib, Mar 16/94; USA Today, Mar 17/94; W Times, Mar 17/94; AP, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 17/94; Reuters, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 18/94; AP, Mar 18/94; Reuters, Mar 18/94; B Sun, Mar 19/94; NY Times, Mar 19/94; W Times, Mar 19/94; W Post, Mar 19/94; USA Today, Mar 21/94)
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in Huntington Beach, California, to reconfigure the Delta Clipper experimental vehicle (DC-X) using advanced lightweight materials and advanced auxiliary propulsion systems. NASA was acquiring the DC-X from the Department of Defense to test new technologies needed to develop a reusable launch vehicle that could assist NASA's ultimate goal of gaining low-cost access to space. (NASA Release 94-125)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., announced the selection of a scientific investigation that included the development of a new camera for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). NASA was scheduled to work with Holland Ford of Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, to develop a new camera, called Hubble Advanced Camera for Exploration. The new camera would be installed on the HST by Shuttle astronauts during the third servicing mission scheduled for November 1999. (NASA Release C94-oo)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a contract to Rockwell International Corporation, Downey, California, to continue providing Shuttle Orbiter logistics operations requirements. (NASA Release C94-hh)
Preparations for the launch, the launch itself, and experiments conducted aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia received extensive media coverage. Fueling began the morning of March 4 prior to the crew's boarding. The mission commander and the pilot wore newly devised long johns with tubes that plugged into water pumps to keep them cool while awaiting takeoff and during reentry. Most of the major experiments were to be operated from the ground so that the astronauts could concern themselves with medical tests, some mechanical structures, and observation of the 12 rats used in a bone density study. On March 5, one of Columbia's three auxiliary power units registered an unusually high pressure reading, causing concern; the readings returned to normal when the crew switched to other heaters. It developed that the high pressure apparently resulted from an ice buildup in one of the auxiliary power units. Meanwhile, several articles expressed concern that budget cuts endangered the safety of NASA flights, but NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin denied this was true. As the space flight progressed, two crew members at a time took turns in taking four hours off duty in view of the lengthy nature of the mission. (W Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; NY Times, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; B Sun, Mar 5/94; P Inq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq, Mar 6/94; Daily News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY Times, Mar 7/94; AP, Mar 7/94; UP, Mar 7/94; Reuters, Mar 7/94; NY Times, Mar 8/94; CSM, Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C Trib, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc., of San Diego, California, for contract negotiations for two definite launches and options for seven added launches using the Atlas intermediate expendable launch vehicle. The first mission was to be the Earth Observing System-AM-1 spacecraft scheduled for 1998. (NASA Release C94-g)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and a consortium led by Texas Instruments' Metallurgical Materials Division were trying to use advanced aerospace materials to develop a demonstrator automobile engine significantly lighter and more efficient than the ones in present use. They planned to use high-temperature, high-strength materials developed for the defunct National Aerospace Plane. NASA would provide funding under its Aerospace Industry Technology Program. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)
The International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers filed unfair labor practice charges against NASA because of the April 4 memorandum from Jeremiah Pearson, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, transferring several positions from headquarters to Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center without collective bargaining. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)
Before setting the final date for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA engineers were studying the results of tests conducted on Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engine that shut down 1.9 seconds before takeoff, aborting the launch. (AP, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 4/94; B Sun, Sep 4/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; Fla Today, Sep 4/94)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center's Western Aeronautical Test Range passed a milestone on March 18: the 10,000th mission monitored by the range. In this case it was NASA's F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle's second flight of the day. (Antelope Valley Press,Mar 19/94)
NASA announced the dedication of the Independent Verification and Validation facility, a new research facility in Fairmont, West Virginia, that was to support NASA's work in advanced research, stimulate commercialization efforts, and provide training in a variety of engineering and technology areas. In addition to housing staff working on software for the International Space Station, it was to house parts of the Earth Observing System Data and Operations System. Senator Robert C. Byrd attended the opening. (NASA Release 94-88; Times-West Virginian, Jun 2/94)
A critical article broke down the percentages NASA would devote to various programs during the 1995 fiscal year, out of the $14.4 billion approved by Congress. The following categories were listed: Space Shuttle, 25 percent; NASA bureaucracy, 15 percent; Space Station, 15 percent; Mission to Planet Earth, 9 percent; physics and astronomy, 8 percent; aeronautics, 6 percent; planetary exploration, 5 percent; advanced concepts and technology, 4 percent; mission communications, 3 percent; launch services, 2 percent; life and microgravity sciences, 2 percent; space communication and telecommunications, 1 percent; new construction, 1 percent; safety office, .5 percent; inspector general, .5 percent. Not included were wind tunnel operations. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
A former NASA researcher and subcontractor at the Johnson Space Center, Jong-Hun Lee, was ordered deported as a suspected North Korean agent. The action followed a hearing at which he was not allowed to see all the evidence against him. (AP, Sep 24/94)
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
NASA announced the selection of Scientific Applications International Corporation, of San Diego, California, for a contract to provide occupational safety, industrial hygiene, and environmental services to support NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-jj)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
The joint Air Force-NASA space plane program, which involved NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, ended September 30. It was replaced by a program that focused on the plane's engine rather than the entire plane. Engineers at Langley had conducted space plane engine research for 35 years under the Hypersonic Systems Technology Program and were attempting to solve the most challenging problem: how to propel the space plane into space. Currently they were testing a scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet). In addition to Langley, engineers were working on the space plane at NASA centers in Ohio, California, and Mississippi, and at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. (Daily Press, Nov 6/94)
A ceremony held at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility marked its return to its former status as an independent NASA center. For 13 years it was administered by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, and designated a facility. Kenneth J. Szalai, formerly deputy director of Ames Research Center for Dryden, was named Dryden director. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 1/94)
Mars Pathfinder, the first of NASA's Discovery missions, was beginning construction in preparation for launch in two years' time. Anthony J. Spear, project manager for the Mars Pathfinder project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said fabrication of the cruise portion's structure had begun; final assembly of the spacecraft was to begin in June 1995. Testing of various kinds would follow with the spacecraft being shipped to Cape Canaveral for launch by early September 1996. The primary goal was an engineering demonstration of a low-cost Martian landing system. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA announced that it had assumed the satellite-development contract for Landsat 7 from the Department of Defense. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was to manage the contract with Martin Marietta Astro Space, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Landsat 7 was to provide essential land remote-sensing data critical to understanding environmental change. (NASA Release 94-78)
Diane Farrar of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, stated that NASA, the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, and the National Science Foundation were conducting an eight-month airborne study of the Antarctic ozone hole and its possible effects. The study, which was to use high-altitude ER-2 NASA aircraft, was to be based in Hawaii and New Zealand. This was the first NASA-sponsored airborne study of the southern polar region since the 1987 campaign that confirmed chlorofluorocarbons were the primary cause of ozone destruction. (UP, Mar 16/94)
The publication of Moon Shot by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton was set for release one month before the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 lunar landing. The book gives a history of space flight and includes many little-known anecdotes. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
An article discussed finding other planetary systems as an inspiring new challenge for astronomy and pointed out NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's proposal that NASA's core mission might be the search for a habitable planet. Mention was made of Proxima Centauri, the nearest neighbor of a bigger, hotter, brighter star: the sun, which made it an easy star around which to look for planets. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope was used to study Proxima Centauri and recently the Hubble discovered discs in the Orion nebula, which might produce planetary systems. Although the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) was eliminated by Congress, SETI continued with private money and became Project Phoenix, scheduled to be connected with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia in early 1995 and to listen for faint radio signals from hundreds of stars. (Economist, Jul 16/94)
NASA officials said that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had not been home to any secret radiation tests on humans, and no workers were unknowingly exposed to any harmful materials. "We do not do anything like that here," KSC spokeswoman Lisa Malone said. Life science research underway at the space center mostly involves growing plants and food in an environmentally controlled chamber at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station as well as some muscle fatigue research in long-term bedrest studies to simulate weightlessness. The Johnson Space Center in Houston and the Ames Research Center near San Francisco are the facilities where most medical research on humans is conducted.
NASA announced a new Mars exploration program in fiscal year 1995 involving the development of a small Mars Surveyor orbiter. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, was to manage the program, which was designed to study the surface of Mars. (NASA Release 94-20)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin made a state-of-the-agency address to all staff members in which he stressed that NASA intended to become less costly and quicker during the next four years, ending with as many as 4,000 fewer workers. Kennedy Space Center Deputy Director Gene Thomas, who answered questions after the televised address, said it would be a year of "significant change." (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, refitted over a 19-month period at a cost of $96 million to enable it to dock with Mir, was expected to arrive at Kennedy Space Center from its overhaul at Rockwell Space Systems Division in Palmdale, California. The plan was for Atlantis to dock with Mir during a series of 10 shuttle flights between 1995 and 1997. Other modifications were designed to make Atlantis safer. Atlantis's return means limited space at Kennedy Space Center for processing the various Shuttles. (Fla Today, May 27/94; AP, May 29/94; W Post, May 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 1/94)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had discovered the best evidence yet of a black hole in the constellation Virgo. The proof consisted of a whirlpool of hot gas at the core of galaxy M87, which lies more than 52 million light-years from Earth. The stars in the whirlpool appeared to be streaming toward the galaxy's center and then into orbits bound to an apparent black hole hidden at M87's core. Data from the Hubble spectrometer, used to measure the velocity of stars orbiting within the nucleus of the M57 galaxy, also appeared to confirm the black hole. Sally Heap, a NASA astronomer, at a national meeting of the American Astronomical Society, commented on the Hubble findings in terms of her own research. (NASA Release 94-82; Fla Today, May 25/94; B Sun, May 26/94; USA Today, May 26/94; W Post, May 26/94; NY Times, May 26/94; W Times, May 26/94; Fla Today, May 26/94; WSJ, May 26/94; O Sen Star, May 26/94; AP, May 26/94; CSM, May 26/94; Oregonian, May 27/94; Fla Today, May 29/94; AP, May 30/94; H Chron, May 31/94; C Trib, May 31/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 2/94; Newsweek, Jun 6/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with the Boeing Company on the key elements of the prime contract for the International Space Station. The agreement dealt with the scope of work, program schedule, cost ceiling, and fee arrangements as well as establishing contractual terms for the contract to be signed before year's end. (NASA Release 94-144)
NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)
NASA announced the opening of a new, remote ground station in Tidbinbilla, Australia, called the Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO) Remote Terminal System. The station was to receive scientific data from the Compton GRO via a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite that was moved into position over the Indian Ocean. (NASA Release 94-42)
The Russian President made an edict in mid-November establishing the state's first experimental space center at Plesetsk. The edict divided the Plesetsk facility, with one part being retained by the strategic missile forces and the other transferred to Russia's military space forces without, however, increasing logistical support, staffing, or pay. In contrast to Baikonur, for which Russia annually paid Kazakhstan $116 million, the Plesetsk Space Center would give Russia its own launching site. From the Soviet era Plesetsk had nine launchpads and was the top secret site for launching more than half of all satellites. However, a critical state of electricity supply to industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast had occurred, resulting from the payments crisis, which threatened a cut-off of electricity to Plesetsk and to Severodvinsk, where atomic submarines were built. (Izvestiya, Nov 17/94)
NASA announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce, currently Deputy Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, as Chief Scientist at the Ohio Aerospace Institute, Cleveland, effective September 18. (NASA Release 94-130)
NASA announced that it would conduct a joint campaign with Brazilian space agencies to study the Earth's space environment over the magnetic equator from August 15 through October 20, 1994, as part of the International Equatorial Electrojet Year. During the campaign, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, was scheduled to launch 33 rockets from the Centro de Lancamento de Alcantara launch range in the northeastern state of Maranhao, Brazil. (NASA Release 94-126)
In a wide-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin reviewed his tenure to date and focused on prospects for civil space flight. Goldin proposed that while private industry would use the low orbiting costs offered by a new single-stage-to-orbit vehicle to profit from commercial space applications, governments would cooperate on building a space infrastructure to support robotic and human exploration. He believed that countries could cooperate in space infrastructure while maintaining competition in space ventures such as the development of a launch vehicle. (AvWk, Sep 5/94)
Space Shuttle Endeavour, which had been rescheduled to lift off on April 8, was launched April 9 because of bad weather. In its cargo bay was the Space Radar Laboratory, weighing 23,000 pounds and containing $366 million worth of imaging systems. The system was to bounce radar waves off Earth in three frequency bands to produce three-dimensional maps of ocean currents, river valleys, forests and farm lands, the geology of volcanoes, and features under desert sands. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the German and Italian space agencies developed the equipment. The radar developed a glitch after the first day, but ground control was able to repair it and the results were most successful. (NY Times, Apr 8/94; W Post, Apr 8/94; B Sun, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 8/94; USA Today, Apr 8/94; AP, Apr 8/94; UP, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 9/94; W Post, Apr 10/94; NY Times, Apr 10/94; B Sun, Apr 10/94; P Inq, Apr 10/94; UPI, Apr 10/94; Reuters, Apr 10/94; AP, Apr 11/94)
The Book Review section carried an extensive review of Eric J. Chaisson's The Hubble Wars: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope. Chaisson served as spokesman and director of educational programs for the Space Telescope Science Institute, a NASA-supported group of astronomers responsible for planning and directing the telescope's observational program. According to the author, the space telescope's progress toward scientific discovery was hampered by squabbling among NASA, the military intelligence community, industry, the press, and scientists. Some of the problems might have been avoided if the Hubble scientists had had access to the technical experience of the military intelligence community. (NY Times Book Review, May 29/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, were observing rare gamma ray flashes above thunderstorms at a rate six times that of previous observations. Steve Goodman of Marshall's Space Sciences Laboratory said the observations were being made by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment aboard NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which was recently modified by ground commands to be more sensitive to such events. NASA planned to bring together investigators from the fields of space and atmospheric physics to study the newly discovered events. (NASA Release 94-204; AP, Dec 7/94)
Ecologists Christopher Potter and Steven Klooster of NASA's Ames Research Center processed ten years of data to construct a map charting one month's exchange of the heat-trapping gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and the Earth's land plants and soils. This is a key process in determining the extent to which the release of this gas through burning fossil fuels and land-use changes might cause global climate warming, and this is the first time satellite data have been combined with computer simulation of soil processes. A 1990 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave estimates in billions of tons of carbon per year to try to answer the question of where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton University geochemist Jorge L. Sarmiento hypothesized a terrestrial sink, while Harvard University geochemist Steven Wofsy agreed with Potter that simulation also needed detailed studies of plant-soil processes. (CSM, Jan 19/94)
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)
NASA announced the award of a contract to the Boeing Company, Commercial Airplane Group, Renton, Washington, for engineering design and trade studies in support of the National Wind Tunnel Complex (NWTC). The NWTC was a joint effort between government and industry to construct state-of-the-art transonic and low-speed wind tunnels to meet the turn-of-the-century needs of the aerospace industry. The Wind Tunnel Program Office at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, was to manage the contract. (NASA Release C94-u)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, awarded the Computer Sciences Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, an eight-year contract to provide Program Information Systems Mission Services (PrISMS). (NASA Release C94-l; W Post, May 4/94)
NASA announced that 166 small, high technology firms located in 31 states had been selected for Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Funding for Phase II contracts could be up to $600,000 for a two-year performance period. (NASA Release 94-192)
