Arianespace, the commercial arm of the European Space Agency, suffered a major setback in its bid to maintain control of the satellite-launching market in the face of competition from U.S. companies. Only seconds after the launch of Ariane 5, a huge rocket intended to launch satellites, Arianespace had to blow up the rocket when it veered severely off course. Arianespace had spent 10 years and more than US$7 billion to develop the 674-foot (205-meter), 821-ton (750,000- kilogram or 750-tonne) vehicle. Also lost in the explosion were satellites valued at more than US$500 million. Arianespace had projected a launch reliability of 98.5 percent for the rocket, considering failure so unlikely that the company had guaranteed a free launch to customers if the launch failed. A spokesperson for Arianespace acknowledged the disappointment of the failed test, but promised that the company would continue as the world’s leader in launching satellites. Aerospace industry analysts predicted that U.S. companies such as Lockheed Martin would likely gain an increased foothold in the market because of the European company’s misfortune.(Kathleen Day, “Losing a Rocket and a Satellite Edge?” Washington Post, 5 June 1996; Craig Whitney, “Costly Failure: Space Launch Is Aborted,” New York Times, 5 June 1996.)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
Lockheed Martin announced its intention to cut 200 jobs at its facility for the production of external fuel tanks for NASA’s Space Shuttle. NASA’s budget reductions had caused the layoffs, according to Lockheed. Lockheed Martin’s facility in New Orleans employed more than 2,500 workers in 1996.
NASA formed an independent panel to review the failure of the tethered satellite experiment and the loss of the satellite. NASA selected Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of Dryden Flight Research Center, to chair the panel. The formation of such an investigative body in the wake of a costly loss conformed to standard practice under NASA’s Space Flight Operations Contingency Plan. In a NASA press release announcing the panel’s formation, Szalai stated, “given the public investment in the tethered satellite, it is important that we find out what went wrong.”(NASA, “NASA To Form Independent Review Panel,” news release 96-39, 26 February 1996.)
At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the station’s air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISS’s air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, “Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test,” news release, 10 May 1996.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeremiah F. Creedon as Director of LARC. Creedon succeeded Paul F. Holloway, who had served for 36 years at LARC. With this appointment, Creedon moved up from his position as LARC’s Director of the Airframe Systems Program Office to return to the research center where he had begun his engineering career 33 years earlier. During his career at NASA, Creedon had received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Executive in the Senior Executive Service, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive in Senior Executive Service.(NASA, “Dr. Jeremiah Creedon Named Director, Langley Research Center,” news release 96-152, 31 July 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft completed a flyby of Jupiter’s largest moon, Ganymede, passing only 519 miles (835 kilometers) above the moon’s surface. NASA had equipped Galileo with 10 scientific instruments to gather data from the expedition. The instruments began making measurements on 23 June, as the probe approached Ganymede. Images revealed an icy surface, with bright, clean ice covering part of the moon and darker, dirty ice covering the rest. This was the first data gathered during a collection mission planned for 1996 and 1997, in which Galileo would pass Ganymede before completing 11 orbits of Jupiter and surveying the planet’s other moons. NASA monitored Galileo’s progress through its Deep Space Network, using control stations in California, Spain, and Australia. Scientists and engineers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had built the Galileo spacecraft.(NASA, “Galileo Readies for Close Flyby of Jupiter’s Biggest Moon,” news release 96-122, June 1996.)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) scientists began the most comprehensive testing to date on how plants produce food and oxygen in space. The experiment, part of NASA’s development of a Controlled Ecological Life Support System, called for the analysis of 128 potato plants and 6,500 wheat seeds. NASA scientists planned for the study to last from one to three years. NASA agricultural engineer John Sager, praising NASA’s earlier success in producing crop species for space, explained the experiment’s significance: “If we plan to live in space . . . we must determine if this system will be as successful over longer periods of time.” Scientists were using KSC’s Biomass Production Chamber to test the crops in a space-like environment. NASA had begun in 1987 to test strains of crops and plants for their ability to produce oxygen and food in space.(NASA, “NASA Begins Study on Reliability of Space Life Support System,” news release 96-120, 12 June 1996. 86 Rowan Scarborough, “Engen To Head Air and Space,” Washington Times, 13 June 1996.)
Columbia astronauts set a series of small fires inside the Shuttle to help NASA scientists improve their design of smoke detectors and fire extinguishers for use in a weightless environment. The fires spread quickly within the enclosed vehicle. Astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman marveled at the behavior of the flames, which was completely different in a weightless environment from that typically observed on Earth. The fires scattered quickly and burned much more intensely than on Earth. NASA had never before tested the fire-detection equipment in a space environment. The fire equipment worked properly, and the crew put out all fires without incident.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Set Fires To Check Safety Equipment,” 3 March 1996.)
Former U.S. Representative Norman Y. Mineta received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal, the highest civilian honor awarded by NASA. Mineta had served 21 years in the U.S. Congress, representing California’s Silicon Valley in the House of Representatives. As chairperson of the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation, he had played a vital role in bolstering the nation’s transportation infrastructure and fostering technological research. Mineta remarked that serving over the long term as the senior member of the House Committee on Science and Technology had given him the opportunity to see firsthand NASA’s significant achievements. When he accepted the award at a private ceremony, Mineta said, “I’m deeply honored to be recognized by NASA for any contributions I made furthering the mission of our nation’s space operations.”
NASA spacecraft managers reported the failure of two scientific satellites. NASA had designed the Scientific Applications Satellite-B (SAC-B), launched three days earlier from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility, to survey solar flares and gamma-ray bursts. The project was a cooperative effort between NASA and Argentina. NASA scientists had intended the second satellite, HETE (High Energy Transient Experiment), to remain dormant until it detected sunlight, at which time it would deploy, transmitting signals. Scientists doubted this would ever occur, because the satellite had fallen into a tumbling pattern. Officials hypothesized that the satellites had not deployed properly and, therefore, had orbited uselessly, lacking electrical power. NASA valued both satellites at more than US$20 million. The launch failure was the third miscue in two years for the Pegasus rocket program. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, developed and ran the program.(John Mintz, “Orbital Sciences Fails in Another Launch,” Washington Post, 5 November 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Reports Failure of Scientific Satellites,” 7 November 1996; NASA, “SAC-B/HETE Spacecraft No Longer Operational,” news release 96-231, 7 November 1996.)
NASA completed the first step in its transition to using a single contractor to conduct all Shuttle operations, signing two novation agreements with the newly formed United Space Alliance (USA). NASA had announced in 1995 that it would consolidate its Shuttle operations under a single contract with USA, on a noncompetitive basis. When Rockwell International Corporation and Lockheed Martin Corporation developed USA as a joint venture, the two companies already held nearly 70 percent of the dollar value of all Shuttle-related contracts. NASA officials expected that the move to a single contract would reduce costs by eliminating duplicative work and streamlining management.(NASA, “Shuttle Contracts Take First Step Toward Consolidation,” news release 96-73, 12 April 1996.)
A team of astronomers announced at the American Astronomical Society convention that they had discovered ordinary vinegar in a stellar cloud 25,000 light-years away from Earth. The presence of an organic molecule, which may have played a role in the formation of life, excited scientists. “Acetic acid could have been one of the first steps toward the chemicals of life,” explained Lewis E. Snyder, a member of the research team that made the discovery. Scientists had discovered complex molecules in space before, but formic acid, discovered in 1975, was the only other basic molecule detected before the discovery of the vinegar.(John Noble Wilford, “Whiff of Organic Stuff Found Between Stars,” New York Times, 11 June 1996; Associated Press, “Vinegar Found in Far Away Space,” 11 June 1996.)
NASA reported that a team of scientists from Johnson Space Center and Stanford University had found evidence that “strongly suggested” that primitive life existed on the planet Mars. During a two-year study, the researchers discovered what they believed to be organic molecules of Martian origin on a potato-sized meteorite, which members of the National Science Foundation’s Antarctica Meteorite Program had found in 1984. Scientists estimated that the meteorite was about 4.5 billion years old. According to the team’s report, published in Science magazine, the remnants on the meteorite shared several mineral characteristics indicating biological activity, possibly even containing microscopic fossils of primitive, bacteria-like organisms. The minute scale of the evidence required the careful research of the team of specialists in the fields of microbiology, mineralogy, and chemistry. The largest of the possible fossils measured about 1/100th the diameter of a human hair. Only with recently developed technological instruments, including a dual-laser mass spectrometer, were the scientists able to make any substantial observations.112 The announcement generated immediate excitement in the scientific community and in the mass media, although some scientists responded with a multitude of critical questions. The researchers carefully qualified their report, stating, “It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let alone on Mars.”113 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make samples of the meteorite available to scientists throughout the world, to encourage a full scientific investigation.(McKay et al., “Search for Past Life on Mars,” 924–930; NASA, “Meteorite Yields Evidence”; Sawyer, “NASA Releases Images.”)
Astronomers at California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of what they believed to be the most distant galaxy ever glimpsed from the Earth. The team of scientists, including Thomas A. Barlow, Limin Liu, Wallace L. W. Sargent, and Donna S. Womble, had stumbled across the unnamed galaxy while studying a quasar silhouetted by the galaxy’s light. The team used the W. M. Keck Observatory atop the Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii. In comparison to other documented galaxies, their find was a relatively young galaxy⎯probably formed less than 1 billion years after the Big Bang. The galaxy resides near the constellation Virgo. Ironically, since the galaxy lies 14 billion light-years away from Earth, the scientists had no way of knowing whether their discovery still actually existed. The scientists hoped that their discovery would offer new understanding of the period when stars began to congregate into galaxies.(California Institute of Technology, “Astronomers Discover the Most Distant Galaxy,” news release, 31 January 1996; Reuters, “Scientists Discover Farthest Galaxy Yet,” 1 February 1996; John Noble Wilford, “New Galaxy May Shed Light on Universe,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin’s efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldin’s mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, “NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston,” 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin’s Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft discovered a giant iron core taking up half of the diameter of Jupiter’s moon Io, as well as a large hole in Jupiter’s magnetic field. Galileo Project Scientist Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) identified Io as the most “geographically active body in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Galileo scientists also measured the intense heat Jupiter generates, noting that the planet has a massive gravity field. Galileo managed to come within 559 miles (900 kilometers) of Jupiter during its 1995 flyby, allowing scientists to locate the iron core and the hole in the magnetic field. Although they were still grappling with the significance of the “completely unexpected finds,” scientists reported their early analysis of the data in Science magazine.(J. D. Anderson, W. L. Sjogren, and G. Schubert, “Galileo Gravity Results and the Internal Structure of Lo,” Science 272, no. 5262 (3 May 1996): 709−712; NASA, “Galileo Finds Giant Iron Core in Jupiter’s Moon Io,” news release 96-89, 3 May 1996.)
The Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation announced that McDonnell Douglas would merge with Boeing in a stock-for-stock transaction. The merger, the biggest in aerospace history, positioned Boeing to compete with Europe’s Airbus Industrie for nearly all commercial airline contracts. The merger also strengthened Boeing’s position as one of the most influential companies, both domestically and internationally, in the United States. The US$13.3 billion deal would place under a single umbrella nearly 200,000 employees, producing annual revenues in excess of US$48 billion. The Boeing Company also emerged from the deal with improved chances of winning major military contracts, whereas, previously, the company had few ventures involving the military aerospace industry. However, McDonnell Douglas had been the main supplier to the military of F/A-18 and F-15 Eagle-model fighter jets to the military. Thus, the merger brought together leaders in the commercial and military sectors of the aerospace industry, creating what one industry analyst called an “800-pound gorilla.” McDonnell Douglas stock rose 20 percent on the first day of trading following the announcement.(The Boeing Company, “McDonnell Douglas To Merge with Boeing, Combination To Be the World’s Largest Aerospace Company,” news release, 15 December 1996; Peter Kaplan, “Mission Inevitable,” Washington Times, 17 December 1996; David E. Sanger, “A Giant in Jets and Foreign Policy,” New York Times, 17 December 1996.)
Reuters News Service published an internal NASA memorandum written by an independent safety commission, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, cautioning NASA against cutting the budget for the Shuttle program too quickly. According to the panel’s analysis, NASA’s attempts to reduce costs by conducting fewer Shuttle safety inspections and by transferring responsibility for day-to-day operations of the Shuttle program to United Space Alliance had demoralized NASA’s workforce at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The memo made clear the opinion of the safety inspectors: “Overall, it was the clear consensus of the team that a cooling off period is absolutely necessary if KSC operations are to continue safely . . . without this hiatus the safety risk is likely unacceptable.”(Reuters, “Warning Light for NASA’s Shuttle Program—Memo,” 4 July 1996.)
NASA’s analysts at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), who had investigated the causes of the Challenger explosion, joined the probe into the crash of TWA flight 800, which exploded near Long Island, New York, on 17 July 1996. NASA offered the services of its MSFC investigative team to analyze why the center fuel tank of the Boeing 747 had exploded. Officials from the National Transportation Safety Board led the investigation, with support from a variety of other agencies, including NASA, the U.S. Navy, and the FBI.(Robert Davis, “Challenger Experts Aid in TWA Probe,” USA Today, 23 August 1996; Eric Malnic, “Experts at NASA Join Probe of TWA Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 23 August 1996.)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope identified 18 star clusters that they believed to be embryonic galaxies. According to the New York Times, because the clusters resided 11 billion light-years from Earth, essentially, the scientists had glimpsed back in time. The observations supported a theory that galaxies begin with stars grouping together. The astronomers from Arizona State University and the University of Alabama called the discovery “the first page in an otherwise blank book.”(Lee Bowman, “Possible View of Galaxies Being Born,” Washington Times, 5 September 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Looking Back 11 Billion Light-Years, a Glimpse at Galaxy Birth,” New York Times, 5 September 1996. 125 NASA, “Lopez-Alegria To Replace Lawrence as NASA Manager to Russia,” news release 96-182, 5 September 1996.)
In a study released in the journal Science, Charles P. Sonett detailed the results of his research measuring changes in the motion of Earth. Sonett reported that tidal forces from the gravitational force of the Moon had caused the Earth’s rotation to slow gradually over a period of millions of years. About 900 million years ago, according to Sonett, the length of the Earth’s day was only about 18 hours. The gravitational pull of the Moon, Sonett explained, “acts like a brake on the Earth.”(C. P. Sonett et al., “Late Proterozoic and Paleozoic Tides, Retreat of the Moon, and Rotation of the Earth,” Science 273, no. 5271 (5 July 1996): 100−104; Associated Press, “Astrodynamics: A Brake on the Earth’s Spin,” 8 July 1996.)
NASA returned the record-setting, solar-powered, research aircraft Pathfinder to flight-testing at Dryden Flight Research Center. Pathfinder had set an altitude record of more than 50,000 feet (15,000 meters) during a flight on 11 September 1995. Wear and tear during previous operations, as well as a ground accident inside a hangar, had damaged the craft. NASA had hired AeroVironment to repair the remotely piloted plane. AeroVironment made several improvements and rebuilt the damaged portions of the aircraft. The company installed stronger rib structure and higher-efficiency solar cells. NASA had adopted Pathfinder in the 1980s after the aircraft’s release from a classified military program.(NASA, “Solar-Powered Pathfinder Returns to Skies,” news release, 25 November 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers’ funds on NASA’s research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies “are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy.” The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, “NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame,” news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking upon Mission STS-78. The Shuttle carried U.S. astronauts Terrence T. Henricks, Kevin R. Kregel, Richard M. Linnehan, Susan J. Helms, and Charles E. Brady Jr.; French astronaut Jean-Jacques Favier; and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thrisk. NASA planned to use an orbiting research laboratory to conduct a variety of experiments during the mission. In addition to its human cargo, the Shuttle transported the payload for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences, used to conduct research on musculoskeletal physiology and on the responses of living organisms to a low- gravity environment.(NASA, “Life and Microgravity Science Research Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-78,” news release 96-116, June 1996; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 103.)
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission,” 10 March 1996.)
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houston’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) identified what they believed to be the most distant objects observed to date. Researchers based at State University of New York at Stony Brook found several dozen galaxies so far away that they might have existed when the universe was less than 5 percent of its present age. The team of astronomers made its calculations on the distances of the galaxies from the Earth by relying on the relationship between speed and distance in the expanding universe. According to the scientific understanding of the speed-distance relationship, “the expansion of the universe causes the light from distant galaxies to be ‘redshifted’,” meaning that, because of the expansion of space, light leaving a distant galaxy as blue arrives at the HST as red light. The redshifting phenomenon allows researchers to tentatively measure the distance the light has traveled. Noting that other factors, such as dust, also might make a galaxy’s light red, Mark E. Dickinson of the Space Telescope Science Institute categorized the study as “enticing,” but also clarified, “it’s not a proof.”(Associated Press, “Hubble Scope Peers into Universe’s Past with Aid of Starlight,” 27 June 1996; NASA, “Findings from Hubble Deep Field Home in on Distant Galaxies,” news release 96-123, 26 June 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
G. Porter Bridwell retired after nearly 40 years of service at MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Bridwell had served as Director of MSFC from 1994 until his retirement. He left the Center with an annual operating budget of US$2.5 billion and more than 3,000 employees. Bridwell had spent most of his career at MSFC, serving briefly as Acting Director of Stennis Space Center in 1987, and at NASA Headquarters from 1993 to 1994. Bridwell had also been a member of the space station redesign team. During his tenure, Bridwell had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, the Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Exceptional Achievement Medal, attaining the rank of Meritorious Executive.3 NASA announced that J. Wayne Littles would take over as the new Director of MSFC.(NASA, “Littles Named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 96-3, 16 January 1996. 1)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planet’s surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, “U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars,” New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
With funding from NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, researchers at Utah State University successfully developed a strain of wheat suitable for growth in space. The space wheat, called USU-Apogee, produced a yield equivalent to 600 bushels of grain per acre (21,000 liters of grain per 4,100 square meters), a rate three times more than the rate achieved in previous experiments. Researchers had worked for more than a decade developing the wheat. During the tests, USU- Apogee had thrived under the difficult conditions of artificial sunlight and high levels of carbon dioxide. In conditions approximating the environment in space, the wheat grew on short stalks, produced an unusually large number of seeds, and maintained green leaf tips (reflecting proper calcium levels). Scientists hoped that astronauts would be able to grow the wheat in the future International Space Station, as a more economical means of providing food for long-term space residents than frequent Shuttle supply missions.(NASA, “Utah State University Develops Space Crop,” news release 96-75, 15 April 1996.)
NASA and Orbital Sciences Corporation signed a contract, which was not a cooperative agreement, whereby Orbital Sciences would build a new X-34 reusable launch vehicle, smaller than that originally planned. NASA had first made public the original X-34 program in 1994. NASA had intended the program, also known as the Reusable Small Booster Program, to stimulate the development of a reusable commercial launch vehicle to place smaller payloads in low orbit. In addition, NASA planned for the X-34 program to demonstrate that an industry-led partnership between NASA and the aerospace industry could accomplish this objective within 30 to 36 months and within a fixed government budget. On 12 January 1995, NASA released a final cooperative agreement notice for the X-34 program, and in March 1995, NASA selected Orbital Sciences Corporation as its industry partner. Over the next eight months, as design of the X-34 progressed, problems arose over the selection of an appropriate rocket engine, resulting in NASA’s temporarily shutting down the program on 2 November 1995. In January 1996, Orbital Sciences Corporation suggested that NASA explore the potential of a smaller vehicle. Orbital Sciences then issued stop-work orders to all its X-34 subcontractors, effectively ending the program. Because NASA wanted to use remaining federal dollars to develop a smaller vehicle, capable of demonstrating various reusable launch technologies, it rebid the contract in March 1996. On 10 June 1996, NASA selected Orbital Sciences to build the new X-34.(NASA History Division, “X-33 History Project, Fact Sheet #7: The Policy Origins of the X-33, Part VII: The X- 34,” March 25, 2000, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/pao/History/x-33/facts_7.htm.)
NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tank’s strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASA’s External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, “Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests,” news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, “First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite,” news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
More than 200 experts met in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to plan the design and implementation of a new fleet of radar satellites. The group emphasized the recent geological discoveries made with data from radar satellites, especially from those satellites tracking the movements and shifts in Earth’s plates that have been impossible to track until recently. The U.S. Geological Survey and NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory sponsored the event. Geophysicist Howard A. Zebker described the satellites as a “great leap forward. It’s like suddenly having [x]-rays to see inside a body.”(William J. Broad, “Satellite Radar Unveils Subtle, Slow Wrinkling of the Planet’s Surface,” New York Times, 3 September 1996.)
NASA released Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images revealing much of the surface of Pluto for the first time. The Pluto imaging team declared the quality of the pictures better than they had expected. “Hubble has brought Pluto from a fuzzy, distant dot of light, to a world which we can begin to map, and watch for surface changes,” remarked Marc W. Buie, a member of the team. The HST took snapshots of nearly the entire surface of the planet during 6.4 days of its rotation. The pictures showed Pluto’s complexity, revealing nearly a dozen distinct provinces, and confirming the existence of a polar ice cap, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to verify. NASA officials were optimistic that the images would pave the way for a proposed Pluto flyby mission in the coming years. Pluto remained the only planet not yet visited by a spacecraft.(NASA, “Hubble Reveals Surface of Pluto for First Time,” news release 96-43, 7 March 1996.)
NASA announced the completion, on time and on budget, of the first major component of the ISS. Russia’s Khrunichev Industries and the Boeing Company had combined efforts to construct Functional Cargo Block (known by its Russian abbreviation FGB), a 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18-tonne) pressurized module. Members of the international space team planned to launch the spacecraft from Russia in November 1997. FGB formed the initial building block of the ISS, featuring computer equipment, thermal controls, fire detection tools, and navigational apparatus. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center and Boeing Defense and Space Group received US$190 million for developing and building the craft. According to the plan, the ISS team would add many other components to FGB.(NASA, “Station’s First Module Assembled; Ready for Testing,” news release 96-253, 9 December 1996.)
NASA announced the recipients of the 1996 Software of the Year Award, honoring those individuals who had created software enhancing NASA’s mission and the U.S. aerospace industry. Linked Windows Interactive Data System, developed by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Tetrahedral Unstructured Software System, developed by LARC, won the 1996 awards. The former system allowed scientists to examine geophysical and climatological data gathered from satellites, and the latter aided researchers in studying problems with “spacecraft, rotorcraft, automotive, turbomachinery, and medical analysis and design.”(NASA, “NASA Announces 1996 Software of the Year Award Recipients,” news release, 9 July 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavour’s launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavour’s flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay,” Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, “Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs,” 16 January 1996.)
In Marshall Space Flight Center’s (MSFC’s) underwater weightless simulator, NASA began testing a remotely controlled robot created by a team of researchers from the University of Maryland. Team leaders nicknamed the robot Ranger, predicting that it would one day assist astronauts aboard the Shuttle or the ISS. Project Manager Joseph Parrish pointed out that astronauts often use valuable spacewalk time completing mundane tasks, such as collecting tools, establishing footholds, and cleaning up. Scientists hoped Ranger could perform such tasks under the command of an operator located in space or even that of an operator at NASA’s command center. The 8-foot-long (2.4-meter-long), 1,700-pound (770-kilogram) robot used gas thrusters, robotic arms, lights, and cameras. The academic project filled a void in experimental robot design, a program affected by NASA’s budget cuts. Allowing university researchers and professors to design and test the robot cost NASA about US$8 million, far less than NASA would pay for similar projects contracted through an aerospace firm. During the tests, the University of Maryland’s team operated Ranger remotely from its campus hundreds of miles away from MSFC’s facility in Huntsville, Alabama.(Martin Burkey, “Ranger Gets a Workout,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 September 1996.)
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Graham’s design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes,” news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
An international team of researchers announced that, while tracking Comet Hyakutake in March 1996, they had discovered x-rays emitting from the comet. German scientists working at Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had collaborated on the project with NASA scientists based at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Konrad Dennryl, who had directed the use of Germany’s ROSAT (Röntgensatellit) for the project, called the discovery of the x-rays “a thrilling moment.” The comet emitted far stronger radiation signals than the scientists had expected, about 100 times brighter than anticipated. The scientists could not explain why the comet gave off such intense x-rays, but offered two preliminary hypotheses: 1) the gaseous molecules surrounding the comet absorbed x-rays from the Sun before reemitting the same x-rays; or 2) violent collisions between the comet material and the supersonic wind and particles from the Sun produced the extraordinarily strong x-rays. The scientists vowed to ascertain conclusively why the comet x-rays behaved as they did.(NASA, “First X-rays from a Comet Discovered,” new release 96-66, 4 April 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Scientists Seek Explanation for X-rays Seen from Comet,” New York Times, 5 April 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour made a smooth sunrise landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bringing to its close a fruitful 10-day research mission. The Shuttle crew celebrated their record achievement of 21 hours flying in close proximity to the satellites they had released. NASA planned to move Endeavour to Palmdale, California, for refurbishing.(Stefanie Asin, “Welcome Back, Endeavour, Shuttle Lands at Kennedy Space Center After 10-Day Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 30 May 1996.)
At the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Adriana C. Ocampo, a geologist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, announced the discovery of a chain of impact craters in Chad. According to a team of scientists, the presence of the craters suggested that a sizable comet or asteroid might have struck ancient Earth. Scientists discovered the craters using the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C), which flew on Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994. The impact craters were only the second chain of large craters ever discovered on Earth and the first impact craters found using the SIR-C technology. Ocampo warned that scientists still needed to excavate the ground extensively before they could be sure that the craters were indeed impact structures.(NASA, “Chain of Impact Craters Suggested by Spaceborne Radar Images,” news release 96-55, 20 March 1996. 46 NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-76—Press Kit,” news release 96-46, March 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Takes Off for Russian Mir Linkup,” Washington Post, March 23, 1996.)
A NASA research team published in the Journal of Geophysical Research its findings on urban- like pollution over the tropical South Atlantic Ocean. The team used data gathered from an experiment called the Transport and Chemistry near the Equator of the Atlantic (TRACE-A), conducted with the Brazilian Space Agency and scientists from South Africa. The scientists suspected that the high concentrations of ozone, like those found in densely populated urban areas, resulted from seasonal burnings in South America and Africa. According to the NASA researchers, the presence of pollution over the tropical ocean confirmed that humans had extended their negative impact on “traditionally pristine air” far beyond reaches directly above land. According to one researcher, the results of TRACE-A greatly improved the scientific community’s understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of the Southern Hemisphere.(NASA, “NASA Team Finds Urban-Like Pollution in Tropical South Atlantic,” news release 96-220, 30 October 1996.)
For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.
Shuttle Columbia landed at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Forced to remain in space an additional day because of bad weather, Columbia and its crew had set an endurance record of nearly 18 days in space, only one day short of the previous record of 17 days. Heavy fog in Florida was the cause of the landing delay.(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Sets a Record for a Mission,” 7 December 1996.)
NASA researchers at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) completed the testing of the F- 16XL at Edwards Air Force Base. The tests had taken more than one year to complete. Scientists were studying how the modified F-16 flew with US$14 million laminar-flow gloves on its wings. The data they collected demonstrated that the glove had reduced the turbulent layer of air that passes over an airplane’s wing during flight. Project Manager Carol A. Reukauf called the tests successful. NASA hoped the results would provide manufacturers with a new technology that would improve aeronautical design, decreasing air drag on airplanes and, consequently, reducing the fuel required to fly.(Jay Levine, “Laminar Flow Tests Successful,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 10 October 1996. 143 NASA, “The X-Planes: 50 Years of High Desert ‘Right Stuff’,” news release 96-204, 10 October 1996. 144 Reuters, “Russia Postpones Mir Supply Rocket Mission,” 16 October 1996.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
NASA released its blueprint for the future, the “NASA Strategic Plan 1996.” The plan laid out NASA’s vision for the United States’ space exploration; noted its history; and discussed possible changes in strategy, committing NASA to a threefold mission: scientific research, space exploration, and development and transfer of technology. Furthermore, the plan outlined NASA’s quest to address science’s fundamental questions, such as, how did the universe, galaxies, stars, and planets form and evolve? and, does life in any form, however simple or complex, carbon-based or other, exist elsewhere than on planet Earth? NASA intended the document as the starting point for future decisions regarding the allocation of its resources.(NASA, “NASA Strategic Plan 1998,” NASA policy directive (NPD)-1000.1, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/nsp/ NSPTOC.html (accessed 5 February 2008); NASA, “NASA Releases Strategy for the Future,” news release, 14 March 1996.)
The experimental DC-XA flight vehicle completed a successful test flight, flying nearly 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the desert of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico and landing safely. NASA researchers and administrators hoped that the rocket would one day replace the Space Shuttle as the primary means of space exploration. The reusable, unpiloted rocket, taking off and landing from a vertical position, would cut significantly the costs of delivering payloads into orbit. NASA announced that the vehicle had been renamed Clipper Graham, in honor of Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham. Graham, who died on 31 December 1995, had served as an advisor to President Ronald Reagan and had been an early proponent for the development of reusable rockets. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed optimism that NASA would be able to replace the Shuttle with the DC-XA flight vehicle: “We are going to fly the [S]huttle safely until we can replace it. But, by God, we are going to replace the [S]huttle.”(NASA, “Revolutionary New Launch Vehicle Renamed for Space Pioneer,” news release 96-114, 7 June 1996; Associated Press, “Reusable Rocket Ends Flight,” 7 June 1996.)
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) at Edwards Air Force Base in California commemorated its 50th anniversary with a celebration called Discovery Through Flight Research. The Center got its start when five aeronautical engineers from Langley Research Center arrived to explore flight beyond the speed of sound, in preparation for the X-1 tests, featuring pilot Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager at the controls. Researchers at DFRC contributed to a wide variety of aeronautical achievements, including breaking the sound barrier and helping launch the Space Shuttle program. At the age of 50, DFRC employed 900 government and civilian contractor employees.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Marks Half-Century of Achievements,” 25 September 1996. 136 Associated Press, “Ancient Spacecraft,” 1 October 1996.)
NASA released images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, revealing a dust storm on Mars nearly the size of the state of Texas. The storm appeared in the pictures of the planet as a 600- mile-long (965-kilometer-long), salmon-colored patch. Scientists believed this was the first time that one of the huge storms had neared the planet’s northern polar ice cap.(Reuters, “Hubble Shows Texas-Size Dust Storm on Mars,” 4 November 1996.)
Joseph B. Gurman of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHO’s scientists were excited and surprised to find that “movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun.” The scientists observed that the Sun’s plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, “Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found,” news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, “Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal,” 2 May 1996.)
Henry McDonald became Director of Ames Research Center (ARC) in Mountain View, California. NASA had selected McDonald for the position in January 1996 after the selection of former Director Ken K. Munechika as NASA’s first Director of Moffett Federal Airfield. A former professor of mechanical engineering at Pennsylvania State University, McDonald brought to NASA both industrial and academic experience.(NASA, “McDonald Named Director of Ames Research Center,” news release 96-8, 19 January 1996. 37 Associated Press, “Campus Takes Control of Shuttle Experiment,” 5 March 1996.)
bombers marked the end of an era in the aerospace industry. The Wall Street Journal estimated that Boeing’s share of aerospace and defense revenues would increase to US$8−9 billion annually.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Acquire Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Units,” news release, 1 August 1996; NASA, “NASA Comment on Boeing Corporation Acquisition of Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Businesses,” news release N96-51, 1 August 1996; Associated Press, “Boeing To Buy Rockwell International’s Aerospace Holdings,” 1 August 1996; James F. Peltz, “Rockwell To Sell Space and Defense Divisions to Boeing,” Los Angeles Times, 2 August 1996; Jeff Cole and Steven Lipin, “Boeing Deal Will Strengthen Company,” Wall Street Journal, 2 August 1996.)
NASA released time-lapse photographs taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), making the images immediately available on the Internet. Based on these images, lauded as the deepest images of the universe ever taken, scientists raised their estimate of the number of galaxies in the universe from 10 to 50 billion; “Suddenly, Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” the New York Times reported. Using a narrow “keyhole” view and focusing the HST on a portion of the sky only the width of a dime, telescope operators probed deep into the universe. The images revealed the process of a star’s death, as well as new information about how galaxies evolve. HST astronomer Howard E. Bond estimated that the Sun would die out in about 5 billion years.(John Noble Wilford, “Suddenly Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” New York Times, 16 January 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Takes Portrait of Universe,” Washington Post, 16 January 1996; NASA, “New Hubble Images Available,” news release N96-2, 17 January 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. “We’re looking to spark a constructive competition,” Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the “X Prize” on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
At a conference of the American Astronomical Society in San Antonio, Texas, a team of U.S. astronomers announced the discovery of two new stars with the characteristics to sustain life within their solar systems. The astronomers identified the bodies, both visible to the naked eye, as star 70 Virginis in the constellation Virgo and a star orbiting 47 Ursae Majoris in the Big Dipper. Geoffrey Marcy and Paul Butler, researchers affiliated with the University of California at Berkeley and San Francisco State University, spent nine years monitoring 120 Sun-like stars in order to discover the two stars.
George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbey’s distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, “George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management.” Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbey’s superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, “Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center,” news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
Continuing its efforts to cut costs by using private contractors, NASA awarded McDonnell Douglas Aerospace a US$500 million, eight-year contract to provide “fixed-price medium-light (Med-Lite) class expendable launch vehicle services.”31 NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program, and the Orbital Sciences Corporation served as the major subcontractor. At the time of the agreement, NASA had planned three Med-Lite missions launching from both the East Coast and the West Coast.
NASA and the scientific community celebrated the 15th anniversary of the Space Shuttle program. NASA had adopted the Shuttle as a means of controlling the costs of exploring space. However, NASA conceded that, since its deployment, the Shuttle had flown only nine times per year, compared with the 24 to 60 Shuttle flights per year anticipated. Furthermore, the cost of flying the Shuttle had reached almost US$500,000 more per mission than expected. During its first 15 years, the Shuttles had flown 76 missions, including 51 following the Challenger accident. The Shuttles had transported 545 tons (490,000 kilograms or 490 tonnes) of payloads to space, bringing back to Earth 18.5 tons (17,000 kilograms or 17 tonnes) of payloads. During the same period, 440 astronauts from 12 countries flew aboard the Shuttles. NASA experts predicted that the Shuttle would remain the primary vehicle of space exploration well into the 21st century.(Martin Burkey, “A Lean, Mean Teen: Shuttle Turns 15,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 April 1996; Seth Borenstein, “Costly History Dogs Shuttle on Anniversary,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 12 April 1996.)
Preparing to take over the administration of the Shuttle program from NASA, the Rockwell- Lockheed Martin joint venture, United Space Alliance (USA), named James C. Adamson as its chief operating officer. Adamson came to USA from Lockheed Martin, where he had served since 1994 as a group vice president and general manager of Lockheed’s Engineering and Science Services. Adamson had served as an astronaut at NASA from 1984 to 1992, spending more than 334 hours in space as a part of Missions STS-28 and STS-43.
NASA announced the completion of a major benchmark in the development of its Advanced X- ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as engineers completed the delicate task of assembling the high-resolution, cylindrical mirrors needed for the facility’s telescope. Engineers aligned and cemented the mirrors into place at the facility in Rochester, New York. Unlike optical telescopes, the AXAF used a series of shallow mirrors shaped like cylindrical cones to produce its image. AXAF’s mirrors were the largest set of such mirrors ever constructed.(NASA, “Completion of Mirror Assembly Marks Milestone for NASA’s Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility,” news release 96-212, 18 October 1996.)
NASA introduced a new technology with the potential to make much smaller and more efficient electronic devices: the Thin-Layer Composite-Unimorph Piezoelectric Driver and Sensor (THUNDER). Researchers at Langley Research Center (LARC) recognized the potential of piezoelectric material, because of its well-known capability to generate movement when subjected to an electric current. NASA hoped that the THUNDER technology would improve devices in “electronics, optics, jitter (irregular motion) suppression, noise cancellation, pumps, valves and a variety of other fields.” LARC’s interdisciplinary team had improved upon already available commercial-grade piezoelectric material, producing a more durable, cheaper, and more effective product. R&D Magazine announced that it would honor THUNDER as one of its top 100 most technologically significant new products of the year. Six companies signed agreements with NASA to develop THUNDER, and a dozen other companies expressed interest in negotiating similar pacts.(NASA, “NASA Rolls Out Award-Winning ‘Thunder’,” news release 96-197, 1 October 1996.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttle’s appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, “Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans,” 21 October 1996.)
A malfunction in an unpiloted test plane forced NASA officials to detonate the plane high above Edwards Air Force Base in California. The lightweight plane, dubbed Theseus, veered out of control during a routine test flight. Aurora Flight Systems had developed the US$5 million plane for long-term flights to observe climatic conditions from altitudes as high as 60,000 feet (18,300 kilometers). A spokesperson for Aurora indicated that the company had insufficient data to determine the cause of the failure. NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Systems to develop the plane as part of its Mission to Planet Earth initiative. At the time of the forced detonation, NASA had not designated funds to develop any subsequent Theseus models.
Scientists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States’ Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.
NASA and the ESA made available images taken of Comet Hyakutake as it approached the Sun. The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory had captured the pictures during the appearance of the comet in late April 1996. The Naval Research Laboratory had built a special instrument⎯the Large Angle Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO)⎯to record the images. Operating aboard SOHO, LASCO suppressed the glare of the Sun, exposing the comet and its tails. In addition, the instrument produced the equivalent of a time-lapse movie of Hyakutake, thereby documenting the comet’s tails as they changed direction in reaction to the Sun’s forces. LASCO also allowed scientists to observe coronal mass ejections⎯the expulsion of hot gases. Researchers used the data to learn more about how comets interact with the Sun and about the behavior of comet tails.(NASA, “SOHO Images Comet Hyakutake’s Close Encounter with the Sun,” news release, 15 May 1996. 72 Paul Hoversten, “A Space Race with a Lofty Goal: Cash,” USA Today, 17 May 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
NASA disclosed the startling discoveries of Rice University astronomer C. Robert O’Dell and graduate student Kerry P. Handron, who had used images captured by the Hubble Space Telescope to pinpoint thousands of gigantic, tadpole-shaped objects surrounding a dying star, the first time that scientists had observed the forms in such abundance. The scientists hypothesized that the final outbursts of the dying star probably caused the gaseous knots, each several billion miles across. O’Dell concluded that if a dying star caused the gaseous knots, then trillions of these forms might litter the universe.(NASA, “Hubble Finds Thousands of Gaseous Fragments Around Star,” news release 96-74, 15 April 1996.)
Researchers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that tests aimed at improving the efficiency of Space Shuttle engines would likely translate into substantial savings for commercial airlines as well. Researchers had learned that locating an engine’s turbine airfoils in the “optimum position” could cut down the flow of fluttering wakes of gases. When wakes occur, an engine requires additional energy to run and generates higher temperatures. NASA researchers predicted that the findings would have special application for the Boeing 777. Improving efficiency by a half percent would save hundreds of gallons of fuel per flight. The researchers had based the new positioning of the turbines upon the simple principle evident when a bike racer drafts behind a competitor⎯because the first rider takes the full brunt of the wind, the second can travel equally as fast with less exertion. The engineers found that by aligning turbines in the most efficient positions, the engine derived a similar drafting.(NASA, “Applying NASA Shuttle Engine Test Findings May Save Airlines Millions in Fuel Costs,” news release 96-254, 12 December 1996.)
The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the company’s plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCo’s Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. d’Amore called space “the ultimate frontier of global marketing.” The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitor’s advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavour’s Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, “Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit,” USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
NASA launched into space its unpiloted Mars Global Surveyor, the first in a series of missions to explore the Red Planet further. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission and vehicle embodied a shift in the United States’ approach to space exploration. With the expressed intent to make exploration as affordable and reliable as possible, NASA had developed the smaller Mars Global Surveyor, measuring 5 by 5 by 10 feet (1.5 by 1.5 by 3 meters) and designed to carry less fuel than Mars Observer. Mars Global Surveyor cost NASA US$150 million to develop, whereas Observer had cost nearly US$1 billion and had failed to reach Mars after its 1992 launch. Surveyor’s ability to function with less fuel than previous models heightened the chances that it would succeed in its mission. NASA predicted that after ascending to the desired 235-mile-high (378-kilometer-high) orbit, the robotic Global Surveyor would have to travel nearly halfway around the Sun before catching up with Mars in September 1997. The spacecraft would then begin mapping the Martian atmosphere and surface, a survey planned to last 687 days. Mission objectives included searching for evidence of life on Mars, gathering data about the Martian climate, learning more about the planet’s geology, and determining what resources were necessary to support future human missions to Mars. According to NASA, the search for water was the unifying theme of all missions to Mars. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission continued the exploration of Mars that NASA had begun with the Mariner and Viking missions of the 1960s and 1970s.(Associated Press, “Mars Probe Heads for Mapping,” 8 November 1996; Paul Hoversten, “Surveyor Sets Off for Mars,” USA Today, 8 November 1996; NASA, “1996 Mars Mission—Press Kit,” news release 96-207, November 1996.)
Lockheed Martin won the contract to design and build the X-33 test vehicle, a scaled-down model of the reusable launch vehicle (RLV) that NASA planned as an eventual replacement for the Space Shuttle. NASA set a budget of US$941 million for the project. In announcing the new contract, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed NASA’s high hopes for the project: “We want to develop technologies that will allow industry to build a vehicle that takes days, not months, to turnaround; dozens, not thousands of people to operate; reliability ten times better than anything flying today; and launch costs that are a tenth of what they are now. Our goal is a reusable launch vehicle that will cut the cost of sending a pound of payload to orbit from [US]$10,000 to [US]$1,000.” Lockheed planned to invest US$220 million in the RLV project. The X-33 plan built upon the successful engineering of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA), launched from White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The agreement between NASA and Lockheed Martin split the risk between government and industry. Although NASA passed over Rockwell International for the contract, Rockwell designed the vehicle’s engine.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Selected To Build X-33,” news release 96-128, 2 July 1996; Jeff Cole, “Lockheed Wins $1 Billion Pact for the Shuttle,” Wall Street Journal, 3 July 1996; Curt Suplee and Steven Pearlstein, “Lockheed Martin Gets Spacecraft Project,” Washington Post, 3 July 1996.)
The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 2A rocket, a satellite aimed at serving the burgeoning European television market. The satellite Hot Bird 2 cost US$100 million to develop and was powerful enough to beam television images throughout Europe and the Middle East. Eutelsat led a consortium of co-owner companies from the 45 different countries that co-own the satellite. Eutelsat assumed responsibility for operating Hot Bird 2, calling it “the most powerful commercial satellite launched to date.”(Todd Halverson, “Atlas Sends $100 Million Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia conducted an overnight experiment on the effects of space travel on the body’s biological clock. Four astronauts slept with special caps equipped with electrodes to monitor their brain and muscle activity. Astronauts in space have no exposure to the once-daily rising and setting Sun, which helps trigger a regular sleep pattern on Earth. In space the Sun rises and sets more than a dozen times each “day.” NASA administrators planned the experiment because they recognized the value of restful sleep for astronauts working in space and were concerned that sleep loss would become a greater disadvantage the longer an astronaut stayed in space. With the ISS on the horizon, NASA researchers considered the possible effects on astronauts of record-setting stays in space a significant issue. “Sleep disruption is something that has to be taken seriously,” said Timothy H. Monk, the lead researcher on the project.(Reuters, “Shuttle Mission Probes Body Clock,” 24 June 1996.)
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASA’s Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as “the first day of a new space program in America.” Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve “very good” safety ratings.(Associated Press, “NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry,” 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, “NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 30 September 1996; United Press International, “NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 1 October 1996.)
A team of scientists from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia discovered new evidence that pushed back considerably the scientifically estimated date of the origin of life on Earth. The researchers projected that the Earth’s age might be 350 million years older than previously thought. The research team, led by Gustaf Arrhenius, published its findings in the 7 November issue of Nature. The scientists argued that the presence of apatite (basic calcium phosphate) in Earth’s oldest known sediment sequences suggested that life had emerged on Earth 3.85 billion years ago. The scientific community met these findings with both excitement and skepticism.(S. J. Mojzsis et al., “Evidence for Life on Earth Before 3,800 Million Years Ago,” Nature 384, no. 6604 (7 November 1996): 55; Malcolm W. Browne, “Evidence Puts Date for Life’s Origin Back Millions of Years,” New York Times, 7 November 1996.)
Without holding any subcommittee hearings on the matter, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology voted to trim NASA’s budget for 1997 by US$450 million. NASA operated under a US$13.8 billion budget in 1996. Most of the cuts were from the budget of the initiative Mission to Planet Earth.(Brett Davis, “Panel Sets $450 Million NASA Budget Cut,” Huntsville Times (AL), 25 April 1996.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had purchased most of the aerospace and defense holdings of its competitor Rockwell International Corporation. The US$3 billion deal restructured the two companies in drastically different ways, permitting Boeing to increase significantly its potential to win government aerospace contracts, while Rockwell International turned its attention to the lucrative commercial market in automation. Whereas Boeing solidified its established dominance in the commercial jetliner construction business, Rockwell left behind its signature industry⎯the company had been nearly synonymous with NASA’s piloted space program. However, in the face of dwindling government contracts, Rockwell had been concentrating for years on developing its commercial product lines. Although the merger was not a surprise, the sale of the company responsible for engineering the Apollo spacecraft and the B-(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
In a postflight inspection, NASA engineers discovered that one loose screw had caused the hatch on Shuttle Columbia to jam, preventing the astronauts from taking their scheduled spacewalks. The screw had probably dislodged during takeoff, falling into the gears of the hatch. NASA had decided to cancel the spacewalks, rather than force the hatch open and risk damaging it permanently. With the Shuttle scheduled to launch again in one month, NASA faced the question of whether to remove and replace the gearboxes on all the hatches inside the Shuttle as a precautionary measure.(Associated Press, “Loose Screw Caused Stuck Hatch on Shuttle,” 12 December 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Hatching Up Plan in Case Emergency Spacewalk Is Needed,” 2 December 1996.)
The Russian-built Tu-144LL supersonic passenger jet, which U.S. and Russian aerospace industries and NASA had modified for commercial purposes, performed well in its first test flight after refurbishment. The aircraft took off from the Zhukovsky Airfield south of Moscow. During the Tu-144LL flight, researchers studied the impact of excessive speeds on the aircraft’s internal and exterior surfaces, engine temperature, and handling. The aircraft’s body, constructed primarily from light aluminum alloy, held up well during the initial test. The Tu-144LL project supported NASA’s High-Speed Research Program, which had begun in 1990, to encourage the development of technologies supporting supersonic commercial travel. The Boeing Company had led the U.S. industry involvement in the project, with support from McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, Rockwell International Corporation, Pratt & Whitney, and General Electric Company. The project’s aim was to prepare flight-research facilities to adapt to market demands of the future. Aviation experts predicted that a commercial market for advanced supersonic transport would evolve early in the 21st century.(NASA, “First Flight of U.S.-Russian Supersonic Testbed Scheduled for Nov. 29,” news release N96-78, 26 November 1996; “Russian Tu-144LL SST Joint NASA Flying Laboratory—Flight November 29, 1996,” http://nix.larc.nasa.gov/info;jsessionid=1f4kro1asktqm?id=EC96-43859-2&orgid=7 (accessed 1 August 2007).)
NASA scientist Benjamin F. Chao explained to the New York Times the results of his research on Earth’s orbit. A geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, Chao attributed the Earth’s slightly changed orbital pattern to the increased construction of dams. As the planet’s population has grown, people had attempted to maximize use of Earth’s limited water resources by building reservoirs. Using geophysics, international data, and theoretical calculations, Chao postulated that this increase in impounded water on the Earth’s surface had actually helped speed up the Earth’s orbit. Chao first made public his findings in the Geophysical Research Papers. Some members of the scientific community challenged his conclusions.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Dams for Water Supply Are Altering Earth’s Orbit, Expert Says,” New York Times, 3 March 1996.)
Paul F. Holloway, Director of Langley Research Center (LARC) in Hampton, Virginia, announced his retirement. Holloway had served at LARC for his entire aerospace career, beginning in 1960. He became the Center’s Director in 1991, overseeing 4,500 employees and a budget of more than US$600 million. During his tenure, Holloway published 42 technical articles in the fields of hypersonic aerodynamics; boundary layer transition and flow separation; analysis of entry flight mechanics; and Earth orbital and planetary space missions. NASA awarded Holloway its Outstanding Leadership Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, Distinguished Service Medal, and Equal Employment Opportunity Medal. Holloway also received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Service and two Senior Executive Service Distinguished Presidential Rank Awards. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin summarized Holloway’s contributions to NASA, saying that his “career spans almost the entire history of the Space Age, and his many achievements at Langley are a tribute to his talent, his professionalism, and his dedication to the importance of NASA aeronautical programs.”(NASA, “NASA Langley Director Paul F. Holloway To Step Down,” news release 96-127, 2 July 1996.)
DFRC test pilot Edward T. Schneider received the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Chanute Flight Test Award for his work testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle at extremely high angles of attack. The Institute honored Schneider at the World Aviation Congress and Exposition, held in Los Angeles, California. Schneider had participated in NASA’s Attack Research Program, meant to improve the control and maneuverability of high- performance aircraft. He tested the thrust-vectoring control system installed in the F-18, which allowed pilots to make high-angle motions and still maintain control of their planes. Schneider spent nine years testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle during his distinguished 18-year career as a test pilot. Schneider had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1996.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Pilot Receives Flying Award,” 25 October 1996, http://www.nasa.gov/lb/centers/dryden/news/Biographies/Pilots/bd-dfrc-p014.html (accessed 5 August 2007).)
Scientists announced the discovery of frozen water on the Moon, calling into question the long- held belief that the Moon lacked any form of hydration. The Clementine spacecraft had found the ice while using radar signals to examine the depths of the Moon’s craters. The discovery was the by-product of a US$75 million mission, co-sponsored by NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense, to test the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization’s “Star Wars” sensors developed to detect and track missiles. The possible ice deposit, composed of the suspected ice crystals mixed with dirt and spread over a vast landscape, was termed a dirty lake. The scientists discovered the ice in a massive, extremely deep crater. One scientist described the crater as twice the size of Puerto Rico and deeper than the height of Mount Everest. Scientists discussing the significance of the discovery postulated that the presence of water on the Moon might be a boon to future space exploration, perhaps enabling the construction of a “filling station” on the Moon. Other scientists offered a more sober opinion of the findings, referring to reports that the presence of water on the Moon might someday allow for colonization as “hyperbole.”(John Noble Wilford, “The Moon May Have Water, and Many New Possibilities,” New York Times, 4 December 1996; Associated Press, “Deep Within Lunar Crater, Small Frozen Lake Is Found,” 3 December 1996; Joyce Price, “Prospect of Ice on Moon Fires Hopes of Scientists,” Washington Times, 4 December 1996; Curt Suplee, “The Moon’s ‘Dirty Lake’ Makes Waves,” Washington Post, 4 December 1996.)
