Jeremy Lin of Taiwan’s Academia Sinica Institute and colleagues at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico, reported in the journal Nature that measurements taken with the world’s largest radio telescopes—the Very Large Array (VLA)— had detected “peculiar bulges in the atmosphere of a giant star.” Huge plumes of gas thrust from beneath the surface of the red supergiant star, Betelgeuse, had likely caused the bulges. Betelgeuse is located in the shoulder of the constellation Orion, about 430 light-years from Earth. The research team used the Y-shaped, 22-mile-wide (35-kilometer-wide) cluster of 27 huge antennas of the VLA telescopes to capture the most detailed radio image ever taken of a star other than the Sun. The team discovered that some of the gas in the star’s atmosphere was much cooler than previously believed—about 5,750°F (3,200°C). The discovery of the lower temperatures enabled astronomers to understand “how huge amounts of dust are constantly blown away from the star.” Before the lower temperatures were identified, scientists had not been able to explain how the stellar dust formed, because at “higher temperatures the dust could not condense from the hot gas expelled from the star’s interior.” Astronomers believe that dust created and expelled by stars like Betelgeuse “is distributed throughout the universe and provide[s] the raw materials that gave rise to life on Earth.”(Malcolm W. Browne, “Atmosphere Bulges on None-Too-Distant Star,” New York Times, 21 April 1998.)
The Russian Space Agency announced that the first module of the ISS was completed and ready to ship to the launchpad. Under a contract with Boeing Company, Khrunichev’s Moscow factory had designed and built this first module to hold cargo. The new module was similar to two existing modules in the Mir space station. Russia had originally scheduled the module for launch in November 1997, but fell behind in the production of the second unit. Despite the delay, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev emphasized the importance of the day during a news conference: “This event symbolizes the fact that Russia was, is, and shall be a space nation, capable of realizing large-scale projects penetrating into space.” The ISS project, a joint effort of Russia, the United States, the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan, was especially significant to Russia since the ISS would replace Mir as the only piloted element of Russia’s space program.
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA planned to reserve an additional US$750 million of federal funds over the next two years, enabling Lockheed Martin to continue work on a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Lockheed Martin and NASA had signed an agreement in 1996 to develop the X-33 suborbital test craft. At that time, the federal government had pledged to dedicate US$900 million to develop the craft and fund 15 suborbital test flights, beginning in the spring of 1999. Goldin explained that if the test program exceeded the original ceiling of US$900 million, the US$750 million funding pool would be available, beginning in the year 2000, to develop the X-33 replacement vehicle.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, "More NASA Money for Shuttle Replacement,” 3 February 1998.)
NASA modified its contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation in order to produce a second flight vehicle for the X-34 program. The modified contract expanded test objectives, allowing US$7.7 million in additional funds for the purchase of hardware and another US$2 million for additional testing and analysis, wind tunnel testing, and a second leading-edge thermal protection system.(NASA, “NASA Commits to Second Vehicle for X-34 Program,” news release 98-11, 21 January 1998.)
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASA’s purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russia’s failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASA’s proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “NASA Defends Space Station Plans,” 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, “NASA Chief Concedes Space Station Delays—Has Contingency Plans If Russia Can’t Do Its Part,” San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs,” 22 January 1998.)
NASA announced its selection of Litton/PRC of Mclean, Virginia, to perform work under NASA’s sounding rocket operations contract, consolidating several previous contracts. The four- year contract, an indefinite delivery–indefinite quantity contract worth between US$11.9 million and US$211.8 million, included two three-year options worth up to an additional US$572.5 million. Goddard Space Flight Center’s (GSFC’s) Wallops Flight Facility, at Wallops Island, Virginia, was to provide services, including design, fabrication, integration, testing, and performance of mission operations for sounding rocket missions. NASA considered the contract an integral part of the Wallops 2000 strategic plan, initiated in 1997 to ensure the facility’s future “stability and vitality.”(NASA, “NASA Selects Litton/PRC for NASA Sounding Rocket Program,” contract announcement C98-t, 1 December 1998.)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagon’s National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 11⁄2 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
NASA successfully launched Deep Space 1, a spacecraft that could “think for itself.” Driven by ion propulsion, Deep Space 1 was the first craft to rely on this technology for its primary propulsion. The craft’s destination was an asteroid 120 million miles (193 million kilometers) away from Earth. Although tracking stations encountered initial difficulties receiving signals from the spacecraft, Deep Space 1 communicated 2 hours after liftoff that it was on “the right course” and “in good shape.” NASA scientists expected the spacecraft to travel 450 million miles (724 million kilometers) to catch up with the moving asteroid. Without the ion-propulsion technology, it would have required 10 times more fuel to reach its target. The craft was also flying with 10 other “futuristic technologies,” such as lens-covered solar arrays to generate additional power, and a radio beacon to communicate with ground controllers without their prompting the probe from Earth.(New York Times, “U.S. Launches a Spacecraft That Thinks for Itself,” 25 October 1998.)
France’s Aérospatiale, British Aerospace, Germany’s Daimler-Benz Aerospace, and Spain’s CASA, partners in the Airbus Industrie airplane-manufacturing consortium, announced their intention to merge into a “unified civilian and military aerospace conglomerate that would compete in the world market with U.S. aerospace giants Lockheed Martin Corp[oration] and Boeing Co[mpany]” The partners provided no details regarding how the merger would take place, but the public statement represented “another move toward a unified European aerospace industry,” an idea that had been elusive “because of the competing national interests of the various countries.”
NASA announced the change in name of one of its four strategic enterprises. NASA’s Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise was renamed Earth Science Enterprise. Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise had originated 10 years ago, based on the concept that NASA should observe the Earth in the same way that it studies other planets. NASA said that the new name reflected the enterprise’s reformulated goals. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise would seek to answer key questions about land-surface cover, near-term and long-term climate change, natural hazards, and atmospheric ozone.(NASA, “Mission to Planet Earth Enterprise Name Changed to Earth Science,” news release 98-12, 21 January 1998.)
James L. Elliot, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues, together with Lowell Observatory and Williams College, published findings in the journal Nature based on data obtained from NASA’s HST. The data indicated that Neptune’s largest moon, Triton, had warmed up significantly since the Voyager spacecraft’s visit in 1989. Triton’s temperature had risen from 37 K (-393°F or -236°C) to 39 K (-389°F or -234°C), a 5 percent increase. The astronomers traced the warming trend to seasonal changes in Triton’s polar ice caps attributed to “an extreme southern summer,” a cyclical phenomenon occurring every few hundred years. Other possible explanations included a changing frost pattern on Triton’s surface, which could have caused the surface to absorb more of the Sun’s warmth; or changes in the reflectivity of Triton’s ice, which could have caused it to absorb more heat. Because of the warming, Triton’s frozen nitrogen surface was turning into gas, making its thin atmosphere denser. The scientists hoped their study of the changes on Triton would provide insight into global warming on Earth, which has a more complicated environment than Triton. HST’s “detection of an increase in the moon’s atmospheric pressure,” measured with one of the space telescope’s three fine guidance sensors, had provided the clue to the increased surface temperature.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope Helps Find Evidence that Neptune’s Largest Moon Is Warming Up,” news release 98-110, 24 June 1998; J. L. Eliot et al., “Global Warming on Triton,” Nature 393, no. 6687 (25 June 1998): 765–767.)
NASA announced it had renamed the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility the Chandra X-ray Observatory, in honor of the late Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. NASA chose the name Chandra because it was the late scientist’s preferred name among friends and colleagues, and because it means moon or luminous in Sanskrit. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented that Chandrasekhar had made “fundamental contributions to the theory of black holes and other phenomena,” which the Chandra X-ray Observatory would study. NASA also announced that it had set a new launch date for the observatory⎯no earlier than 8 April 1999.(NASA, “NASA Renames Telescope and Sets New Launch Date,” news release 98-225, 21 December 1998. 644 Bill Scanlon, “CSU Will Lead NASA Cloud Study $145 Million Project Is Designed To Improve Weather Forecasts, Study Global Warming,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver), 30 December 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFC’s previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFC’s Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.’s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, “Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center,” revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, “Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait,” 14–20 September 1998.)
NASA officially opened its new communications terminal on Guam, to provide “global, full- time and real-time communications support for NASA’s Space Network customers.” The Guam ground station replaced the interim ground terminal in Canberra, Australia, established to provide continuous, full-time, real-time communications support for NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after it had “suffered an on-board tape recorder failure in March 1992.”
NASA announced that Colorado State University would lead a US$145 million study of clouds, to better understand global warming and to “dramatically improve” weather forecasts. The five- year project would use a satellite named CloudSat to capture three-dimensional global images of clouds.
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that Europe’s Infrared Space Observatory, which had been orbiting Earth for two and one-half years, had located water in unexpected places. The most intriguing of these was the water vapor detected in the atmosphere of Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. ESA Director of Science Roger M. Bonnet remarked, “the moon may duplicate the conditions that led to the creation of life on Earth . . . and the only thing you need is a little heat to heat up Titan, maybe [the] birth of life may be seen.” Chairperson of ESA’s Astronomy Working Group Reinhard Genzel said that the Observatory had “enabled scientists to see water throughout the universe,” and that the water was likely brought “to the icy outer planets by comets.” He explained further that comets might have deposited the water on Earth during the early formation of the solar system, when many comets constantly collided with the Earth.
NASA announced that two of its research pilots had been the first Americans to fly a modified Russian Tu-144 supersonic jetliner, participating in three evaluation flights over a two-week period during mid-to-late September, at Zhukovsky Air Development Center near Moscow. Pilots Robert Rivers of Langley Research Center and C. Gordon Fullerton of Dryden Flight Research Center had flown the jetliner as part of a jointly funded activity under the auspices of NASA’s High-Speed Research Program and the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group. The purpose of the test flights was to gain operational experience and experimental flight data to develop an “environmentally friendly, second-generation, supersonic transport” in the United States.(NASA, “NASA Pilots Fly Russian Tu-144LL Flying Laboratory,” news release 98-186, 13 October 1998.)
The data transmission system of Galileo malfunctioned during its fifth flyby of Jupiter’s moon Europa when it went into safe mode. Although NASA engineers activated a backup system, the transmission system had lost all data collected when the craft passed within 1,141 miles (1,835 kilometers) of the moon. NASA was investigating the malfunction. NASA had launched Galileo in 1989, and the probe had entered Jupiter’s orbit in 1995, collecting data from moons Io, Europa, and Callisto during its initial two-year mission, completed in December 1997. NASA had extended the mission for two additional years.(Agence France-Presse, “Galileo Probe Suffers Malfunction in Jupiter Moon Flyby,” 22 July 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft Galileo Working Again,” 24 July 1998.)
NASA announced that JSC had modified its contract with United Space Alliance, awarding the contractor more Shuttle work. Three other NASA contractors had previously performed the more than US$900 million of work on the Space Shuttle’s solid rocket booster and other elements. USBI Company at Kennedy Space Center had worked on the boosters; Lockheed Martin Corporation in Houston, Texas, had designed and produced the primary Shuttle avionics software; and Boeing Aerospace Operations in Houston had processed flight equipment.(NASA, “NASA Awards More Shuttle Work to USA,” news release c98-h, 7 July 1998.)
At a ceremony marking its official opening, Virginia Governor James S. Gilmore III announced that Reston-based DynCorp was the first major investor in the Commercial Spaceport Launch Pad at Virginia Space Flight Center on Wallops Island, the nation’s third commercial spaceport. The Virginia Commercial Space Flight Authority, a collaborative effort of the state, the Center for Innovative Technology at Old Dominion University in Virginia, NASA, and private industry, had developed the communications facility, located at one end of NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility. The spaceport was one of 18 sites competing to launch the VentureStarTM, a privately owned space plane still in development, which could eventually carry construction materials to the ISS.(Sonja Barisic, “Firm Gives a Big Boost to Spaceport,” Roanoke Times (VA), 15 September 1998; Karen Jolly Davis, “$4.5 Million Contribution Gives Wallops Island Spaceport a Boost,” Virginian Pilot and the Ledger-Star (Norfolk, VA), 15 September 1998.)
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the craft’s fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Solar Probe Back Under Control,” 17 September 1998.)
During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The program’s original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASA’s commitment to “achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost,” saying that the plan would meet a “legitimate need within the science community.”(Warren Ferster, “NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals,” Space News, 8–14 June 1998.)
At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had “apparently outshone all the rest of the universe” for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and “pinpointed the position of the rays’ source.” The United States’ Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, “Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories,” news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
The joint committee of NASA and the European Space Agency investigating the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) incident issued a preliminary report. The committee found that several errors had led to the loss of the satellite’s signal. First, Mission Control had “unknowingly activated” two preprogrammed sequences, which lacked commands to reorient the spacecraft properly. The resulting anomalies had caused SOHO to enter into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR). A “rapid decision” to turn off one of the craft’s gyroscopes had ultimately triggered two more ESRs, sending the spacecraft “flailing out of control.” Controllers also discovered that “undetected failures,” which had occurred sometime earlier in the year, “had taken out three of the four batteries.”(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Investigation Board Focuses on Most Likely Causes,” news release 98-125, 16 July 1998; James Glanz, “Chain of Errors Hurled Probe into Spin,” Science 281, no. 5376 (24 July 1998): 499; United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 28 July 1998.)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston, astrophysicists Alexander G. Kosovichev of Stanford University and Valentina V. Zharkova of the University of Glasgow in Scotland presented evidence confirming their “solar-bomb theory.” Using sequential images that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft had captured, the two scientists explained that, 20 minutes following the rupture of a solar flare from the surface of the Sun, “a seismic wave front surges across the [S]un’s face like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond.” The SOHO images proved that solar flares not only release energy into the Sun’s atmosphere, but also “trigger huge waves of seismic energy that ripple through the [S]un like earthquakes.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Solar Flares Trigger Sunquakes,” 27 May 1998; A. G. Kosovichev and V. V. Zharkova, “X-ray Flare Sparks Quake Inside Sun,” Nature 383, no. 6683 (28 May 1998): 317.)
As part of an overall restructuring, the Boeing Company announced plans to reduce its workforce by 12 percent over the next 18 months, through the layoffs of as many as 28,000 workers. Much of the restructuring plan focused on the company’s commercial airplane business, affecting those workers who were once part of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which Boeing had purchased in 1997. In contrast, the company reported it was making strides in its defense and space work.(Tim Smart, “Boeing To Retool, Lay Off Thousands; Condit Cites Need To Reduce Costs,” Washington Post, 14 August 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a five-year, US$99.3 million contract to Sverdrup Technology Inc. of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to provide testing and facility operation, including wind tunnels and arc-jet testing.(NASA, “NASA Awards $99 Million Contract to Tennessee Firm,” contract announcement C98-q, 27 October 1998.)
Two scientific teams, independently studying HR 4796, a star in the southern constellation Centaurus, announced they had captured “the strongest evidence yet” of a new group of planets forming around the star. The teams used the 10-meter (33-foot) W. M. Keck II Telescope on top of the extinct Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii, and the National Science Foundation’s 4-meter (13-foot) Blanco Telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile. Using both of these sensitive new instruments, the research teams believed they could see clearly, through the glare of the star, a planet-forming disc of gas and dust. A third international team of British and American astronomers released the first images of the huge discs, which appeared to be forming around two other stars, Fomalhaut and Vega, the star made famous in the novel and movie Contact. The third team used the 15-meter (49-foot) James Clerk Maxwell Telescope, also atop Mauna Kea. Scientists considered the discoveries of the discs around the stars a missing link in the study of planetary system formation, offering them clues about the formation of rocky planets like Earth.(Kathy Sawyer, “Oh, Baby! Telescopes Show the Birth of a Solar System; New Imaging Sharpens Delivery Room View,” Washington Post, 22 April 1998.)
NASA officials announced that the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, which had operated the science program for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1983, would also manage the science operations for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST). As one of the cornerstone missions of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems, a major project within its space science program, NASA expected the NGST “to provide a critical follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope.” With capabilities unavailable in existing ground- based or space telescopes, the NGST’s purpose was to observe the first stars and galaxies in the universe, to understand better how the universe formed after the Big Bang. After consulting advisory committees, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, had decided that the “most cost-effective and scientifically sound way to proceed” would be “to expand the [Space Telescope Science] Institute’s responsibilities to include the management” of the new telescope.(NASA, “NASA Selects Home for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 98-96, 8 June 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
John S. Lewis, Codirector of the Space Engineering Research Center at the University of Arizona in Tucson, testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics concerning the potential danger of nearby asteroids. His testimony supported the idea that any asteroid colliding with Earth in the next 100 years could only be an asteroid not yet known to scientists. Lewis argued that, since an international scientific effort could identify such an asteroid easily, he advocated “a systematic, globally-coordinated search and characterization program that costs less than a single small space mission.” Such a search, he argued, would “give us adequate warning of a threatened asteroid impact,” so that we would “have ample time to design, build, test, and deploy an effective defense against the threat.”(Federal Document Clearing House, “Asteroids: Perils and Opportunities,” government news release of testimony of John S. Lewis before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Washington, DC, 21 May 1998.)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) launched into orbit, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, a new weather satellite, the NOAA-K, aboard a 34- year old converted Titan II nuclear missile. The satellite was an Advanced Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS-N) weather satellite, able to see inside clouds, a feature that scientists expected would greatly increase our knowledge of how hurricanes develop and move. The TIROS-N was the latest model of TIROS satellite in four generations. Lockheed Martin had last built a TIROS satellite for NASA and NOAA in 1960. After the launch of the TIROS-N, the satellite would undergo a series of tests by NASA, followed by a round of tests by NOAA, before becoming fully available in time for next year’s hurricane season.(Justin Ray, “New NOAA Weather Satellite Will Keep a Better Eye on Hurricanes,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 1998; Business Wire, “Nation’s Newest Advanced Weather Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully,” 14 May 1998.)
Chryssa Kouveliotou of the Universities Space Research Association led a team of astronomers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in confirming the existence of magnetars, a special class of neutron stars with a magnetic field one thousand trillion times the strength of Earth’s. The team calculated the strength of SGR1806-20, first discovered in 1979, by combining data from NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer satellite and the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics.(UniSci Science and Research News, “‘Magnetar’ Generates Most Intense Magnetic Field in Universe,” 21 May 1998; C. Kouveliotou et al., “An X-ray Pulsar with a Superstrong Magnetic Field in the Soft Gamma-Ray Repeater SGR1806-20,” Nature 393, no. 6682 (21 May 1998): 235–237; NASA, “Strongest Stellar Magnetic Field Yet Observed Confirms Existence of Magnetars,” news release 98-87, 20 May 1998.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a six-year, US$90 million contract to Logicon Syscon Inc. of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide operations, development, maintenance, and modification of the Center’s aeronautical simulation facilities. The contract included the operation and maintenance of the world’s largest motion-base simulator, the Vertical Motion Simulator, designed to aid in the study of helicopter and vertical short takeoff and landing issues, as well as the Crew-Vehicle Systems Research Facility, designed for the study of human factors in aviation safety.(NASA, “NASA Awards $90 Million Contract to Virginia Firm,” news release c98-s, 2 November 1998.)
Astronomers at the University of Manchester in England and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) announced that six radio telescopes, in concert with the HST, had “captured the first image ever recorded of an unbroken ‘Einstein ring’,” a “circle of light created by the gravitational warping of space between a very distant galaxy and the earth.” Physicist Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity had predicted that “light from a distant object would travel a curving path if it passed close to a massive object along the line of sight from Earth.” The radio image showed a fragmented group of bright arcs, but the HST showed that the galaxy’s infrared emission region was perfectly in line with the gravitational lens and Earth, confirming the existence of the Einstein ring.(Malcolm W. Browne, “‘Einstein Ring’ Caused by Space Warping Is Found,” New York Times, 31 March 1998. 127)
Aerojet announced it had won a US$485,000 contract to build a rocket injector for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) that would help JPL scientists develop propulsion technologies for NASA’s Mars Sample Return Vehicle.(Sacramento Bee (CA), “Aerojet Lands Contract,” 11 June 1998.)
An international team of researchers announced that observations of U.S. satellites orbiting Earth had proven one of physicist Albert Einstein’s theories correct. In his general theory of relativity, Einstein had predicted that a spinning body could curve space, because the “spin of a body must change the geometry of the universe by generating space-time curvature.” Einstein had called the phenomenon frame dragging, but scientists came to refer to it as the Lense-Thirring effect, naming it for two Austrian physicists who wrote that rotating celestial bodies, such as the Sun, “create a force that pulls space toward them.” Ignazio Ciufolini, a physicist at Sapienza University of Rome, and his colleagues used lasers to measure changes in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellite I, or LAGEOS, a NASA spacecraft, and LAGEOS II, a satellite belonging to NASA and the Italian Space Agency. The research team observed changes that they could not account for by the laws of gravity or tidal forces, concluding that the Lense-Thirring effect exists. The satellites, launched in 1976 and 1992, were passive satellites dedicated exclusively to laser ranging. In this process, scientists had send laser pulses to the satellite from ranging stations on Earth, measuring the round-trip travel time of the pulses. The research team had analyzed data collected over a four-year period beginning in 1993.(NASA, “Earth Dragging Space and Time as It Rotates,” news release 98-51, 27 March 1998; Reuters, “Einstein Proved Right Yet Again,” 26 March 1998.)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced the winners of the 1998 National General Aviation Design Competition, in which undergraduate and graduate students, enrolled at U.S. engineering schools “participating in a major national effort to rebuild the U.S. general aviation sector,” compete individually or as teams. A 27-member undergraduate team from Virginia Polytechnic Institute won first place for its design, called VicTor, a single-engine, four- seat, high-performance aircraft. VicTor’s special design elements included an ergonomic cockpit with adjustable, side-control sticks and dual airbags; a choice between two high-performance engines; and advanced technology instrument displays. The design also included an upgrade option, “to allow autonomous flight if it becomes a reality.” A 15-member, Pennsylvania State University team won second place for their high-performance, two-person, single-engine, composite-fuselage, tractor-prop light airplane. Third place went to 13 undergraduate students from the University of Virginia for their computer program predicting drag in the design of new small passenger airplanes.(NASA, “NASA and FAA Announce Design Competition Winners,” news release 98-140, 1 August 1998.)
At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States’ role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, “at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage.” The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASA’s decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAO’s report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division,” testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, “Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says,” 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
On NASA’s 40th anniversary, President of the Space Frontier Foundation Richard N. Tumlinson and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about space exploration and the possibility of privatizing space ventures. Tumlinson’s organization advocated limiting NASA’s role to supporting technology and research programs. He proposed commercializing the Shuttle fleet and privatizing NASA field centers, to reduce the costs of space exploration and eventual colonization. Goldin advocated reducing costs as well, but did not respond to Tumlinson’s proposals. He also outlined new technologies that NASA was developing, to cut the cost of rockets and satellites. Goldin remarked that NASA “would form partnerships with industry for ‘cutting-edge research development’,” also emphasizing NASA’s support of government loans to fuel the growth of the space industry in the United States.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 2 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “NASA Urged To Sell Shuttles,” 1 October 1998.)
Astronomers announced that pictures from a new camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) supported the theory that a new planet was forming around Beta Pictoris. Images focusing on the disc (the halo of dust and gas rotating around the star) revealed that, instead of a smooth flow, one quadrant has a large bulge, indicating the orbital path of a planet that could be many times larger than Jupiter. No actual planet was visible in the images, only the effects of its gravitational pull. Nevertheless, this was the strongest evidence to date in visible light, of the presence of a possible planet. Beta Pictoris is younger (20 million to 100 million years old compared to the Sun’s 4.5 to 5 billion years) and about eight times brighter than the Sun. The formation of planets around a young star suggested that planets form very early in the life of a solar system.(Washington Post, “Images Support Theory of New Planet: Hubble Photos Show Bulge in Star’s Halo Dust—63 Light-Years from Sun,” 9 January 1998.)
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was “the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center.” NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a “whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac,” the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, “so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids” to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, “X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test,” news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, “Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight,” Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
Ghassem R. Asrar, NASA Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about budget concerns and delays associated with the Earth Observing System program. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) had called the hearing to discuss numerous delays in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise missions. Asrar explained the reasons for the delays, indicating that NASA would work with Raytheon Systems to deliver a scaled-back data system within budget, in time to support two delayed missions. Subcommittee member, Representative David Weldon Jr. (R- FL), “questioned the legitimacy of NASA’s ownership of the Earth Science program,” suggesting that a different agency, such as the National Academy of Sciences or the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), should manage the program. Weldon also questioned whether scientists would be able to make use of the vast amount of data they expected the program to generate. Robert S. Winokur, NOAA’s Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, assured subcommittee members that scientists would be able to use the information. Winokur was responsible for coordinating NOAA’s joint efforts with NASA to archive and retrieve environmental data.(Brian Berger, “Earth Science Faces Hurdles: NASA To Forfeit Data Capabilities To Put Key Program on Track,” Space News, 14–20 September 1998.)
The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshall’s X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFC’s X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), “MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded,” 21 February 1998.)
NASA officials at Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, announced the new five- year collaborative program of LERC and Case Western Reserve University. The program’s name, the Glennan Microsystems Initiative, honored the late T. Keith Glennan, the first NASA Administrator, who had served from 1958 to 1961. Glennan was also President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology, forerunner of Case Western Reserve University. Backed with US$16 million in federal funds and US$4.5 million in state funds, the initiative planned to “develop and apply the technology known as microelectricomechanical systems for industry and for NASA.” LERC planned to develop systems for use a decade into the future, including power systems for the next space station.(Jennifer Arend, “Lewis Research Launches Effort To Develop Technology,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 20 June 1998.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) and ranking Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA) submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton requesting that he supply a plan within 30 days, “detailing how the [a]dministration expects to resolve the dire problems surrounding the International Space Station.” The two members of Congress asked President Clinton to intervene with President Boris N. Yeltsin to “ensure full Russian compliance with its stated commitments to the space station.” In the aftermath of the announcement of the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force’s findings on the ISS, the members of Congress were attempting to rectify the inadequate budget submission. They asked the President to “direct the Office of Management and Budget to deliver a workable plan to Congress . . . so that the relevant [c]ongressional committees can consider OMB numbers when crafting NASA appropriations and authorization bills.”(Federal Document Clearing House,” Committee Asks Clinton for Space Station Plan,” government news release, 24 June 1998.)
Mark H. Thiemens, professor of chemistry at the University of California at San Diego, and a team of researchers published a study in the journal Science disputing NASA’s theory that a rock from Mars contained evidence of life. NASA scientists had studied the rock, found in the Allen Hills ice field in Antarctica, concluding that some carbonate mineral structures in the rock were evidence that microbes had lived in the rock before it “blasted away from Mars,” during the collision of Mars with an asteroid millions of years ago. By contrast, Thiemens’s researchers concluded that the chemical characteristics of oxygen inside the rock originated from the carbon dioxide and ozone of the Martian atmosphere. The team explained that, if a microbe had deposited the oxygen, “the chemical signature of the minerals would have matched that of oxygen in water, not oxygen in the atmosphere.” According to the team, this finding did not provide final proof that the rock had never contained life. However, it provided a significant argument against NASA’s theory, controversial since its first proposal in August 1996.(James Farquhar, Mark H. Thiemens, and Teresa Jackson, “Atmosphere-Surface Interactions on Mars: Δ17Ο Measurements of Carbonate from ALH84001,” Science 280, no. 5369 (June 5, 1998): 1580; Los Angeles Times, “New Meteorite Study Casts Doubt on Theory of Martian Life,” 5 June 1998.)
NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced the hiring of Space Gateway Support of Herndon, Virginia, to run base operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Patrick Air Force Base, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Johnson Controls and EG&G Florida at KSC had previously held base-operations contracts at the military bases. The new joint base-operations- support contract was worth US$1 billion for five years, with the option to renew for another five years. In consolidating the contracts, the agencies intended to cut costs. According to officials, continuing separate base-operations contracts would have cost 30 percent more. Other primary customers under the contract included government contractors for NASA and U.S. Air Force spaceflight operations, payload ground operations, life sciences, expendable vehicles, and launch operations and support.(NASA, “SGS Awarded NASA and Air Force Joint Base Contract,” contract announcement C98-m, 21 August 1998; Joni James, “Base Operations Under 1 Contract,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 August 1998.)
George W. Lewis Jr., NASA aeronautical engineer and son of George W. Lewis, former research director of NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, died at his home at the age of 81. He had worked for 30 years in Cleveland, Ohio, at Lewis Research Center, which NASA had named for his father.(Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), “George W. Lewis, 81, Was An Engineer at NASA,” 9 October 1998.)
Due to arrive at Mars in October 1999 after a period of orbiting Earth, Japan’s Planet B spacecraft launched from Kagoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu. The Japanese Education Ministry’s Institute of Space and Aerospace Science developed the probe, nicknamed Nozomi, or Hope. The probe carried 14 scientific instruments developed by Canada, Germany, Japan, Sweden, and the United States. NASA provided two instruments for the probe: the Neutral Mass Spectrometer, designed to measure the gas composition of Mars’s upper atmosphere for the first time; and the Ultra Stable Oscillator, deployed to support a radio science experiment, also involving analysis of the Martian atmosphere, and to guide the spacecraft in its orbit around Mars.(NASA, “NASA Instruments on Japanese Planet-B Spacecraft Will Aid Studies of Martian Upper Atmosphere,” news release 98-119, 1 July 1998; United Press International, “Japan Launches First Mars Mission,” 4 July 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.’s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, “Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science,” news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, “Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive ‘Drizzle’,” USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
After two delays, one because of mechanical problems, the other because of strong winds, a Japanese H-2 rocket blasted off from Tanegashima Space Center, carrying a US$370 million communications satellite intended to conduct a three-year series of communications and broadcast tests. However, an engine breakdown prevented the satellite from entering a geostationary orbit; instead, the launch left the satellite floating in space, useless for its intended mission. Engineers were looking for ways to rescue the mission.(Mari Yamaguchi for Associated Press, “Japan-Satellite,” 21 February 1998.)
NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billion–light-year–long “corridor,” the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a “core sample” of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a “small patch of space near the Big Dipper.”(NASA, “The Universe ‘Down Under’ Is the Target of Hubble’s Latest Deep-View,” news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
Kenneth J. Szalai ended his 34-year NASA career to join IBP Aerospace Group Inc. as the company’s president and chief operating officer. In his last position at NASA, Szalai was Director of Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Szalai had directed DFRC since December 1990. Before becoming the Center’s director, Szalai had been head of the research engineering division at DFRC for eight years. NASA had awarded Szalai, an internationally recognized expert on flight control and flight systems, the Exceptional Service Medal in recognition of his work on the first Digital Fly-by-Wire aircraft. He had also received NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal during his NASA tenure. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Kevin L. Petersen Acting Director of DFRC, effective 1 August.(Jim Skeen, “Dryden Director To Leave NASA for Private Sector,” Los Angeles Daily News, 11 July 1998.)
NASA’s ER-2 aircraft, a “close relative” of the U-2 spy plane, officially broke the altitude record for medium-weight planes when it flew to 68,700 feet (20,900 meters), nearly twice the cruising altitude of commercial airliners, during a mission to measure components of the atmosphere. A Canadian P-42 aircraft had set the previous record of 62,500 feet (19,050 meters) in 1988. NASA officials said the craft had flown at such altitudes in the past, but this flight was the first time that scientists had documented its altitude and made it public.(Agence France-Presse, “NASA Airplane Flies High into Sky: ER-2 Able To Break Record for Altitude,” Washington Times, 23 November 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
At the request of the United States, Israeli officials arrested Ehud Tenenbaum, the eighteen-year- old computer hacker who called himself The Analyzer, along with two other Israeli teenagers. Tenenbaum was ringleader of a group called Israeli Internet Underground. Prosecutors accused the teenage hackers of breaking into U.S. government and military computer systems, including NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), as well as into Israeli government computers and commercial and educational computer systems in the United States. The FBI said that all three had admitted their involvement, stating that they had worked in tandem with two juveniles in Cloverdale, California.
NASA successfully tested a fuel tank made of a new metal mixture, aluminum lithium, never before used in major U.S. manufacturing. The tank made of the new alloy was 30 percent stronger and 5 percent lighter than the aluminum magnesium tanks in use since the days of the Apollo program. The tank showed no leaks, pressure bulges, or other problems, when loaded with 537,000 gallons (2,033,000 liters) of liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel. Lockheed Martin had developed the new fuel tank to help ensure that NASA would be able to haul large sections of the ISS into orbit.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle’s New Fuel Tank Test a Success,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 May 1998.)
Controllers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), “activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun.” Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHO’s mission was to track “major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space.” The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Sun’s atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted,” news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears It’s Lost,” USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, out of contact with ground controllers since 25 June, responded to signals sent by NASA’s Deep Space Tracking Network antennas in Canberra, Australia. Although the signals contained no data, SOHO transmitted a series of short radio bursts, indicating to space scientists that the craft was still able to receive ground commands and, therefore, that they might still have a chance of salvaging it.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Contacted,” news release 98-145, 4 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Contact Re-established with Wayward Satellite,” 4 August 1998.)
NASA announced that a long-exposure, infrared image, taken with a camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had uncovered the most distant galaxies ever seen. HST’s Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) had detected galaxies that might be over 12 billion light-years away, depending on which cosmological models scientists used. NASA’s Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science, Edward J. Weiler, deemed the discovery a major step toward fulfilling one of HST’s key objectives: to search for the “faintest and farthest objects in the universe.”(NASA, “Hubble Goes to the Limit in Search of Farthest Galaxies,” news release 98-179, 8 October 1998.)
S. George Djorgovski, an astronomer at California Institute of Technology; Dale A. Frail, an astronomer with the Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico; and their colleagues issued a notice to fellow astronomers regarding a gamma-ray burst (GRB) detected on 2 July. Frail and Djorgovski had combined the resources of the VLA and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to pinpoint the source of the burst, which they calculated to be a galaxy, “alive with new-forming stars,” billions of light-years away from Earth. Although scientists did not yet know the cause of GRBs, Frail remarked, “the fact that this burst happened in a hot galaxy where new stars are being rapidly formed is probably the death knell for the theory that collisions between old, dying neutron stars are responsible for the gamma-ray bursts.”(John Fleck, “N.M. Scientists Track Galaxy Blast: Explosion Is Billions of Light Years Away,” Albuquerque Journal (NM), 9 July 1998.)
NASA awarded Aerojet, a GenCorp Inc. company, a US$16.4 million contract to provide a de- orbit propulsion stage for the X-38 technology demonstrator vehicle. The contract for design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of one propulsion stage for the first X-38 spaceflight test included a second option for five operational propulsion units for the crew return vehicle (CRV), if NASA selected the X-38 design for the CRV. Engineers at Dryden Flight Research Center were flight-testing the X-38, a prototype spacecraft intended to lead to the development and construction of a CRV for the ISS.(Defense Daily, “Aerojet Wins $16.4 NASA Contract for X-38 Propulsion,” 20 August 1998.)
Boeing Company announced plans to cut an additional 8,200 jobs by the end of the year 2000, to streamline facilities, to focus on manufacturing and assembly operations, and to eliminate redundant laboratories. The job cuts, affecting work sites in Arkansas, California, and Texas, included planned product phaseouts of the MD-80 and MD-90, and brought into question the future of the MD-11. As it shut down selected facilities, including an electronic manufacturing facility and the Site 9 modification center, Boeing planned to transfer thousands of employees involved with aircraft and missile systems, reusable-space-systems support, and satellites.(United Press International, “Boeing Cuts 8,200 Jobs,” 20 March 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
NASA awarded its combined space operations contract to Lockheed Martin, covering operations at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida; Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama; and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The contract, worth US$1.9 billion for the first five years, with a five-year renewal worth an additional US$1.5 billion, covered the cost of directing, monitoring, and downloading data from spacecraft. NASA estimated that the contract, consolidating work previously done under 17 separate contracts, would save US$1.4 billion over 10 years.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Space Operations Co. Awarded Contract To Manage NASA’s Space Operations,” contract announcement c98-p, 25 September 1998; Peter Behr, “Lockheed Team Wins NASA Contract; $3.4 Billion Big Beats Out Boeing,” Washington Post, 26 September 1998; Anna Wilde Mathews, “Lockheed Group Wins NASA Pact for $3.44 Billion,” Wall Street Journal, 28 September 1998.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planet’s polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyor’s data; the Arizona researchers believed that a “concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes.” The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water “was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.”(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, “Mars Discovery,” 28 May 1998; Washington Times, “Minerals Suggest Life in Mars’ Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers,” 28 May 1998.)
NASA’s Inventions and Contributions Board announced the winners of its 1998 Software of the Year Award. The first winner, Tempest, a breakthrough technology “originally developed to support the science experiments on the ISS,” had “spawned new markets,” and NASA predicted that the technology would continue to do so. NASA’s Ames Research Center had designed the second winner, Center TRACON Automation System Software, a set of three software tools for managing air-traffic–control systems at major airports, to optimize flight operations. Analyzing and predicting aircraft paths, the software created visual representations of arriving traffic flow, providing controllers with “up-to-the-second advisories of information” for pilots, thus reducing time between landings to a minimum. The Federal Aviation Administration had chosen the software for immediate implementation at all major airports.(NASA, “Space Flight, Aviation Programs Receive NASA Software Award,” news release 98-124, 15 July 1998. 543 NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Complete Worldwide Communications Coverage,” news release 98-122, 13 July 1998.)
The Boeing Company announced the creation of a new subsidiary called Boeing Space Operations, based in Houston, Texas, at the Johnson Space Center, which would provide various services for government and commercial space operations. Rick Stephens, the president of the new subsidiary, stated that the goal of Boeing Space Operations was to make Boeing “the global provider of low-cost, reliable, commercially based space operations services.”(James Wallace, “Boeing Forms a New Unit To Boost Its Space Business,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 3 June 1998.)
Elizabeth H. Moore, Head of the Art and Archaeology Department of the School of Oriental and African Studies, the University of London, and Anthony Freeman, a radar scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), discussed new radar imagery of Angkor, Cambodia, during a press briefing at JPL. The researchers announced that the Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (AIRSAR), developed by JPL to produce radar maps, had helped them to detect and locate a distribution of prehistoric mounds and undocumented temples to the northwest of Angkor. The three-dimensional maps, created using radar interferometry, revealed evidence of temples and earlier civilization that were absent or incorrectly marked on modern topographic maps and early twentieth-century archaeological reports. These discoveries brought into question long-standing ideas about the urban evolution of Angkor. The 1996 AIRSAR Pacific Rim Deployment on board a NASA DC-8 jet was a follow-up to a 1994 study of Angkor that used Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR) on board Space Shuttle Endeavour during Mission STS-59, producing the radar images used to create the three- dimensional maps. Unlike SIR-C/X-SAR, AIRSAR had P-band with a longer wavelength, able to penetrate the forest canopy. AIRSAR also flew in a mode that allowed it to measure topography and create three-dimensional images of the surface.(NASA, “New Insights into Ancient Angkor by NASA Radar To Be Subject of Press Briefing,” news release N98-11, 5 February 1998; NASA, “NASA Radar Reveals Hidden Remains at Ancient Angkor,” news release 98-28, 12 February 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Unseen Angkor,” 12 February 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Ghassem R. Asrar as the new Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise. Before this appointment, Asrar had served as Chief Scientist for the Earth Observing System in the Office of Earth Science Enterprise at NASA Headquarters. He led an international team in developing scientific priorities and measurements “to be obtained from a series of advanced Earth-orbiting satellites that promise fundamental new insights into the connections between Earth’s land, oceans, atmosphere, ice, and life.”(NASA, “Asrar Named Associate Administrator for Earth Science,” news release 98-19, 2 February 1998.)
SPACEHAB Inc., a Virginia-based, commercial space company with a staff of 85, purchased the Johnson Engineering Corporation, a 400-person firm contracted to support NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. SPACEHAB’s chairperson said the company would “expand the use of Johnson Engineering’s larger technical staff to support its plans for expansion into the commercial space arena.” Investors had incorporated SPACEHAB in 1984, to “develop a commercial research module that could accommodate small, private, as well as government- financed science experiments and engineering tests during [S]pace [S]huttle mission[s].” However, when the anticipated commercial market had failed to develop, SPACEHAB “changed its strategy,” winning NASA contracts. NASA used SPACEHAB modules, stored in the Shuttle’s payload bays, as cargo containers for storing “tons of food, clothing, and other gear that was ferried to Russia’s Mir space station aboard a series of recently concluded U.S. [S]huttle flights.”(Mark Carreau, “Spacehab of Virginia Acquires NASA Contractor,” Houston Chronicle, 5 July 1998.)
Eighteen members of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton, urging him to “abandon plans to reach an agreement in China on expanding space cooperation because of Beijing’s weapons transfers and human rights abuses.” The letter was the House’s response to a 29 April report in the Washington Times, disclosing a plan to conclude a space cooperation agreement at the Beijing summit. The article discussed a draft agreement calling for the free and unrestricted exchange of scientific data between NASA and the State Science and Technology Commission of China, a key developer of weapons-related technology. The lawmakers, warning that the pact would increase the likelihood of China’s sharing technology with rogue states, referred to a CIA report stating that China had aimed 13 of its 18 long-range strategic missiles at the United States. These comments emphasized the concern of members of Congress that China constituted a direct threat to the United States. Many opponents of the agreement insisted that the United States should not share with China technologies or applications that enemies of the United States might use against the American people or U.S. interests.(Bill Gertz, “House Science Panelists Oppose Space Pact with China,” Washington Times, 24 June 1998.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that the ion engine responsible for the Deep Space 1 probe’s primary propulsion was back in operation after its unexpected shutdown two weeks earlier. Scientists believed that metallic grit or another type of contaminant located between two high-voltage grids had caused the engine to shut down after running for 41⁄2 minutes.(NASA, “Deep Space 1 Ion Propulsion System Starts Up,” news release 98-215, 25 November 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft’s Troubled Ion Engine Restarts,” Washington Post, 26 November 1998.)
NASA researchers released images and temperature readings collected by Mars Global Surveyor. The images revealed that the Martian moon Phobos is covered in a layer of dust at least 3 feet (0.9 meters) deep, the result of the impact of meteoroids, occurring over millions of years. Surveyor’s thermal emission spectrometer revealed that, on Phobos, the temperature changes from -170oF to -25oF (-112oC to -32oC) between night and day. Scientists explained that dust accounts for some of the moon’s drastic temperature change, because Phobos does not have an atmosphere enabling it to trap heat. Therefore, the surface’s small particles have only 7 hours to absorb heat from the Sun, losing heat rapidly after sunset. Images of landslides on steep crater slopes indicated that Phobos’s gravity, even at just 1/1,000th of that of Earth, is sufficient to pull objects downward.(NASA, “Martian Moon Phobos Hip-Deep in Powder,” news release 98-164, 11 September 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Martian Moon,” 12 September 1998.)
Phillip Z. Tapper, emergency coordinator for NASA’s GSFC, announced that exposure to smoke and water during the previous day’s fire had damaged parts of two spacecraft. Tapper said that engineers had not yet determined the exact damage to the heat protection panels, which they were planning to install in the Hubble Space Telescope and another spacecraft.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire Damages Spacecraft Parts,” 21 August 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
NASA awarded contracts to Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems; Kelly Space and Technology; Lockheed Martin Astronautics; and Orbital Sciences Corporation Space Access. The five contracting companies would study ways that NASA could meet its requirements for human spaceflight at a lower cost. The studies would examine three scenarios: 1) keeping the Shuttle operational until 2020, 2) replacing the Shuttle when it was cost-effective to do so, and 3) developing an alternative plan in case NASA’s funding remained at FY 1999 levels.(NASA, “NASA Contracts for Future Space Transportation Studies,” news release c98-n, 4 September 1998; Defense Daily, “NASA Awards Future Space Transport Study Contracts,” 8 September 1999.)
At a NASA press conference, Ethan J. Schreier of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and his colleagues discussed new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images. The new images showed in greater clarity an old galaxy’s black hole “feeding on a smaller, younger galaxy that collided with it.” The scientists explained that the new images revealed young stars in the midst of an “obviously old galaxy,” suggesting that a collision had occurred. The merged galaxy complex, known as Centaurus A, was about 10 million light-years away from the Milky Way. The images, taken with HST’s newest infrared camera, also showed gas and dust feeding an apparent large black hole. An inner disc of gas, swirling around the black hole, was behaving in a manner opposite to scientists expectations, based upon the behavior of other galaxies. Hans- Walter Rix of the University of Arizona theorized that the collision could explain the difference, postulating that the HST “may have caught Centaurus A in the midst of trying to realign itself after its spiral companion plowed into it.” Schreier offered an alternative explanation—that the mass of the merged galaxies was greater than the mass of the black hole, causing the gravitational pull to warp the inner disc.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Hubble Reveals Feeding Black Hole,” 14 May 1998; NASA, “Hubble Provides Multiple Views of How To Feed a Black Hole,” news release 98-71, 14 May 1998.)
NASA announced the establishment of a Near-Earth Object Program Office at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), responsible for coordinating “NASA-sponsored efforts to detect, track, and characterize potentially hazardous asteroids and comets that could approach Earth,” and with facilitating communication between scientists and the public, were NASA to discover any potentially hazardous objects. NASA selected JPL to host the new program, because of “its expertise in tracking precisely the positions and predicted paths of asteroids and comets.”(NASA, “NASA Establishes Near-Earth Object Program Office at Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” news release 98- 123, 14 July 1998.)
NASA announced that Raytheon STX Corporation of Lanham, Maryland, would provide routine data operations, research, and development support for the Space Science Data Operations Office and the National Space Science Data Center at GSFC, under a two-year contract with three one- year options. Valued at more than US$33 million, the contract covered the processing of space- science data and the acquisition, modeling, analysis, archiving, and dissemination of NASA’s archival data to the scientific community, educators, and the public.(NASA, “NASA Selects Raytheon STX To Provide Goddard Support,” contract announcement c98-v, 2 December 1998.)
The European Science Foundation and the U.S. National Research Council published a joint study analyzing 13 projects in astrophysics, planetary science, space physics, earth science, and microgravity research. The report advised the United States and its international partners to “set aside a specific part of their annual space budgets to plan for future critical joint exploration projects,” highlighting factors hampering cooperation within the projects analyzed. Hampering factors included cultural differences, poorly defined objectives, and “lukewarm support from the scientific community for projects undertaken more for political than research reasons.” The report set forth recommendations for successfully pursuing cooperative space projects within tight budget constraints.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Study: Space Projects Need Good Science,” 30 June 1998; European Space Foundation, “Transatlantic Study Identifies Keys to Success in International Space Collaboration,” news release, 30 June 1998, http://www.esf.org/media-centre/press-releases/ext-single-news/article/transatlantic- study-identifies-keys-to-sucess-in-international-space-collaborations-220.html (accessed 27 September 2007).)
The investigation board of engineers and officials from NASA and the European Space Agency released their final report, determining how controllers had lost communication with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite on 24 June. The board’s findings, presented at a joint news conference held in Washington, DC, and Paris, concluded that no anomalies existed on the spacecraft; the loss of SOHO “was a direct result of operational errors, a failure to monitor the status of the spacecraft adequately, and the use of insufficiently tested rescue procedures.” However, the board emphasized that no single cause or particular person was responsible for the incident.(Warren E. Leary, “Satellite To Study Sun Is Reviving from Dead,” New York Times, 4 September 1998.)
Shuttle operator United Space Alliance (USA) cut 363 jobs at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), one of the largest cutbacks in decades. Combining the layoffs with 194 voluntary resignations, USA eliminated 557 jobs at KSC. In implementing the cutbacks, the company hoped to “trim $100 million from the current [S]huttle budget,” thereby reducing costs, improving efficiency, and attracting new payload customers without compromising safety.(Richard Burnett and Seth Borenstein, “363 Lose Jobs at Space Center,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1998.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had found the youngest cluster of stars ever observed in a galaxy near the Milky Way. The baby stars were “enveloped in a cloud of luminous gases,” in the galaxy known as the Small Magellanic Cloud, about 200,000 light- years from Earth. The HST had discovered the 50 new stars, each 300,000 times as bright as the Sun, “concentrated in a region only 10 light-years across in a cloud known as N81.” Before the capture of the HST’s high-resolution images, astronomers had referred to the area as The Blob.(NASA, “Nearby Star Cluster Yields Insights into Early Universe,” news release 98-132, 23 July 1998; Washington Times, “Hubble Telescope Finds Family of Stars,” 24 July 1998; New York Times, “Genesis in a Cosmic Firestorm,” 28 July 1998.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, opened a new Collaborative Engineering Center equipped with virtual reality, teleconferencing, and cutting-edge technology. Using a combination of a joystick and computerized voice commands, engineers could control the three-dimensional, virtual space station, which included a docking Space Shuttle orbiter.(Akweli Parker, “NASA Reshaping the Way It Works,” Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, VA), 16 January 1998.)
As part of the Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA officials chose more than 300 research proposals to share US$23 million in funding. Out of 28 award categories, 21 focused on space-based applications, such as achieving routine space travel, exploring and settling the solar system, and developing new technologies in astrobiology. The range of topics indicated that research associated with high-profile space transportation and exploration efforts, curtailed because of cuts in NASA’s 1999 budget, would continue on a smaller scale.(Anne Eisele, “Small Business Grants Span Range of NASA Goals,” Space News, 23 February–1 March 1998.)
A fire that started in a shed containing an air compressor spread to another building of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), causing extensive damage. No one was injured, and firefighters were able to stop the blaze before it reached laboratories containing hazardous and flammable materials. Fire investigators had not determined the cause of the fire. NASA did not permit the investigators to survey the damage immediately, because of sensitive material housed in the affected building.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire,” 20 August 1998.)
The European Southern Observatory (ESO) successfully tested the first of four linked, identical telescopes of 8.2-meter (27-foot) diameters, comprising the Very Large Telescope (VLT). The VLT is the world’s largest and most advanced Earth-based telescope, with a collective diameter equal to16 meters (52 feet). The telescope’s “first light” images (its first astronomically useful images) met the design goals. Exposures lasting up to 10 minutes confirmed that the telescope’s tracking was very accurate and stable. The ESO had built the new telescope in the Atacama Desert in northern Chile, where a dry atmosphere and stable climate guaranteed clear skies 350 nights of the year.(Financial Times (London), “Staring Out Across 14 Billion Light Years: Technology Very Large Telescope: The Earth-Based VLT Brings a Twinkle to a European Astronomer’s Eye,” 4 June 1998.)
NASA announced the arrival of international astronaut candidates at Johnson Space Center, where they began training as members of the 1998 astronaut class. The international candidates, from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, and Italy, were Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, Hans W. Schlegel, and Roberto Vittori of the European Space Agency; Bjarni V. Tryggvason of the Canadian Space Agency; and Marco C. Pontes of the Brazilian Space Agency.
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
NASA released images recorded by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft, showing the Cydonia region of Mars in 10 times more detail than that provided in the images recorded more than 20 years ago by one of the U.S. Viking space probes. In the new images, the Sun was shining from the opposite direction than in the images recorded by the Viking probe. Viking’s images had revealed a surface formation in the hilly desert area, Cydonia, which some members of the public believed to be a monumental sculpture of a humanoid face, in spite of NASA scientists’ insistence that the “face” was only a common geological formation called a mesa. Some of those people who believed the structure to be a sculpture had accused NASA of manipulating data in a conspiracy to keep the origins of the face a secret. Surveyor’s new images confirmed NASA’s previous analysis of the formation. However, in an effort to counteract the conspiracy rumors, NASA posted on the Internet the raw data sent by Mars Global Surveyor and took no official position regarding what the images did or did not reveal. Several planetary scientists remarked that “the new image contained no surprises and no evidence of artificial origin.”(Robert Lee Hotz, “California and the West Alien ‘Face’ Recedes into Martian Myth Space: NASA Photo Appears To Show a Naturally Weathered Mesa,” Los Angeles Times, 7 April 1998; Kathy Sawyer, “With Mars Images, NASA Says: Face It, It’s a Mesa,” Washington Post, 7 April 1998.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was “a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula,” the site of a gas cloud generating enough water “to fill the Earth’s oceans 60 times a day.” The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting “large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula.” The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time “the vital role that water plays in star formation,” may “provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Michael Werner of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, “that water is prevalent in space” and “plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth,” 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, “Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, “Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
NASA partially cancelled the Clark satellite program, keeping only the US$13 million launch vehicle service portion of the contract with Lockheed Martin. As reasons for the cancellation, NASA cited cost overruns, an uncertain launch schedule, and questions concerning the effectiveness of Clark’s instruments in orbit, because its primary instrument had been “sitting on the ground two years longer than planned.” The intended mission of the program was to take black-and-white stereo images, showing detail as small as 10 feet (3 meters) across, for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise (formerly the Office of Mission to Planet Earth), as well as for commercial customers. NASA had paired the Clark satellite with the Lewis satellite. However, after its August 1997 launch, the Lewis satellite had gone into a spin, which controllers were unable to repair. Consequently, the Lewis satellite plunged into the atmosphere where it burned up.(NASA, “NASA Terminates Clark Earth Science Mission,” news release, 25 February 1998; Justin Ray, “NASA Cans Clark, an Imaging Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 February 1998.)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had selected Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California, and TRW Inc. Space and Electronics Group of Redondo Beach, California, as industry team members for the Space Interferometry Mission. The Interferometry Mission would measure the precise location of stars and search for planets orbiting nearby stars. The two contracts, which together exceeded US$200 million, included mission formulation and implementation.(NASA, “Contractors Chosen for Space Interferometry Mission,” news release 98-162, 10 September 1998.)
