Lockheed Martin and its Russian business partners announced the appointment of Wilbur C. Trafton as President of International Launch Services (ILS); Trafton had been Acting President since the previous December. Lockheed Martin, Russia’s Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia had established ILS in 1995, as a joint venture to market commercial launch services on Russian Proton rockets and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. Before joining ILS, Trafton had been Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In that position, he had headed NASA’s Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. Ray Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, remarked that Trafton had brought to ILS “years of experience working on joint space programs with Russia.” Colladay said that Trafton’s background, together with his knowledge of the Atlas product line, made him “particularly well suited to lead ILS.”(Lockheed Martin, “Wilbur Trafton Named President, International Launch Services,” news release, 26 March 1999,” http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/WilburTraftonNamedPresident Internat.html (accessed 21 December 2007).)
Soyuz TM-29 launched on a mission to Mir with Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Ivan Bella. Jean-Pierre Haigneré of the European Space Agency was also on board Soyuz.(NASA, “U.S. and Russian Human Space Flight 1961⎯September 30, 2000,” in Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2000 Activities (Washington, DC, 2001).)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles O’Brien, “Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station,” CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, “Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches,” 28 October 1999.)
The Federal Laboratory Consortium appointed Donald J. Campbell, Director of Glenn Research Center (GRC), as the 1998 Laboratory Director of the Year for Technology Transfer. The Consortium honored Campbell, NASA’s first African American center director, for his “exemplary contributions to the overall enhancement of technology transfer for economic development.” Industries had created at least 20 new products from GRC-developed technologies in the previous five years. Campbell had also led the Center in establishing the Lewis Incubator for Technology, to help entrepreneurs and start-up companies commercialize NASA-developed technologies, as well as the Garrett Morgan Commercialization Initiative, to help small businesses in Ohio and the Great Lakes region use NASA technologies to become more competitive.(NASA, “Campbell Named Laboratory Director of the Year,” news release 99-32, 4 March 1999.)
At the American Geophysical Union’s fall meeting in San Francisco, NASA presented images from the Galileo spacecraft’s close flyby of Jupiter’s moon Io on 25 November, showing “a curtain of lava erupting within a giant volcanic crater.” Because of the intense heat and height of the lava fountains, NASA’s Infrared Telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was also able to observe them. NASA scientists hoped to determine the temperature of the extremely hot lava on Io, by combining data from the telescope and from Galileo observations. Galileo scientist Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson remarked that capturing images of the fountains was a 1-in-500-chance observation. NASA announced that engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s (JPL’s) Measurement Technology Center had been able to repair images damaged by radiation during Galileo’s 10 October flyby using LabVIEW software from National Instruments. JPL’s Torrence V. Johnson compared the work to unscrambling a television cable signal: “JPL engineers had to break the code that was inadvertently introduced by the radiation near Io.”(NASA, “Galileo Sees Dazzling Lava Fountain on Io,” news release 99-148, 17 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-148.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the mission’s failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASA’s interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California” had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, “Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named,” news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Kevin L. Petersen, who had been serving in an acting capacity since August 1998, as Director of NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Petersen had joined Dryden as an aerospace engineer in 1974 and had worked on flight-research projects, including the F-8 Digital Fly-by-Wire, the HiMAT (the Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology), and the X-29 forward-swept wing projects. He had served as Chief of the Vehicle Technology Branch, Chief of the National Aerospace Plane Projects Office, and, since January 1996, as DFRC’s Deputy Director.(NASA, “Petersen Named Dryden Director,” news release 99-14, 8 February 1999.)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASA’s first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASA’s new space-grant program, Rasmussen’s primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension work⎯using the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information system⎯as “precision agriculture,” because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, “NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work,” Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that the plutonium-powered Cassini spacecraft, en route to Saturn, had entered safe mode on 11 January. The craft, NASA’s largest and most complex interplanetary probe, had detected a possible error in its orientation, which prompted it to halt all “non-critical” activity, while maintaining its communications link with Earth.(Associated Press, “Saturn-Bound Spacecraft Develops Problem, JPL Says,” Los Angeles Times, 14 January 1999. 651 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cunningham, Cook Named to Mars Posts,” news release 99-03, 13 January 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/marsappts.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the company’s spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried “a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade.” Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the craft’s enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earth’s surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earth’s surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, “New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
President of the Aerospace Industries Association John W. Douglass testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space that the nation needed an “enlightened” national space program, combining “public and private investment in synergistic ways.” Douglass stated that the government needed to “remove barriers to the growth of commercial space.” He said that the most critical action needed for the industry’s growth was renewal of the indemnification provisions of the Commercial Space Launch Act, because without such provisions, U.S. companies are unable to compete with the government-backed programs of foreign competitors. Douglass also testified that U.S. launch ranges lacked modern facilities, causing launch delays. Such delays “wreak havoc” in the commercial world, because launch sites require more time to reconfigure a launch than convenient for commercial enterprises. He cited the export licensing process as a serious problem, because it was causing the U.S. commercial space industry to lose market share in both satellite and launch services. Additionally, Douglass called the “dramatic drop” in funding for aerospace research and development over the last two decades a “serious structural problem,” which the United States should correct, to remain competitive in the world market.(“AIA Urges Congress To Remove Barriers to Commercial Space Industry,” Aerospace News, 20 May 1999.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) published a report critical of the X-33 program jointly sponsored by NASA and Lockheed Martin, concluding that the program was unlikely to meet its original cost, schedule, and performance goals because of increased costs, delayed testing, and revised objectives. However, NASA and Lockheed Martin responded that they expected the program to “achieve technical requirements, such as demonstrating the feasibility of building large liquid hydrogen fuel tanks made of graphite composite material.” The purpose of the X-33 Program was to develop and demonstrate advanced technologies for use on future reusable launch vehicles, such as the company’s VentureStarTM.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Transportation: Status of the X-33 Reusable Launch Vehicle Program” (report no. NIASD-99-176, Washington, DC, 11 August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99176.pdf (accessed 4 March 2008).)
At the 14th Annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented the George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest honor for quality and technical performance, to four U.S. companies: 1) Barrios Technology Inc. of Houston, Texas, for its small-business product; 2) Kay and Associates of Edwards, California, for small-business service; 3) Raytheon Support Services Company of Annapolis Junction, Maryland, for the large-business service category; and, 4) Thiokol Space Operations of Brigham City, Utah, for the large-business product category. NASA had evaluated the recipients for performance, delivery according to agreed cost and schedule, innovation, management leadership, alignment of organizational goals with NASA’s strategic plans, customer orientation, and adherence to the Total Quality Management philosophy. Thiokol Corporation, which had won the Low Award in 1991 and Marshall Space Flight Center’s Contractor Excellence Award in March 1999, had manufactured the reusable solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, as well as providing launch support and refurbishment services for the motor. Over the past seven years, Thiokol had never delayed its delivery of hardware. Its cost reduction efforts had saved NASA US$152 million.(NASA, “Four Aerospace Firms Win NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release 99-53, 22 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-053.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); Cordant Technologies Inc., “Thiokol Propulsion Wins NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release, 3 May 1999.)
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASA’s four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a “long-overdue tune-up.” The orbiter’s overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbia’s fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tuneup,” 25 September 1999.)
NASA researchers at MSFC unveiled an experimental 50-foot (15-meter) track using magnetic levitation (maglev) technology to propel a 30-pound (13.6-kilogram) model of a spacecraft, at a speed of 60 miles (97 kilometers) per hour, in 0.5 seconds. MSFC researchers had sought to reduce launch costs, as well as to reduce space-vehicle size with the development of a maglev launch-assist system. The maglev track was theoretically capable of propelling and releasing a spacecraft at 600 miles (965 kilometers) per hour; wing design would then lift the craft and “give it a kick start” before the ignition of the rocket’s engines. MSFC Manager of Launch Technologies Sherry Buschmann commented that the researchers believed the use of maglev technology could cut launch vehicle size by 20 percent. NASA’s industry partner in the experimental technology was PRT Advanced Maglev Systems Inc. of Park Forest, Illinois.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “New NASA Track Races Toward Cheaper Trips to Space,” news release 99-260, 4 October 1999; Kent Faulk, “NASA Spacecraft Float to Future: Researchers Test Levitation as Way To Boost Launches,” Birmingham News (AL), 7 October 1999.)
Analyzing data from NASA’s Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) spacecraft, researchers proved for the first time that smoke from forest fires inhibits rainfall. TRMM, a mission of the United States and Japan and part of NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, had been producing continuous data since December 1997. Daniel Rosenfeld of the Institute of Earth Sciences at Hebrew University in Jerusalem had studied the data, finding that clouds polluted with heavy smoke significantly inhibit warm rain processes. When smoke pollutes them, cloud tops must “grow considerably above the freezing level” to produce rain through a different process. Rosenfeld remarked that the results of his research had validated earlier studies, which showed that urban air pollution inhibits rainfall. Christian D. Kummerow, a TRMM scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) commented that such findings were “making the first inroads into the difficult problem of understanding humanity’s impacts on global precipitation.”(NASA, “Spacecraft Provides First Direct Evidence: Smoke in the Atmosphere Inhibits Rainfall,” news release 99-110, 5 October 1999.)
A team of astrophysicists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only “seen” the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or “the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole.” However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a “strange feature” buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an “astronomical Doppler effect,” because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretched⎯redshifted⎯moving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, “Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory,” Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASA’s Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiter’s moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, “recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data.” James K. Erickson of NASA’s JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileo’s instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, “If we didn’t have the automatic restart software, we wouldn’t be getting any data at the encounters.”(Michael A. Dornheim, “Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Iran’s missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States’ friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russia’s cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilman’s legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was “assisting Iran’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.” If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from “transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction.” An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, “Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency,” Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
China confirmed that it had fired its new Dong Feng-31 (DF-31) missile during a test launch on 2 August, publicizing details of the successful launch of the long-range, ground-to-ground, intercontinental, strategic ballistic missile. The Chinese Guangzhou Daily reported that the “three-stage, solid-fuel rocket was launched from northern Shanxi province and crashed down in the western territory of Xinjiang.” Jane’s Defence Weekly estimated that the DF-31 had an 8,000-kilometer (5,000-mile) range and was capable of carrying a 700-kilogram (1,500-pound) nuclear warhead. Robert Karniol, a foreign correspondent covering Asia for the defense industry publication Jane’s, remarked that “the DF-31 should be operationally deployed by China in 2000,” and that the country expected to build 10 to 20 of the missiles, some replacing 1960s-era missiles with half the range of the DF-31. The Guangzhou Daily also reported that China had developed the technology for piloted spaceflight. Wang Xinqing, head of the China Carrier- Rocket Research Institute, which designs military- and civilian-use rockets, stated that the core of the program was the development of a new series of carrier rockets, Long March 5. Wang Xinqing also refuted a report by the U.S. Congress alleging that China had stolen the United States’ missile and nuclear warhead technology, insisting that China had perfected the rocketry before the United States had achieved it.(Matt Pottinger for Reuters, “China Details Missile Test, Planned Space Flight,” 12 August 1999.)
NASA announced it had completed negotiations on a US$625.6 million contract with Lockheed Martin Michoud Space Systems to purchase the last set of materials required to build 60 new Space Shuttle external fuel tanks. Although it was the sixth and last in a series of purchases of fuel tanks, this was the first purchase NASA had made consisting entirely of super lightweight tanks. The tank’s design was the same as that of the lightweight tank design NASA had previously used, but the new tanks were 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) lighter, and used a new aluminum lithium alloy. NASA and industry partners had developed the lighter alloy, 30 percent stronger than the material used to manufacture the lightweight tank, to enable the Shuttle to deliver ISS components into the proper orbit.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “NASA Completes Purchase of Material for 60 Shuttle External Tanks,” news releases 99-069, 28 April 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-069.html (accessed 5 February 2008).)
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services’ maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martin–built Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russia’s new Dnepr rocket, Europe’s Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporation’s Pegasus.(United Press International, “Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year,” 23 November 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
NASA released preliminary findings of an internal peer review conducted at Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) after the apparent loss of the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its orbit on 23 September. The results of the review indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California led to the loss of the spacecraft.” The peer review discovered that “one team had used English units while the other used metric units for a key spacecraft operation.” NASA’s systems engineers had failed to detect the error. In addition to the JPL committee, NASA had formed a separate review committee of experts from within and outside of JPL and planned to establish an independent failure-review board shortly.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Team Finds Likely Cause of Loss,” news release 99-113, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-113.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, effective immediately. NASA had created the Astrobiology Institute in July 1998, a “virtual organization” comprising NASA’s centers, universities, and other scientific entities for the study of “the origin, evolution, distribution, and destiny of life in the universe.” The Institute, with a multidisciplinary focus, sought to bring together astronomers, biologists, chemists, exobiologists, geologists, and physicists, to search for the origins of life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the announcement of Blumberg’s appointment at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, the site of the Institute’s headquarters. Goldin stated that NASA had tasked the Astrobiology Institute with “providing the ‘intellectual underpinnings’ for building new types of instruments and space probes for finding life in the solar system and beyond.”
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Ball and Aerojet—General Picked To Study New Weather Sensor,” news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket plane’s two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheed’s VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33’s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had “placed a huge wager” on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that “delays in the prototype would harm NASA’s plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.”(Jeff Leeds, “Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheed’s X-33 Rocket Plane,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)
Robert Thomas “R.T.” Jones, who had “led the development of the swept-back jet wing design that revolutionized air travel and enabled planes to break the sound barrier,” died at the age of 89. Jones had begun designing the swept-back wings in 1944, when airplane wings were perpendicular to the fuselage, while working at NACA (National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics), NASA’s predecessor agency. In 1945 Jones had conducted airflow studies, showing that a cone-shaped shock wave cut across the tips of straight wings, causing deterioration at Mach 1, the speed of sound. Jones had concluded that a swept-back design would preserve the wings and reduce drag. Although his idea was initially ignored, “virtually every commercial and military jet uses the design today.” Jones’s later research had included work on the oblique wing, “mounted on a pivot on top of the fuselage.” The oblique wing maintained a right angle to the fuselage for maximum lift during takeoff, but the pilot could manipulate it so that, at cruising altitude, one wing tip pointed forward and one backward, saving fuel, generating less engine noise, and eliminating the sonic boom. Although Jones’s oblique wing design had never advanced beyond the testing stage, some aeronautical designers continued to study its possibilities.(Washington Post, “Robert Jones Dies; Led Breakthrough on Wing Design,” 15 August 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States’ strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the mission’s duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite,” news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
The Perseus B research aircraft, built by Aurora Flight Sciences Inc., sustained moderate damage when it crashed on a California highway during a flight from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. The craft was a “developmental vehicle designed to operate at high altitudes for extended periods on scientific sampling missions,” one of several aircraft that NASA was evaluating as part of its Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program. Controllers could operate the craft remotely from a ground station, or the Perseus B could navigate autonomously along a preprogrammed flight path. At the time of the accident, ground-based Aurora Flight Sciences mission controllers at Edwards Air Force Base were guiding the Perseus B. DFRC flight safety officials, with assistance from Aurora Flight Sciences operations staff, formed an accident investigation team to determine the exact cause of the crash.(NASA, “Perseus B Damaged in Crash on California Highway,” news release 99-115, 1 October 1999.)
A Lockheed Martin Titan II rocket launched successfully, carrying JPL’s QuikSCAT satellite. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation had built QuikSCAT in 11 months, setting an industry record. JPL stated that the satellite had “opened its solar arrays as planned an hour after launch, and a tracking station in Norway acquired the first signal from the spacecraft 18 minutes later.” NASA had originally scheduled the satellite’s launch for November 1998, but delayed it when a Titan IVA exploded after launch, carrying a payload for the National Reconnaissance Office. NASA had postponed the QuikSCAT launch until engineers could determine whether Titan II used any of the hardware that had caused the explosion on the Titan IVA. Following the launch of a Titan IVB rocket that placed a Milstar satellite in a faulty orbit, NASA had again delayed the QuikSCAT’s launch, pending investigation of the failure. The successfully launched QuikSCAT satellite was on a two-year mission with the option of a third year, to “gather about 400,000 detailed measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the ocean’s surface.” NASA intended the US$98 million mission to “improve weather forecasting and detect the onset of conditions like El Niño.” Engineers had designed the QuikSCAT to radiate microwave pulses over wide areas and to listen for the pulses’ echo. Those return signals would “allow scientists to determine wind speeds and directions at the surface of the oceans. Understanding the interaction [of wind and ocean circulation] is important for weather prediction.” Under the terms of NASA’s first contract using the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, Ball Aerospace had provided the QuikSCAT spacecraft bus, launch interface, system integration, test, launch support, and two years of mission operations.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Lockheed Martin’s Titan Launches with QuikScat Satellite,” 20 June 1999; “Satellite Launched on Weather Mission,” New York Times, 20 June 1999; Aerospace Daily, “QuikSCAT Makes It to Space After Six-Month Delay,” 22 June 1999; Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp., “BATC Launches Its First Commercial Spacecraft,” news release, 19 June 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=30 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
After two delays, Space Shuttle Columbia launched on Mission STS-93 from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, under the command of Eileen M. Collins, NASA’s first female Shuttle commander in 38 years of human spaceflight. Commander Collins’s crew comprised Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby and Mission Specialists Steven A. Hawley, Catherine G. Coleman, and Michel Tognini. Columbia carried on board the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, previously known as the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as well as secondary payloads and experiments⎯the Southwest Ultraviolet Imaging System to capture ultraviolet imagery of the Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter; plant growth experiments; biological cell-culture studies; and the Treadmill Vibration Information System and High Definition Television System, which the crew planned to test. NASA had scrubbed both of the Shuttle’s earlier launch attempts late in the countdown, halting the 20 July launch 6 seconds before blastoff because of a technical malfunction and the 22 July launch because of stormy weather. The U.S. Air Force and the Boeing Company postponed a commercial launch to permit NASA a third chance to deliver Chandra into orbit. However, the Shuttle continued to have problems. During the 8-minute climb into outer space, a 0.5-second-long short circuit shut down computers controlling two of the Shuttle’s three main engines. Furthermore, Columbia was 4,000 pounds (1,800 kilograms) short of liquid oxygen fuel in its external fuel tank, leaving the craft in orbit 7 miles (11 kilometers) lower than planned. Fuel carried aboard the orbiter made up the shortfall. Seven hours into the flight, the crew deployed Chandra into orbit, accomplishing its primary mission.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts Off with Woman in Command,” 23 July 1999; Brad Liston for Reuters, “Shuttle Roars into History After Launch Problems,” 23 July 1999; Beth Dickey, “After Hiccup at Liftoff, Shuttle Puts Telescope into Space,” New York Times, 25 July 1999; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-93, Chandra X-ray Observatory,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-93.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak– built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imaging’s test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, “Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space,” New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
NASA scientists announced that, because the Deep Space 1 spacecraft had aimed its camera incorrectly when it flew within 15 miles (24 kilometers) of a small asteroid named Braille, the craft had failed to capture an image. However, the craft had succeeded in its primary mission to test 12 new technologies during the flyby, thereby validating the instruments’ future use in solar- system probes. Deep Space 1 was equipped with “a mind of its own,” enabling it to navigate through space without much assistance from ground control. The craft had traveled at 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour relative to the asteroid, which was 117 million miles (188 million kilometers) from Earth. The flyby of the Braille asteroid, the final test of Deep Space 1’s Autonomous Navigation System, had been the closest any spacecraft had come to an object in our solar system without landing.(Washington Times, “Spacecraft Misses Asteroid Snapshot: Camera Can’t See Rock Called Braille,” 30 July 1999.)
NASA released two initial images from its Chandra X-ray Observatory. One image traced “the aftermath of a gigantic stellar explosion in such stunning detail” that scientists believed they had detected evidence of a neutron star or black hole near the center. The second image showed “a powerful x-ray jet blasting 200,000 light-years into intergalactic space from a distant quasar.” Chandra was still in its orbital “check-out and calibration phase” when it captured the images, confirming that the observatory was performing up to expectations.(NASA, “NASA Unveils First Images from Chandra X-ray Observatory,” news release 99-98, 26 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-098.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASA’s navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was “not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole,” because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost,” news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter,” 23 September 1999.)
NASA released new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of the cores of spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, and astronomers studying the images for clues about galactic development discussed their findings at a briefing at NASA Headquarters. Two complementary surveys by independent research teams had concluded that the Hubble images confirmed the evolutionary link between a disc-like cloud of dust and gas at the center of a galaxy and a bulge of millions of stars at the center of the disc-like cloud. The central bulge stabilizes a galaxy’s development, controls the birth of stars in the galaxy’s core, and “holds secrets as to how and when a galaxy formed.” Reynier F. Peletier of the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom confirmed that central bulges of “more tightly wound spirals” formed at approximately the same time in the early universe. C. Marcello Carollo of Columbia University, who had led a team studying galaxies with small bulges and “bar-like structures that bisect the nucleus,” had discovered that such galaxies developed more recently. Both teams had used HST’s visible-light and infrared cameras to determine the stars’ true colors, a measure of the age of the stars inside the galaxies’ core.(NASA, “Starry Bulges Yield Secrets to Galaxy Growth,” news release 99-107, 6 October 1999; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Tackles Questions About Cosmic Bulges,” 6 October 1999.)
An international team of scientists published findings based on research using data from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. The team had sought to locate the origin of solar wind, which interacts with Earth’s magnetic field, creating auroral displays like the Northern Lights, as well as disrupting satellites and communications equipment. The SOHO team believed that the solar wind originated from honeycomb-shaped areas called convection cells, located beneath the coronal holes. Using data from the spectrometer, the scientists had measured for the first time the structure and motion of gases inside the coronal holes. The team reported that, in some places above coronal holes, magnetic field lines do not loop back to the Sun’s surface, but rather, the magnetic lines shoot upward without returning to the Sun, thereby originating the solar wind.(Donald Hassler et al., “Solar Wind Outflow and the Chromospheric Magnetic Network,” Science 283, no. 5403 (5 February 1999): 810; United Press International, “Source of Solar Wind Believed Found,” 4 February.)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earth’s landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments’ measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earth’s radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, “NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission,” 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, “Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Florida’s Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agency’s Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstan’s Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and China’s Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the group’s findings: “companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer.” Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Florida’s expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, “Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, “NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights,” 7 January 1999.)
Joseph G. Beerer of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory stated that all of the instruments aboard Mars Global Surveyor were operating, and that the craft had begun mapping Mars, approximately one year later than originally planned. NASA had launched the craft in November 1996, and Surveyor had entered orbit around Mars in September 1997. NASA had delayed the mapping portion of the mission when scientists detected a structural problem with one of the craft’s solar panels. To avoid placing excessive stress on the panel, the flight team had opted to proceed cautiously in aerobraking. Aerobraking, a pioneering operation, was necessary to position the spacecraft for its Mars mapping mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-006, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 27 December 2007).)
The Boeing Company announced that it had completed negotiations on a cooperative agreement with NASA to develop an experimental space plane. The US$173 million contract stipulated that Boeing and the federal government share costs equally. Boeing and NASA hoped that the X-37 space plane, previously called the Future-X Pathfinder, would “serve as a test bed for new reusable launch technologies,” helping to achieve the “goal of reducing the cost of placing space vehicles and cargo into orbit.” Boeing envisioned a vehicle that would be “unpiloted, autonomously operated, and capable of speeds up to Mach 25, while demonstrating aircraft-like operations.” NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center led the X-37 government team, comprising the U.S. Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base and NASA facilities, including Ames Research Center, Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Dryden Flight Research Center.(The Boeing Company, “NASA, Boeing Sign X-37 Vehicle Agreement,” news release, 14 July 1999, http://www. boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990714t.html (accessed 19 February 2008); John O’Dell, “California Southland Focus Boeing, NASA Agree on Space Plane Contract,” Los Angeles Times, 15 July 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russia’s first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion,” 22 November 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
NASA announced the establishment of a review panel to examine the overall safety of Shuttle maintenance and refurbishment practices following the discovery of maintenance-related damage to the Shuttle fleet’s electrical wiring. NASA had named Director of ARC Henry McDonald to chair the panel. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg indicated that the other team members, not yet named, would include top maintenance experts from NASA, the military, the commercial aerospace industry, and the commercial aircraft industry. NASA required the team to assess NASA’s standard practices and recommend improvements, with preliminary findings due in October.(NASA, “NASA Forms Independent Industry-Government Team To Review Shuttle Maintenance and Refurbishment Practices,” news release 99-104, 20 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99- 104.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINSCENTAURRL10ENGINESCL. html (25 February 2008). The Independent Assessment Team on Mission Success, which Lockheed Martin had commissioned in May 1999 after a series of Titan IV launch failures, met its 1 September deadline, reporting its findings and recommendations to Lockheed’s senior management. Lockheed Martin had tasked the investigating team with assessing program management, engineering and manufacturing processes, and quality-control procedures within the company’s Space and Strategic Missiles Sector. Having discovered problems in accountability, quality, subcontract and supplier management, and cost emphasis, the Team recommended that the company develop a “fly-out plan” for Titan IV’s remaining missions, improve its quality control, and improve its management of suppliers and subcontractors. Chairperson of the review panel A. Thomas Young remarked that regardless of the problems the team had uncovered, the panel had also found “enormous fundamental technical strengths” throughout the sector, as well as “highly capable and dedicated” staff. Young also commented that the new leadership team was “off to a positive start.” Vance D. Coffman, Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer for Lockheed Martin, “endorsed the panel’s findings and pledged Lockheed Martin to implementing its recommendations.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Implements Space Panel Recommendations,” news release, 8 September 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINIMPLEMENTSSPACE PANELR.html (accessed 27 February 2008).)
Discovery astronauts placed the HST back in orbit using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Astronaut Jean-François Clervoy operated the arm, grabbing a handle on the telescope’s side. After releasing the latches securing the observatory inside the Shuttle’s bay, the robotic arm lifted the telescope above the spacecraft, and ground controllers opened the door covering HST’s telescopic eye. Once ground controllers gave the command, Discovery’s robotic arm released the telescope. Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and Pilot Scott J. Kelly fired the Shuttle’s thrusters to move away from the telescope slowly.(Robyn Suriano, “Hubble Set Free: Discovery’s Crew Ready for Monday Landing at KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 December 1999.)
NASA selected winners of its Government Inventor of the Year and Commercial Invention of the Year awards. Charles E. Clagett, Associate Head of the Component and Hardware Systems Branch at GSFC, won the Government Inventor of the Year Award for his Apparatus for Providing Torque and for Storing Momentum Energy. Clagett had developed the apparatus, known more commonly as the SMEX Reaction/Momentum Wheel, for NASA’s Small Explorer program. NASA had used the apparatus successfully in the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer and the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite. Paul M. Hergenrother, Joseph G. Smith Jr., and Brian J. Jensen of Langley Research Center won the Commercial Inventor of the Year Award for their Phenylethynyl Terminated Imide Oligomers, fifth composition, known as PETI-5, which is a type of glue that holds fibers together. The Langley team had developed PETI-5 as an adhesive for use in various aerospace and commercial applications. Used in high- speed, high-temperature aircraft, PETI-5 had netted US$10 million in sales since becoming commercially available.(NASA, “NASA Selects Top Inventions of the Year,” news release 99-42, 12 March 1999.)
NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASA’s new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the “development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year.” Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASA’s purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of “low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry,” to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a “remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award,” news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home,” Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)
New York Governor George E. Pataki awarded NASA astronaut Eileen M. Collins of Elmira, New York, the state’s highest award, the Jackie Robinson Empire State Freedom Medal, for her achievement as the first female Space Shuttle Commander. Collins had been Commander of the historic Mission STS-93. During that mission, she and her crew had deployed the Chandra X- ray Observatory, the heaviest, largest, and most powerful x-ray telescope ever launched into space. Governor Pataki described Collins as “a bold pioneer of the reaches of space” and remarked that “her talent, intelligence and courage set an example that every woman and every man can hope to duplicate in their lives.” Every year New York presents the Empire State Freedom Medal, established in 1997, to “those who best demonstrate the qualities of determination, dignity, fairness, and honor that were exemplified by Jackie Robinson, who broke major league baseball’s color barrier.”(NASA, “First Female Shuttle Commander Eileen Collins Receives Jackie Robinson Medal,” news release 99- 125, 27 October 1999.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
Following a series of launch failures, Lockheed Martin Corporation announced management changes in three of its business sectors. Raymond S. Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, retired, effective immediately, and G. Thomas Marsh, Executive Vice President of Missiles and Space, succeeded him. Lockheed named the President of Missiles and Space, K. Michael Henshaw, as President and Chief Operating Officer of the Energy and Environment Sector, effective 1 June. In that position, Henshaw succeeded Robert J. Stevens, who had served in dual positions but was directed to “devote his full attention” to his role as Corporate Vice President of Strategic Development. Albert E. Smith, President of Aerospace Electronics Systems and of Sanders, a Lockheed Martin company in Nashua, New Hampshire, succeeded Henshaw as President of Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California. Lockheed named Walter P. Havenstein President of Sanders and Acting President of Aerospace Electronics System, a promotion from his former position as Executive Vice President. In addition to the recent launch failures, Lockheed had been “bedeviled” by problems in its space business, including a 10 percent reduction in sales in its Space and Strategic Missiles Sector and a 17 percent decline in operating profit, after inadequate preparation and cancellations had caused the delay of commercial satellite launches.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Management Changes,” news release, 11 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesManagementCh.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Lockheed Revamping 2 Units: New Leaders Named After Series of Launch Failures,” Washington Post, 12 May 1999.)
NASA released an image of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io, captured at the closest range ever accomplished. The image, which NASA’s spacecraft Galileo took during a flyby of the moon on 10 October, showed a lava field near the center of an erupting volcano named Pillan, with visible new lava flows from its volcanic center. To capture most of the new images of Io, Galileo had used a fast camera mode, in which the camera preprocesses the image, averaging the brightness in its adjacent parts. However, Io’s radiation had disrupted the process, degrading the quality of the images. Radiation had not affected images, including the newly released image of Pillan, taken in other camera modes. Galileo Project Manager James K. Erickson remarked that Galileo would not use the fast camera mode during the next Io flyby.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Closest-Ever Picture of Volcanic Moon Io Released,” news release, 22 October 1999.)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
The Boeing Company named former cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov as the company’s director for Space and Communications, Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States, located in Boeing’s Moscow office. With the appointment, Titov became responsible for initiating new business opportunities, working closely with Boeing’s ISS program members and with Russian and Ukrainian partners on the Sea Launch program. A cosmonaut since 1976, Titov had commanded several Soyuz missions, served as a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle missions, and lived aboard Russia’s Mir space station, logging 387 days in space, including nearly 19 hours of extravehicular activity.(The Boeing Company, “Director Space & Communications for Russia and CIS Named,” news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990615r.html (accessed 8 February 2008).)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.’s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, “Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, “Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash,” 14 July 1999.)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
Lockheed Martin cleared its Atlas II rocket to resume the 1999 launch schedule, after having placed its schedule on hold when a Delta III launch failed in early May. Delta’s RL10B-2, upper- stage engine was similar to the RL10A-4 used on Atlas’s Centaur upper stage. The Boeing Company and Pratt & Whitney had led the investigation of the Delta III launch failure, with the support of Lockheed Martin. Meanwhile, Lockheed Martin Astronautics had formed two panels “to ensure that no aspects of commonality between the RL10 engine versions were overlooked.” The Senior Engineering Review Panel and the Senior Management Review Team had addressed potential causes of launch failure identified in the Delta III investigation, ruling out those factors that did not apply to Atlas flights. When the investigators had determined that “an engine- brazing process that left voids in combustion chamber structural jacket splice joints” was common to all RL10 engines, Lockheed Martin had instituted a new set of inspection and analysis measures for accepting or rejecting each engine. Lockheed Martin intended to use the inspection techniques on new production chambers; Pratt & Whitney planned to continue using its standard procedure, with its Flight Certification Board certifying each set of RL10 engines for all Atlas missions.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin’s Centaur RL10 Engines Cleared for Flight,” news release, 30 August 1999,)
After assessing its safety aspects, officials from the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA’s) commercial space office approved the first space launch from a platform in the sea. The FAA issued the launch license to an international launch consortium known as Sea Launch. The Boeing Company, based in the United States, was a 40 percent partner in the consortium. The Sea Launch Company planned a demonstration launch for 27 March 1999, from a converted, self-propelled, oil-drilling platform in the Pacific Ocean. The consortium’s initiative, to launch communications satellites from a mid-ocean location at the equator, offered several advantages, such as the capability to lift heavier-than-normal payloads.(Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Issues Launch License to First International Sea Launch Consortium,” news release APA 34-99, 15 March 1999, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 4952 (accessed 27 December 2007); Associated Press, “FAA Gives Its OK to 1st Spacecraft Launched from Sea,” Salt Lake Tribune (UT), 16 March 1999.)
India’s government-run space agency began commercial operations with the launch, from an island in the Bay of Bengal, of its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C-2 (PSLV), carrying Indian, German, and South Korean satellites. PSLV carried into orbit Oceansat-1, India’s remote- sensing satellite, intended to carry out oceanographic research; KITSAT-3 of South Korea’s Satellite Technology Research Center; and the German Aerospace Center’s Tubsat. Chairperson of Indian Space Research Organization Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan stated that India could “offer to launch satellites at a much cheaper rate than other countries with launch facilities.” Without naming how much India was charging for its newly inaugurated launch services, Kasturirangan said that in the international market it would cost US$1 million to piggyback a satellite.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Indian Rocket with Korean and German Satellites Takes Off,” 26 May 1999.)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, “Delta Rocket Soars into Space,” Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
Officials at NASA’s Langley Research Center (LARC) officially opened the Center’s new Experimental Test Range (ETR), described as an “electromagnetic wind tunnel.” LARC engineers had designed the ETR to determine how low-frequency electromagnetic radiation affects aircraft, to help the military improve stealth technology. The ETR also would assist in testing technologies to enable airline passengers to watch television signals from satellites or to help Internet users make wireless connections. The first military customer that had signed up to use the ETR, the U.S. Army’s National Ground Intelligence Center, planned to use models of enemy targets in the test chamber, to see how they appeared on radar screens.(Jeff Long for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Hampton, Va., NASA Research Center Tests Plane Design with Wind Tunnel,” 17 November 1999.)
Scientists Peter Smith of the University of Arizona and Justin Maki of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory published a report in the Journal of Geophysical Research summarizing the results of the Mars Pathfinder Mission. After an exhaustive review of more than 17,000 images from the Pathfinder’s 1997 mission, the report had concluded that Mars’s air and dirt are yellowish-brown in color, not red. Viking probes of the 1970s had likewise indicated that Mars is not red, but rather yellowish-brown. However, Mars appears red to the naked eye from Earth, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) data had indicated that Mars is red. The scientists reported that the detailed analysis using Pathfinder data had revealed that the HST, not Pathfinder, needed to be recalibrated.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), “The Red Planet? Mars Is Really Yellowing Brown: Pathfinder Discovers What Hubble Missed,” 24 April 1999.)
NASA announced its decision to end a US$240 million project to land a small spacecraft on a comet, so that scientists could learn how to destroy a comet if it were on course to collide with Earth. NASA had planned to launch the probe in 2003 and to land it on the surface of Comet Tempel 1 in 2005. After landing, the probe was to drill into the nucleus of the comet, helping scientists understand the comet’s composition. Manager of the Space Technology 4 project Brian Muirhead remarked, “we know very, very little about how comets are formed and what their constituency is,” adding that anyone serious about planetary protection must learn more about comets. NASA’s JPL was in the early stages of developing the Space Technology 4/Champollion project and had only spent US$10 million. NASA had also considered canceling Mars Surveyor 2001, but had already spent US$100 million on that project. Other projects were experiencing cost overruns also, such as the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, which needed an extra US$60 million to cover last-minute development problems. NASA intended to redirect some funds from Space Technology 4 to other missions experiencing funding difficulties, such as Chandra.(Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Comet Lander,” 29 June 1999.)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robot’s components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASA’s ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiment’s success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts’ hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine “housekeeping chores,” such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions,” news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
The main engine of Japan’s H-2 rocket malfunctioned 4 minutes after launching from Tanegashima Space Center, failing to put the Mtsat satellite into orbit. Fearing they could lose control of its trajectory, officials ordered the rocket’s destruction 8 minutes into its flight, marking the first time the National Space Development Agency of Japan had destroyed a rocket in flight. It was the second launch failure for the H-2 rocket during 1999; another H-2 had failed to place its payload in orbit in February. However, before the February malfunction, Japan had launched five H-2 rockets successfully. The Mtsat satellite, intended to replace the Himawari 5 satellite, would have observed weather patterns and monitored aircraft.(Associated Press, “Japan Destroys Rocket in Midair as It Lifted $95 Million Satellite,” New York Times, 16 November 1999; Dow Jones Newswire, “Japan Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, Rocket Destroyed,” 15 November 1999.)
Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the “holy grail” of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, “Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time,” news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
NASA announced that after just two months in space, the Chandra X-ray Observatory had taken “a stunning image of the Crab Nebula,” revealing for the first time “a brilliant ring about the nebula’s heart.” The Crab Nebula, located 6,000 light-years from Earth, in the constellation Taurus, is the remnant of a star that Chinese astronomers had observed exploding in 1054 A.D., when it “appeared suddenly and remained visible for weeks, even during daytime.” Astronomers had used “virtually every astronomical instrument” to study the Crab’s area of the sky, discovering that unlocking its mysteries led to “insight after insight” into how the universe works. Astronomers had linked the origin of pulsars to supernovas and confirmed the cosmic origin of chemical elements through the study of the “expanding cloud of filaments” in the Crab. The new image showed the Crab pulsar “accelerating particles up to the speed of light and flinging them out into interstellar space at an incredible rate.” Using Chandra’s “exceptional resolution,” scientists had traced the jet all the way to the neutron star, where the ring pattern clearly appeared. Previously, Hubble Space Telescope images had revealed “moving knots and wisps around the neutron star,” and other x-ray images had shown the outer portions of the jet, only hinting at the ring structure.(NASA, “Chandra Discovers X-ray Ring Around Cosmic Powerhouse in Crab Nebula,” news release 99-109, 28 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-109.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); Paul Hoversten, “Photos Get to the Source of Pulsar,” USA Today, 29 September 1999.)
The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, “NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft,” news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)
Lockheed Martin Corporation named former Martin Marietta President and Chief Operating Officer A. Thomas Young to lead an independent review of the management, engineering, manufacturing, and quality control processes of its space and missile business, specifically Astronautics, Missiles and Space, and Michoud Space Systems. The company had experienced a “series of expensive and well-publicized failures of its rockets and satellites,” including two in the previous week, when a Titan IV placed one military satellite in the wrong orbit and when another satellite, the remote-sensing Ikonos, lost contact with the ground. The company instructed the panel to submit a report to senior Lockheed management by 1 September.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Comprehensive Space Sector Review, Former Martin Marietta President Will Chair Independent Panel,” news release, 4 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesComprehensiv.html (accessed 7 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Panel To Review Lockheed Failures: Former Company President To Head Probe of Aerospace Foul-Ups,” Washington Post, 5 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch,” 29 April 1999.)
NASA announced the student winners of the 1998–1999 National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). A team of 33 students at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Florida, had produced the winning design, “aimed at attracting customers who want to move from propeller-driven craft to jets without needing a significant increase in pilot skill.” A 13-member team from Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pennsylvania, won second place for their “Baracuda,” an acronym for Boldly Advanced and Refined Aircraft Concept Under Development for AGATE, a national, general aviation revitalization program. The team’s “conventional-layout, modern- composite airplane featuring advanced aerodynamics, systems, and avionics” was a four-place, single-engine, jet-powered aircraft. A three-university team⎯the University of Virginia, Old Dominion University in Hampton, Virginia, and Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York⎯won third place for a “highly innovative design known as the ‘Yeah Man’,” a craft with two tail booms, each with vertical tails. The aircraft, which NASA scientists had tested in the Full Scale Wind Tunnel at Langley Research Center, showed good aerodynamic characteristics.(NASA, “NASA and FAA Pick Student Aircraft-Design Contest Winners,” news release 99-87, 2 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-087.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. “Pete” Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence’s Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failures⎯an explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999⎯had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers “at least [US]$3 billion.” Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake “got through,” despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his company’s workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, “Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedman’s team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedman’s international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the “Hubble constant,” used in mathematical equations to “gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other.” Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The team’s findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedman’s team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman team’s conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the team’s methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that “what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.”(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe,” news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, “Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years,” Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts captured the HST using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Discovery had to alter its approach to the space telescope, because the telescope’s failed gyroscopes had “left the telescope a little shaky,” but Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and his crew had prepared for such a scenario. A fully operational HST would have had its aft pointed at the center of Earth; Brown would have carried out a straightforward approach, rising up from below until the robotic arm simply locked on. Without its gyroscopes functioning, the HST slowly rotated at one revolution per hour. Therefore, controllers activated backup gyroscopes to eliminate the rotation as much as possible, permitting Brown to fly around the HST and properly position the Shuttle’s robotic arm. As both spacecraft traveled around the Earth at 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour with Brown at the controls, Discovery moved closer to the HST until French astronaut Jean-François Clervoy had removed the 43-foot (13-meter), 25,000-pound (11,300-kilogram) telescope from orbit and anchored it in the Shuttle cargo bay.(Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Capture Hubble Telescope for Repairs,” Washington Times, 22 December 1999; William Harwood, “Discovery Catches Up with Hubble for a Service Call in Space,” Washington Post, 22 December 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
The People’s Republic of China announced it had launched into orbit its first piloted spacecraft, a non-reusable capsule named Shenzhou, which carried a mannequin for test purposes but was capable of carrying a crew of four. Xinhua news agency reported that the capsule, launched from Jiuquan satellite launch center aboard the new model Long March 2F, had spent 21 hours in space, orbiting Earth 14 times. China had built a new land- and sea-based, space-monitoring-and- control network for the launch. China heralded the launch as a breakthrough in the Chinese government’s effort to “join the United States and Russia in the elite club of manned space flight.” The Chinese had abandoned the pursuit of human spaceflight in the late 1960s, because Premier Zhou Enlai thought it was too costly, but in 1992, President Jiang Zemin had decided to renew Chinese efforts, with the goal of putting a human in space by the end of the century. The head of China’s Manned Spaceflight Program told Xinhua news agency that the successful test flight of the Shenzhou capsule demonstrated that the Chinese spacecraft and the new Long March rocket performed superbly. During the mission, the Chinese had conducted experiments in remote sensing, environmental monitoring, space materials, astronomy, and physics. Shenzhou had landed in Inner Mongolia using a parachute.(Michael Laris, “Chinese Test Craft for Manned Orbits: Space Launch Boosts National Pride,” Washington Post, 22 November 1999; Washington Times, “Chinese Successfully Launch First Spacecraft,” 22 November 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 553, 1 December 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx553.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Following a series of recent launch failures, Boeing Company announced the convening of an independent panel of experts to examine its rocket programs, specifically Boeing’s Delta, Sea Launch, and Inertial Upper Stage programs. To head the panel, Boeing had selected Sheila E. Widnall, former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The panel was tasked with examining organizational roles and responsibilities within Boeing; recent launch failure investigation findings; processes used for government, civil, and commercial launches; acceptance processes for major subsystems and complex assemblies from suppliers; and manufacturing, assembly, transportation, and storage activities of Boeing launch programs.(Associated Press, “Boeing Forms Independent Panel To Review Space Failures,” 9 June 1999.)
NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor successfully completed the aerobraking phase of its mission, raising its orbit completely out of the Martian atmosphere and preparing the craft to begin its primary mapping mission. Glenn E. Cunningham, Deputy Director of the Mars Exploration Program at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), described the Mars spacecraft’s “pioneering operation” of aerobraking as a long and arduous task, which had become a valuable learning experience for all involved—engineers and scientists alike. The technique required the spacecraft to use frictional drag “as it skim[med] through the planet’s thin atmosphere,” altering the shape of the craft’s orbit and providing an innovative method to change the orbit using less on-board fuel. NASA had first tested aerobraking in 1994, during the final days of the Magellan mission to Venus. A structural problem with Mars Global Surveyor’s solar panel had delayed the final burn of aerobraking by approximately one year, so that the flight team could ensure that the process would not overstress the weakened panel. The extended aerobraking phase had enabled Global Surveyor to acquire bonus science data, yielding “some spectacular new findings about Mars,” such as a “profile of the planet’s northern polar cap and information about the unique nature of its remnant magnetic fields.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-06, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
