An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
NASA launched the most advanced communications satellite it had ever developed, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-H (TDRS-H) created to provide communication between the Space Shuttles, ISS, HST, and NASA control centers. Intended to replace a communications satellite that had been in place since 1983 and had surpassed its mission-designed lifetime, the new TDRS-H was the first of three communications satellites planned to link NASA’s space-bound vehicles. NASA had designated nearly US$500 million for the design, building, and launch of the three new satellites. The TDRS-H launched aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIA rocket, separating from it after about 30 minutes of flight. Once the satellite reached 171° longitude, it became operational.(Lockheed Martin Inc., “International Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Provide Mission Success for NASA Satellite Launch,” news release, 30 June 2000; NASA, “Advanced Communications Satellite Ready To Serve New Millennium Space Projects,” news release 00-98, 21 June 2000.)
NASA celebrated the 20th anniversary of its Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP), created to encourage promising high school students, especially minorities, to pursue careers in math, science, and engineering. During the first 20 years of the program, nearly 3,000 students participated, and 3,300 NASA employees served as SHARP mentors. Most SHARP student participants had served as interns at one of NASA’s research centers during the summer months. NASA had begun the program and had continued to fund it as part of its educational mission.(NASA, “NASA’s SHARP Program Celebrates 20 Years of Excellence,” news release 00-96, 19 June 2000.)
NASA awarded its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year awards. Inventors Anne K. St. Clair, Terry L. St. Clair, and William P. Winfree, working as a research team at NASA’s Langley Research Center, won the award for inventing a material that they had named Colorless and Low Dielectric Polyimide Thin Film. Commercial manufacturers could apply the thermoplastic material to many types of surfaces to protect against ultraviolet radiation and high temperatures. The researchers also suggested adding the material to liquids, such as paints and cosmetics, to provide ultraviolet protection. Douglas B. Leviton received the Government Inventor of the Year award for his Ultra-High Sensitivity, Incremental, and Absolute Optical Position Encoder. The encoder allowed scientists to calibrate space-bound instruments more accurately than they had done previously. Both awards recognized inventions completed during 1999. NASA honored the recipients at a ceremony, presenting them with plaques and cash awards.(NASA, “NASA Selected Its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year,” news release 00-53, 5 April 2000.)
NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns,” 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, “New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmosphere’s Ozone,” New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
A team of three high school students from the North Carolina School for Science and Mathematics in Durham won first place in the Siemens-Westinghouse Science and Technology Competition. The team won for discovering the first evidence of a neutron star in the nearby supernova remnant IC443, using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the National Science Foundation’s Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory. The students had located a point-like source of x-rays embedded in a supernova and had determined that the central object was most likely a pulsar, a young and rapidly rotating neutron star. Bryan M. Gaensler, a pulsar expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had reviewed the team’s paper, remarked that the students had produced “a really solid scientific finding.”(NASA, “Students Using NASA and NSF Data Make Stellar Discovery; Win Science Team Competition,” news release 00-195, 11 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-195.txt (accessed 7 April 2008). 1067 Andrew Kramer for Associated Press, “Russian Company To Build Spacecraft To Carry Customers,” 13 December 2000.)
NASA controllers began sending signals to the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to perform a series of maneuvers that would ultimately end in the satellite crashing into the Pacific Ocean. The endgame commands marked the conclusion of a successful nine-year mission, which had recorded data on more than 2,500 gamma-ray bursts. The US$670 million satellite, launched on 5 April 1991 aboard Mission STS-37, had provided researchers with never-before-seen images of explosions throughout the universe. “It will be like losing a member of the family,” remarked one NASA scientist who had worked on the program since 1979. NASA officials had decided to end the satellite’s space tenure because of the possibility that the aging satellite might become unresponsive and plummet out of control to Earth. By initiating the satellite’s demise, NASA could control the landing area of the 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) spacecraft. Some critics charged NASA with being too conservative, because it had based its decision on the 1-in- 1,000 odds that an uncontrolled descent of the satellite to Earth would result in injuries.(James Orberg, “Plan To Scrap Satellite Sacrifices Science,” USA Today, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA To Destroy Compton Satellite After Nine Years,” 28 May 2000.)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) selected Space Systems and Applications Inc. of Lanham, Maryland, to provide engineering, science, and technology support for NASA’s Space and Earth Science Directorates. The value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract was US$204.5 million over a period of five years. Under the contract, NASA required Space Systems and Applications to provide research and information technology services including scientific data analysis, modeling and simulation of physical processes, development of flight-project data systems and large-scale data management, archival and delivery systems, and systems analysis and programming. These services would support a broad range of scientific disciplines⎯astronomy and astrophysics, climatology and atmospheric science, geodynamics, land processes, oceanography, planetary studies, solar and space plasma physics, and solid earth geographics.(NASA, “Contract for Goddard Space Center Support Awarded,” news release C00-j, 6 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-j.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Engineers completed a weeklong series of tests on the U.S.-built Destiny laboratory, planned to launch to the ISS in 2001, ensuring that the module had no leaks and would provide a safe, vacuum-sealed environment in which the ISS astronauts could conduct research. NASA and the Boeing Company had worked together to test the 32,000-pound (14,500-kilogram) research laboratory. Placing Destiny in a pressurized chamber, engineers had monitored gas levels inside the module over the course of the week. Tip Talone, Director of the ISS Payload Process at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), characterized the results as “a large step in meeting the lab’s ‘Destiny’,” stating that the laboratory had “exceeded expectations.”(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space State Laboratory Exceeds Expectations in Vacuum Chamber Test,” 7 July 2000.)
The 20 July 2000 edition of Astrophysical Journal Letters published research of Gibor Basri chronicling the first sighting of a flare from a failed star, or brown dwarf. Using the Chandra X- ray Observatory, a team of scientists from the University of California at Berkeley had spotted the brown dwarf and its bright x-ray flare. Scientists believed that examining the x-ray flare would help them better understand dying stars and the explosive activity and magnetic fields of low-mass stars. Early analyses indicated that the brown dwarf’s x-ray flare was approximately 1 billion times more powerful than the x-ray flares emitted from the planet Jupiter. Scientists reacted to news of the discovery with excitement and surprise. Robert E. Rutledge of California Institute of Technology stated that he and his colleagues were “shocked,” clarifying: “we did not expect to see flaring from such a lightweight object. This is really the mouse that roared.” The task of spotting an x-ray flare had been difficult, because the brown dwarf emitted the flares only periodically. However, the intermittent flares made the successful capture of an image all the more significant. The observation of the brown dwarf’s occasional release of x-ray flares confirmed the theory that brown dwarfs only release energy when they heat to temperatures above 4,500°F (2,500°C).(Gibor Basri et al., “An Effective Temperature Scale for Late M and L Dwarfs, from Resonance Absorption Lines of Cs I and Rb I,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 538, no. 1 (20 July 2000): 363−385; NASA, “Chandra Captures Flare from Brown Dwarf,” news release 00-103, 11 July 2000.)
Jason Allen Diekman of Mission Viejo, California, pled guilty to federal charges of computer crimes after negotiating a deal with prosecutors. Prosecutors had charged Diekman in September with illegal hacking and with using stolen credit card numbers to purchase US$6,000 worth of computer equipment and other items. He had confessed to investigators that he had hacked into “hundreds, maybe thousands” of computers over two years, including systems at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, Cornell University, the University of California at San Diego, and California State University at Fullerton. Diekman’s most serious confessed invasions had occurred at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where he had gained root-level access to two computer systems, and at Stanford University, where he had gained control over 24 systems, two of them owned by NASA and containing flight-control software for NASA’s satellites. The U.S. District Judge set sentencing for 5 February 2001.(David Rosenzweig, “Hacker Pleads Guilty to Invading JPL, Stanford Computers Crime: Mission Viego Man, 20, Accepts Federal Plea Bargain. He Had Gained Control of NASA Computers at Both Sites,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 2000.)
Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mir’s days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russia’s commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today,” 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross reported that the Boeing Company would have to forfeit most of its profit from the ISS contract because of its nearly US$1 billion in cost overruns. NASA’s incentive-laden contract with Boeing allowed for significant bonuses for meeting timeline and cost limits. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had ordered an audit of the NASA-Boeing contract in 1999, because projected cost overages had continued to rise. Nonetheless, as Boeing neared completion of the construction of its portion of the ISS, both NASA and the aerospace giant were optimistic that cost overruns had stabilized, and that the space station hardware would perform well in space.(Tony Capaccio, “Boeing Overruns on Space Station Near $1Billion,” Los Angeles Times, 23 February 2000.)
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARC’s chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASA’s astrobiology program and to establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffen’s two loves, and that “the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.”(NASA, “NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies,” news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, “Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official,” 27 November 2000.)
00-114, 20 July 2000; NASA, “First Opportunity Tonight for Zvezda To Dock with International Space Station,” news release N00-36, 25 July 2000. satellite because it was able to meet challenging demands for bandwidth, power, and in-orbit flexibility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Build First Interactive Broadband Multimedia Spacecraft for New Skies Satellites,” news release, 4 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedContractBuildF.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
NASA released to the Internet a database of 1.9 million celestial images, the largest collection of images of stars and other celestial bodies ever made freely available for public use. The rapid improvement of technology had made possible the release, which brought to home computers information that could have filled 6,000 CD-ROMs. The Two-Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), which used two 51-inch (130-centimeter) telescopes to survey the sky, had collected the images. The University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had collaborated on 2MASS, creating a database of great value to scholars and the public alike.(NASA, “Twin-Telescope Sky Survey ‘Gives You the Stars’,” news release 00-108, 14 July 2000.)
NASA announced that a team of scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to solve one of astronomy’s fundamental problems⎯determining the distance from Earth to a cosmic object. Peter Predehl, the lead researcher on the project, had found that by scattering x-rays between Earth and a given object, the dust grains and scattered materials between the two points could serve as measuring posts to determine the distance covered by the x-ray. Because of the Chandra Observatory’s superior resolution and strength, particles that scientists could not otherwise have observed would serve as points of context. Researchers were confident that they could use the new approach to help determine the size of nearby galaxies. Furthermore, the newly devised means of measuring the distance between objects and Earth had implications for understanding the universe and its age.(NASA, “Chandra Shows New Way To Measure Cosmic Distances,” news release 00-66, 25 April 2000.)
In a much-anticipated launch, the Astro-E satellite lifted off aboard an M-5 rocket from the Kagoshima Space Center on the Japanese island of Kyushu. However, soon after launch, Astro-E was lost when the rocket suffered a “control system breakdown,” propelling the satellite into a lower orbit than planned. U.S. officials monitoring the launch determined that the satellite had most likely burned up in Earth’s atmosphere. Astro-E, the product of a joint venture between the United States and Japan, carried new x-ray–sensing equipment, which scientists had hoped would further illuminate the material surrounding black holes. Scientists had designed the new equipment to sense minute changes in the heat of single protons. The specialists overseeing the launch and mission had hoped that Astro-E would orbit and gather data for five years. The satellite had cost more than US$100 million to develop.(NASA, “Japanese-U.S. Satellite Ushers in Golden Era of X-ray Astronomy,” news release 00-18, 2 February 2000; Associated Press, “Japan Suffers Another Setback When Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” 10 February 2000; Justin Ray, “Astro-E Believed Lost Following Botched Launch,” Space Flight Now, 10 February 2000.)
NASA announced that its Chandra X-ray Observatory had revealed a “luminous spike of x-rays,” known as a hot spot, located approximately 800,000 light-years away from its black-hole source. Scientists commented that the images captured x-ray behavior that astronomers had not predicted. Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland explained, “the brightness and the spectrum of the x-rays are very different from what theory projects.” A possible explanation offered for the brilliant hot spot of x-rays was that a series of shock waves had catapulted across the galaxy electrons with energies as high as 50 thousand billion times the energy of light.(NASA, “Spectacular X-ray Jet Points Toward Cosmic Energy Booster,” news release 00-89, 6 June 2000.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center selected Swales and Associates Inc. to provide research and development, engineering, and support services, under a contract valued at up to US$240 million over five years. Specific work areas covered under the contract included full-spectrum aerodynamics, gas dynamics, fluid dynamics, aerothermodynamics, acoustics and aeroacoustics, metallic and nonmetallic structures and materials, and spaceborne and airborne systems.(NASA, “NASA Awards Support Services Contract to Maryland Firm,” news release C00-o, 24 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-o.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
The “Love Bug” computer virus infected the computer system of NASA, along with those of the Pentagon, the CIA, Microsoft Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and other major business and government offices. Considered one of the most damaging and costly computer viruses in history, “Love Bug” spread primarily through e-mail messages, corrupting files on millions of computers. Four of NASA’s 10 space centers suffered from the attack, causing both Johnson Space Center (JSC) and Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to shut down e-mail and other communication between computers.(Los Angeles Times, “Fast Moving Virus Hits Computers Worldwide,” 5 May 2000.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Sun’s atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets,” news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)
During routine testing in preparation for a July 2000 launch, excessive vibration damaged NASA’s High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Images (HESSI) spacecraft. The vibration test device was accidentally set at a level 10 times higher than appropriate, causing structural damage and cracks in two of the satellite’s four solar arrays. Officials estimated that the damage would delay the planned launch by at least six months. NASA had designated about US$75 million for the project. The faulty test, occurring at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, revealed the high degree of precision required of engineers when creating and testing a space-bound craft. Although the satellite had vibrated at the incorrect setting for only about 200 milliseconds, it still sustained damage. However, the project engineers were optimistic that the mission would resume eventually.(Associated Press, “NASA Engineers Damage Satellite During Shake Test,” 24 March 2000; NASA, “HESSI Sustains Damage During Vibration Testing,” news release 00-45, 24 March 2000.)
The Sea Launch Company suffered a setback in its bid to become a major participant in the satellite launch industry, when one of its Russian-Ukrainian Zenit 3SL rockets carrying a British communications satellite crashed into the Pacific Ocean. The launch was only the third undertaken by the international company, which had planned to use a converted ocean oil rig known as Odyssey as its permanent launchpad. The Sea Launch Company comprised the Boeing Company, together with companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway. The company had designed its innovative Sea Launch System to use Earth’s rotation and the faster movement of Earth’s surface at the equator to make it easier to launch rockets with heavy payloads. The failed satellite had cost London-based ICO Global Communications more than US$100 million to develop.(Associated Press, “Sea Launch Satellite Falls into Ocean; Boeing-Led Venture Out $100 million,” 13 March 2000.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASA’s Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument,” news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
NASA declared an end to its attempts to contact Mars Polar Lander, which had descended to the Red Planet’s surface on 3 December 1999. The planned 90-day mission had derailed when mission controllers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) were unable to communicate with the probe after it landed. Investigators had methodically tried different commands to reach Lander. Meanwhile, scientists and amateur space enthusiasts alike had offered a wide range of hypotheses concerning the cause of Lander’s silence, speculating that Lander had exploded before actually reaching Mars’s surface or that it had simply sunk in the Martian dust. After exhausting all means of contacting the probe, NASA had declared the US$165 million mission concluded, indicating that future missions would attempt to make up for the loss of Polar Lander. Project Manager Richard A. Cook expressed his sense of closure about the decision to stop investigating the matter: “we feel somewhat complete in the sense that we did go through the things we thought were reasonable . . . we gave it a good shot.”(Usha Lee McFarling, “NASA Gives Up Hope of Finding Mars Probe,” Los Angeles Times, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “JPL To End Search Today for Mars Polar Lander,” 17 January 2000; USA Today, “NASA Quits Trying To Contact Missing Mars Polar Lander,” USA Today, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “Report: Mars Lander May Have Touched Down in Steep Canyon,” 6 January 2000.)
More than 10,000 white-collar workers walked off the job at the Boeing Company, in protest over failed contract negotiations. Most of the strikers came from the aerospace giant’s work site in Seattle, Washington.
NASA announced that follow-up studies had determined that the distant mass known as TMR- 1C, discovered in 1997, was probably not a protoplanet⎯a young, still-forming precursor of one of the giant planets. In 1998 astronomer Susan Terebey of the Extrasolar Research Corporation had published findings suggesting that the body was a protoplanet several times larger than Jupiter. Terebey’s research had received widespread attention. However, although NASA had released the images of TMR-1C captured by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had urged scientists to obtain further verification before identifying the body as a protoplanet. After observing the body over several months, astronomers had concluded that TMR-1C was a bright star, rather than a planet. Reflective dust had likely increased the brightness of the star, located approximately 135 billion miles (217 billion kilometers) from Earth, making it appear to be a planet. After her initial high-profile announcement, Terebey had continued to study the star using the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii and had amended her own hypothesis, reporting, “the new data do not lend weight to the protoplanet interpretation and the results remain consistent with the explanation that TMR-1C may be a background star.” Most newspapers gave as much coverage to the news of the changing assessment as they had given to the original discovery.(James Glanz, “Scientists Retract Claim of Planet Discovery,” New York Times, 7 April 2000; Associated Press, “Presumed Protoplanet May Be a Background Star,” 7 April 2000; NASA, “Suspected Protoplanet May Really Be a Distant Star,” news release 00-58, 6 April 2000.)
NASA announced the selection of Sverdrup Technology Inc. to fulfill a contract providing engineering, science, and technical services at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The two- year contract, with three one-year priced options valued at US$300 million over five years, would go into effect on 15 October.(NASA, “Tennessee Technology Firm Selected for $300 Million Contract,” news release c00-n, 6 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-n.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
After completing four months of on-orbit checkout and verification, Terra, the newest in NASA’s series of Earth Observing System Satellites, became functional. NASA had developed and launched Terra to monitor Earth’s atmosphere on a daily basis. Researchers hoped that gathering frequent data would allow a more comprehensive assessment of Earth’s climate change. According to Yoram J. Kaufman, Project Scientist for Terra at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), “Terra is measuring and documenting the Earth’s vital signs, many of them for the first time.” In the midst of public and scholarly discussions of global warming and climate change, the new research satellite was a step toward understanding the causes of the changes. “The data will help us understand our planet, aid in our distinguishing between natural and human-induced changes, and show us how the Earth’s climate affects the quality of our lives,” Kaufman clarified. The satellite’s first transmitted images thrilled scientists. The satellite surveyed North America, creating images in many different layers, to reveal how different levels of population and types of vegetation affected the climate. NASA officials planned to make the images obtained by Terra available to business, scientists, and the public.(NASA, “Terra Spacecraft Open for Business,” news release 00-62, 19 April 2000; NASA, “New Views of Earth from Terra Satellite Wednesday,” news release N00-16, 18 April 2000.)
NASA announced that new technology recently tested at Ames Research Center (ARC) had converted sounds emanating from landing-gear wind noise into color images on computer screens, “enabling engineers to pinpoint loud and preventable aircraft flight noise more easily than in the past.” The imposition of nighttime curfews on noisy takeoffs and landings had prompted aircraft manufacturers to develop quieter planes. Paul T. Soderman, leader of the ARC aeroacoustics group, explained that the ability to visualize the cause of wind noise coming from landing gear enables engineers to analyze the problem so that they can find ways to reduce significantly noise. The engineers had created the sound images using a computer linked to a quarter-scale landing-gear model and an array of 70 microphones inside the wall of a wind tunnel. The researchers had then removed various combinations of landing-gear parts in the wind tunnel, resulting in significant noise reduction.
In an article in the journal Science, a team of researchers led by Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reported that they had found compelling evidence that Mars once had a wet climate. According to Zuber, “Evidence is building of more water on the surface of Mars at one time.” The researchers had used the laser measurements taken by Mars Global Surveyor to reach their conclusions. Although Zuber indicated that scientists did not yet have enough evidence to determine whether Mars once had a surface ocean, the study did find large, buried channels beneath the planet’s crust, suggesting that an enormous flow of water once deluged the landscape. The researchers had also found further evidence of two distinct “crustal provinces” on Mars, similar to those on Earth. The team estimated that Mars’s crust was 50 miles (80 kilometers) thick beneath the planet’s southern highlands, but only 22 miles (35 kilometers) thick beneath the northernmost areas of the planet. By using Surveyor’s data to analyze thoroughly the topography of the planet, the research team had also drawn the conclusion that Mars had once been home to more water than ice. The variety of landmasses suggested that, for a period, the planet’s core had released heat, turning ice trapped beneath Mars’s surface into water. As one newspaper described the formative events estimated to have taken place approximately 4 billion years ago, “It steamed and streamed.”(Marie T. Zuber et al., “Internal Structure and Early Thermal Evolution of Mars from Mars Global Surveyor Topography and Gravity,” Science 287, no. 5459 (10 March 2000): 1788−1893; NASA, “View Inside Mars Reveals Rapid Cooling and Buried Channels,” news release 00-36, 9 March 2000; Dan Vergano, “Northern Mars Once Was Drenched,” USA Today, 13 March 2000.)
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
NASA awarded Lockheed Martin Space Systems a US$1.15 billion six-year contract to produce 35 additional super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle Program, the sixth production of tanks and the first composed entirely of super-lightweight tanks. The contract covered the manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of the tanks, as well as the operations and maintenance of NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans and activities at MSFC and KSC. Jerry W. Smelser, Manager of MSFC’s External Tank Project Office, described the contract as designed to “assure the delivery of a quality product and to reward the contractor and employees on the basis of performance.”(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.15 Billion Contract for Shuttle External Tanks,” news release C00-p, 30 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-p.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASA’s Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion area⎯surpassing the ozone hole’s record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an “extremely intense Antarctic vortex”⎯an upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continent⎯might partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, “Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica,” news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Raymond Toricelli of New Rochelle, New York, pled guilty to breaking into two NASA computers in 1998, to steal user names and passwords to gain access to other systems. The two computers, which helped launch robotic spacecraft, were at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California. Toricelli had also set up a chat room to direct people to a pornography site, which paid him 18 cents per referral; broken into a San Jose University computer system to gain access to other networks; and stolen more than 15 credit card numbers online. He stated that he had never intended to damage the computers he illegally entered. Prosecutors planned to seek a prison term of 8 to 14 months at Toricelli’s sentencing on 7 March 2001. The maximum penalty for his crime was 27 years in prison and a US$950,000 fine.
News reached the United States that space debris had crashed to the ground near Johannesburg, South Africa, prompting NASA to respond. Several metal balls had fallen from the sky, leaving 8-inch (20-centimeter) dents in the ground. NASA scientists clarified that the debris probably came from a Delta rocket launched in 1996. Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris Nicholas L. Johnson explained that manufactured objects sent into space plummet back to Earth nearly every day, landing mostly in the ocean. Johnson also stated that NASA would compensate anyone hurt by the falling debris, remarking that no such injuries had occurred in more than 40 years.(Associated Press, “Hail of Metal Balls Puzzles Farmers, Until NASA Steps In,” 3 May 2000.)
NASA’s Glenn Research Center (GRC) in Cleveland, Ohio, opened a new laboratory dedicated to the study of ballistics. The laboratory, housed in the complex’s Building 49, featured a 40-foot (12-meter) gas gun that could shoot projectiles at speeds of up to 1,500 feet (457.2 meters) per second. A camera with the ability to capture 2.5 million images per second allowed researchers to observe the behavior of the projectiles and chart the results of their impact on aviation equipment. “The whole idea,” Team Leader Dale A. Hopkins explained, “is to watch the impact and see how materials struck by the projectiles behave . . . not just whether they survive, but how they deform and fail.” GRC had designed the new facility to test materials used for aircraft engine housings and for flywheel containment. Researchers hoped that the new tools would help engineer aircraft that could withstand the pressures of high-speed and high-altitude flight better than those already available could. GRC had been testing ballistic materials since 1980.(NASA, “New Lab Ready To Test Sudden Impact,” news release 00-34, 3 March 2000.)
Lockheed Martin announced that for the third time in four years, the Air Traffic Control Association had awarded the company its Industry Award, recognizing Lockheed’s outstanding achievement in and contribution to the science of air traffic control. The award specifically recognized Lockheed Martin Air Traffic Management for its worldwide support of air traffic– control systems. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the German Civil Aviation Authority, and the United Kingdom’s National Air Traffic Services Ltd. Had all nominated the company for the award.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Receives Prestigious Air Traffic Control Association Award,” news release, 27 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinReceivesPrestigious Ai.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA released time-lapse movies created from images produced by the Hubble Space Telescope, showing “spectacular outbursts from young stars,” changing “dramatically over a period of just weeks or months.” NASA had combined individual images of young star systems XZ Tauri and HH 30 in the Taurus-Auriga molecular cloud, captured over several years, to create the time-lapse movies. Documenting the activity of the early stages of stars’ lives, the movies demonstrated that images “taken of the universe today won’t necessarily look the same as those snapped a few months from now.”(NASA, “Hubble Movies Show the Changing Faces of Young Stars,” news release N00-044, 21 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/2000/n00-044.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASA’s special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Voss’s mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the class’s trip to NASA to watch Endeavour’s launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”(Billy Cox, “Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center awarded contracts valued at US$1.8 million to two companies for operating airport-surface surveillance systems intended to prevent runway accidents, a top safety priority of the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board. The contracts required Sensis Corporation of Dewitt, New York, and Rannoch Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia, to operate the Airport Traffic Identification System (ATIDS) and the Dynamic Runway Occupancy Measurement Systems (DROMS) at Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne International Airport, for six months, establishing and validating the systems in a “live” environment. The contracts also required Sensis to deploy and evaluate DROMS at Memphis International Airport and to interface the system with the existing Sensis-operated ATIDS at that airport.(NASA, “Contracts Awarded for Airport Surface Surveillance Systems,” news release C00-m, 28 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-m.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had captured an image of a lone neutron star traveling close to Earth, one of several hundred million neutron stars that scientists believed to exist in the Milky Way. Hubble scientists believed that, at 200 light-years away, this neutron star was the nearest to Earth. No companion star affected its appearance, allowing astronomers to more easily test and confirm stellar theories against its physical properties, such as size, brightness, and true age. Frederick M. Walter of State University of New York at Stony Brook remarked that, as the closest and brightest of the few known isolated neutron stars, this star would be “the easiest to study and is an excellent test bed for nuclear astrophysical theories.”(NASA, “Hubble Sees Lone Neutron Star Streaking Across Galaxy,” news release 00-176, 9 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-176.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Astronomers using images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered what they believed to be the first examples of “isolated stellar-mass black holes adrift among the stars of our galaxy.” They announced their discovery at a convention of the American Astronomical Society. The findings supported a long-standing theory that black holes could form with the collapse of just one massive star, although an opposing theory had concluded that multiple stars must collapse in tandem. Moreover, the researchers’ contribution was the latest in a string of recent findings illuminating the relatively commonplace nature of black holes.(NASA, “Lone Black Holes Discovered Adrift in the Galaxy,” news release 00-4, 13 January 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, “20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers,” 3 December 2000.)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundation⎯now a part of Illinois Institute of Technology⎯had directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: “There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being ‘military high ground’.” The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, “Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project,” Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 13−14; Associated Press, “Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon,” 18 May 2000.)
NASA announced that SPX Services Solutions had obtained a license to use NASA-patented technology to monitor more carefully levels of exhaust produced by the United States’ millions of motor vehicles. NASA had developed its atmospheric, remote-sensing technology to track greenhouse gases and to monitor Earth’s ozone layer. Combining government and private forces, researchers intended to focus on the pollution output of motor vehicles, particularly that of individual automobiles. SPX Services planned to design a device that would enable a driver to test his or her own vehicle to determine its compliance with U.S. Clean Air Act standards, rather than requiring the driver to take it to an auto mechanic for an emissions test. The goal of self- monitoring suited the increasingly popular idea of encouraging individuals to accept personal responsibility for protecting Earth from noxious pollutants.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology To Monitor Motor Vehicle Pollution,” news release 18 July 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
NASA announced its agreement with Lockheed Martin on a plan for the X-33 space plane program. The agreed plan included aluminum fuel tanks for hydrogen fuel, a revised payment schedule, and a target launch date in 2003, contingent on Lockheed Martin’s winning additional funding under the Space Launch Initiative for completing the project. NASA had funded the project through March 2001. The restructured plan focused on “providing milestone payments” to Lockheed Martin’s team, following the completion of tests and the delivery of hardware and software systems this year. The plan also gave greater emphasis to mission safety, quality, and mission success. Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, pointed out that, despite setbacks, the program’s successes had included the creation of technology applicable to the space program and to the commercial aircraft industry, such as a revolutionary new rocket engine; a robust, reusable, metallic thermal-protection system; and software and sensors that automatically determine and predict failures and errors before they affect the flight.(NASA, “NASA, Lockheed Martin Agree on X-33 Plan,” news release 00-157, 29 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-157.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented awards to three minority contractors at NASA’s annual Minority Business and Advocates Awards Ceremony. RS Information Services (RSIS), based in McLean, Virginia, won Minority Contractor of the Year; Rigging and Welding Specialists Inc., a Native American–owned business, won Minority Subcontractor of the Year; and Pace and Waite Inc. won Women-Owned Business of the Year. In addition, NASA recognized advocates for innovative approaches to using minority- and women-owned businesses, awarding NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal to Kenneth Martindale and Rodney J. Etchberger of Johnson Space Center and to Shantaram S. Pai of Glenn Research Center. Furthermore, NASA recognized five individuals for outstanding achievements and three NASA field centers for meeting or exceeding all socioeconomic business goals for FY 1999.(NASA, “NASA To Honor Minority Businesses,” news release 00-148, 25 September 2000, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-148.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Engineers at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) successfully tested a prototype for the “flying lifeboat” that would transport astronauts to and from the ISS. DFRC officials launched a robotic X-38 from under the wing of a B-52 flying at 39,000 feet (12,000 meters). It free fell for more than 40 seconds before deploying a 5,500-square-foot (511-square-meter) parachute, which provided a soft landing for the spacecraft. The test was a significant step in evaluating the technology planned for the crew return vehicle, a low-cost ISS initiative.(Associated Press, “Space Station ‘Lifeboat’ Prototype Successfully Tested,” 30 March 2000.)
NASA announced that scientists using the Chandra X-ray Observatory had confirmed the existence of “middleweight” black holes. Several groups of scientists used Chandra to focus on a mid-mass black hole located 600 light-years from the center of galaxy M82. Previous x-ray data from the German-U.S. ROSAT (Röntgensatellite) and the Japan-U.S. ASCA (Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics) had suggested the existence of a mid-mass black hole in M82. Scientists compared Chandra’s new high-resolution images with optical radio and infrared maps to determine that a single, bright source was emitting most of the x-rays. The scientists continued to observe M82 over an eight-month period, noting that the intensity of the x-rays rose and fell every 600 seconds. Philip Kaaret of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics explained that this behavior was similar to black holes swallowing gas from a nearby star or cloud. Martin Ward of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom remarked that the findings opened “a whole new field of research.”(NASA, “Chandra Clinches Case for Unexpected Black Hole Discovery,” news release 00-140, 12 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-140.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum for “its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built.” NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists’ knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners,” news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASA’s second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatch’s failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissom’s claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Grissom’s Capsule Back at Space Center,” 14 June 2000.)
NASA and the Boeing Company announced an agreement to use Boeing’s Delta Launch Services Inc. for a variety of NASA missions. The contract, estimated to be worth at least US$168 million, included options to extend the agreement. NASA also awarded both Boeing and Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services Inc. indefinite delivery–indefinite quantity contracts for 10 years. The agreements solidified NASA’s partnerships with the two major aerospace companies. A NASA spokesperson clarified the reasons for the extension of the relationships, saying that Boeing and Lockheed “were selected based on their ability to meet NASA’s highly critical future mission requirements and their proven track records for providing a quality product.” At the time of the agreement with Boeing, the company had flown 82 missions for NASA with a success rate of 98 percent.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Delta Rockets To Launch Next-Generation NASA Space Craft,” news release, 16 June 2000; NASA, “NASA Awards Launch Services Contracts,” news release c00-e, 16 June 2000; Seattle Post- Intelligencer (WA), “Boeing Wins $168 Million NASA Order for 3 More Delta II Launches, Options,” 19 June 2000.)
NASA released the first HST images taken after the Shuttle’s Mission STS-103, in which the crew of Discovery realigned and refurbished the telescope. The stunning clarity of the new images suggested that the mission specialists had succeeded in their sensitive work. According to Steven Beckwith, Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the work returned HST to “a condition that was better than it was even before the fourth gyroscope failed.” Astronomers had focused on targets more than 5,000 light-years away to test the upgraded telescope. During the servicing mission, astronauts had also installed a Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 and a Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, new instruments that would contribute to the already formidable strength of the HST.(NASA, “Hubble Reopens Eye on the Universe,” news release 00-16, 24 January 2000.)
Lockheed Martin Systems Integration announced that the U.S. Navy had selected the company to build seven SH-60R Multi-Mission Helicopters, under the first SH-60R low-rate initial production (LRIP) contract, moving Lockheed Martin from development and testing to the production phase of the SH-60R program. The contract required Lockheed Martin to integrate the flight avionics systems, mission avionics systems, and stores and defense systems.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded First SH-60R Avionics Production Contract,” news release, 23 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedFirstSH60R Avio.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had discovered what they believed to be the earliest known structure ever to form in the universe. The researchers had used the Hale Telescope at Palomar Observatory in California and the National Science Foundation’s Mayall Telescope in Kitt Peake, Arizona, to find an ancient quasar. By measuring the quasar’s redshift to determine how fast the quasar was moving away from the galaxy, scientists had been able to calculate the cosmic distance separating Earth and the quasar. The odds of discovering such a distant and relatively fast-moving quasar were remote, especially since scientists could monitor only a fraction of the sky at any one time. The discovery had the broader value of providing a reference point by which to assess those bodies between Earth and the quasar. Daniel Stern of NASA described the finding’s utility: “Finding a quasar at this distance is like turning on a flashlight at the edge of the universe.”(NASA, “Newfound Quasar Wins Title ‘Most Distant in the Universe’,” news release 00-30, 18 February 2000.)
In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that “in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years,” U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASA’s next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, “Red Planet Is Next Frontier,” 2 May 2000.)
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had located a “small armada of ‘mini- comets’,” the fragmented remains of the nucleus of the comet LINEAR. When it had disappeared behind the Sun on 27 July 2000, astronomers initially thought that LINEAR had disintegrated entirely. Upon losing sight of the comet’s core, ground-based observers had suggested that the nucleus had disintegrated into a “pile of dust,” and, consequently, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute had reprogrammed the HST to search for the nucleus. The exceptional resolution and sensitivity of the HST had revealed the nuclei of a half-dozen mini-comets at a level of detail never before observed in a disintegrating comet. Some astronomers had suggested that the fragments the HST revealed were the “primordial building blocks of the original nucleus.” If so, studying them could help scientists understand how the comet had originally formed.(NASA, “Hubble Discovers Missing Pieces of Comet Linear,” news release 00-122, 7 August 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-122.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Lockheed Martin and NASA entered into a consolidated space operations contract (CSOC), allowing NASA to use the services of two commercial, satellite ground-tracking stations. Under CSOC, NASA customers would have access on a per-pass basis to additional stations on Svalbard Island in Norway, owned by Kongsberg Spacetec-Lockheed Martin Space Data Services, and in Poker Flat, Alaska, owned by DataLynx. Both tracking stations had recently completed CSOC operational-readiness reviews in preparation for inclusion in Lockheed Martin’s catalog of services available to NASA programs.(“Lockheed Martin Adds Two Commercial Stations to CSOC Capability,” Aerospace Daily, 29 November 2000. 1052 NASA, “NASA Technology Allows Engineers to See Airframe Noise,” news release 00-189, 30 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-189.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
NASA’s Stardust spacecraft entered safe mode after a stream of high-energy protons emanating from a solar flare hit the craft. Stardust, on a mission to return samples of a comet, had been 130 million miles (210 million kilometers) from the Sun, traveling at about 12,000 miles (19,000 kilometers) per hour, when the solar flare erupted on 9 November. The solar wind had brought the stream of protons into contact with the craft hours later, in the middle of the night, confirming that NASA engineers and scientists monitoring the situation had reason to feel concerned.(Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft Survives Encounter with Solar Flare,” 21 November 2000. 1036 Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft.”)
NASA announced that a team of Lockheed Martin scientists using NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft to observe coronal loops⎯coils of hot, electrified gas⎯believed they had located the source of the heating mechanism that makes the Sun’s corona 300 times hotter than its visible surface. A thirty-year-old theory had assumed that the coronal loops heated evenly, but the TRACE observations had indicated that most of the heating occurs at the base of the loops, near the point from which they emerge and return to the solar surface. The team had observed 41 loops extending from 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) to more than 180,000 miles (290,000 kilometers) from the solar surface and had found that, although threads within shorter loops heat more evenly, longer threads cool noticeably as they attain height. The team had calculated the loops’ energy levels and estimated that “heating typically occurs in the first 6,000 miles of a loop’s length.” Richard Fisher, head of the Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics at NASA’s GSFC, remarked that understanding how the coronal loops function could shed light on coronal-mass ejections (CMEs). CMEs can disrupt or destroy satellite components orbiting Earth and prompt surges in electrical transmission lines, causing blackouts on Earth.(NASA, “Fountains of Fire Illuminate Solar Mystery,” news release 00-146, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-146.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Peter N. Spotts, “Scientists Begin To Unravel a Stubborn Solar Mystery,” Christian Science Monitor, 27 September 2000.)
As a part of its “Celebrate the Century” program, the U.S. Postal Service unveiled a stamp commemorating the Space Shuttle Program. The stamp with the Shuttle’s image joined 12 other stamps with images recalling significant American memories of the past century, such as video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall, personal computers, and Cabbage Patch Dolls. The Space Shuttle stamp was part of the celebration of the 1980s portion of the millennium. Kennedy Space Center Director Roy D. Bridges Jr. issued a statement thanking the Postal Service for the honor.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Joins American Icons in Commemorative Stamp Collection,” news release 00- 12, 12 January 2000.)
Chairman and founder of Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc. Andrew Beal announced his decision to cease all business operations effective immediately. The company had sought to develop low-cost, reliable, commercial space launch systems and had “made significant advances in low cost hydrogen peroxide propulsion systems.” Beal expressed confidence that, despite the company’s cost overruns and schedule delays, Beal Aerospace Technologies could have successfully developed its BA-2C rocket-launch system if it had remained in operation. Beal outlined the risk factors that had been beyond the company’s control and had led to the decision to cease operations: 1) NASA’s and the U.S. government’s commitment to the subsidization of competing launch systems; 2) federal laws mandating the company’s “potential liability for pre-existing environmental contamination at the only available Cape Canaveral launchpads”; and 3) uncertainty about receiving approval from the U.S. Department of State to launch from the company’s launch facilities in Guyana. Beal remarked that government subsidization of launch systems was the primary reason that the company had to choose, either to become a government contractor, like the Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin, or to cease operations.(Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc., “Statement from Andrew Beal Regarding Cease of Operations by Beal Aerospace,” news release, 23 October 2000.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin, Khrunichev State Research, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, launched a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Proton launch, the fourth in the year for ILS, successfully placed into orbit a United States–built GE-1A communications satellite serving customers in parts of Asia, including China, the Philippines, and India.(Jim Banke, “Proton Rocket Lifts American Satellite into Earth Orbit,” Space.com, 2 October 2000, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/launches/proton_launch_001001.html (accessed 14 April 2008).)
An independent study, commissioned by NASA in the wake of the highly public failures of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, found that cost-cutting measures had created significant risks for NASA’s Shuttle program. Although the report maintained that the overall safety of NASA’s operations remained within an acceptable range, the investigators warned that the use of contractors and the lack of oversight compromised the quality of NASA’s missions. NASA’s chief of the Office of Space Flight accepted the report’s recommendations to improve NASA’s operations, also noting, however, that NASA had already investigated and dealt with many of the weaknesses highlighted in the report. With budgetary matters always a pressing concern, NASA had made various necessary reductions in personnel, relying on companies such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin more than ever. NASA had initiated the investigation to understand more fully the impact of the changes on NASA’s highest priority⎯the safety of its astronauts.(Associated Press, “NASA Says Shuttle Cuts Have Led to Higher Risk,” 10 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Study Raises Concerns About Shuttle Safety,” 13 March 2000.)
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected iron-emission lines in the afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), marking the first time such lines had been “unambiguously detected” in association with GRBs, and the first time scientists had been able to measure their properties precisely in x-ray wavelengths. Luigi Piro, lead author of a paper published in the 3 November issue of the journal Science, explained that the discovery provided an important clue to understanding the origins of the bursts. The new data enabled scientists to rule out the theory that two neutron stars or black holes collide to cause a GRB, one of various theories about how the bursts originate. Instead, Piro suggested that the bursts were more likely the result of “something similar to a supernova explosion, but much more powerful.”(NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Captures Telling Gamma-Ray Afterglow,” news release 00-173, 3 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-173.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); L. Piro et al., “Observation of X-ray Lines from a Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB991216): Evidence of Moving Ejecta from the Progenitor,” Science 290, no. 5493 (3 November 2000): 955–958.)
NASA announced a partnership with Dreamtime Holdings Inc., a start-up company backed by Lockheed Martin to provide the International Space Station (ISS) with high-definition television and to create digital archives for NASA. The agreement was NASA’s first involving a commercial partner that would provide support for the ISS. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the partnership at NASA’s Ames Research Center, located in the high-technology hub of California’s Silicon Valley, predicting that the partnership would move NASA to the forefront of the information age and terming it “innovative government at its best.” Dreamtime planned to spend US$100 million on the project, which would give civilians access to neverbefore-seen images of the Space Shuttles and of NASA missions. The pact resulted from the Commercial Space Act of 1998, enacted to increase commercial involvement in and funding for the ISS.(NASA, “NASA, Dreamtime Partnership Propels Space Information Age to New Heights,” news release 00-87, 2 June 2000; Frank Morring Jr., “Startup To Spend $100 Million Digitizing Station, NASA Archives,” Aerospace Daily, 2 June 2000.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americom’s fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four others⎯the GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4⎯to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide “service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site,” news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA dedicated a new aerospace laboratory at Anne Beers Elementary School in Washington, DC, featuring a simulated Shuttle cockpit and Mission Control Center. NASA had named the facility, designed to encourage student interest in space exploration, for U.S. Representative Louis Stokes (D-OH), who had proposed legislation to fund the endeavor in 1998. NASA’s GRC and Goddard Space Flight Center had worked with the Orchard Glenn School of Cleveland, Ohio, and the University of the District of Columbia to construct the innovative facility.(NASA, “Aerospace Laboratory Encourages Students To Reach for the Stars with NASA Help,” news release m00-051, 15 March 2000.)
Astronomers using the telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico captured the first- ever images of the so-called Metal Dog Bone asteroid, officially named 216 Kleopatra. Scientists had categorized the asteroid as a main-belt asteroid, theorizing that the New Jersey–sized rock was the result of an ancient, violent collision. Steven Ostro of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the find “one of the most unusual asteroids we’ve seen in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Scientists made the discovery by bouncing radar signals off the asteroid and cataloging the signals’ echoes. By gathering a comprehensive collection of echoes, the research team had been able to assemble a computer model of the asteroid’s shape. The use of radar signals with a moderately powered telescope had made the long-distance discovery possible. Ostro marveled at the technology, describing the find as akin to “using a Los Angeles telescope the size of the human eye’s lens to image a car in New York.” Many of the astronomers working on the project spoke of their amazement at the size, shape, and metallic complexion of the asteroid. They also clarified that the asteroid posed no danger to Earth.(NASA, “Astronomers Catch Images of Giant Metal Dog Bone Asteroid,” news release 00-74, 4 May 2000. 921 Birmingham Post (AL), “Serious Bone Loss for Cosmonauts Not Mir Speculation,” 5 May 2000.)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASA’s exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commission’s report and Collins’s response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, “NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America,” news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
Margaret G. Kivelson and four coauthors from the University of California at Los Angeles published in the journal Science the strongest evidence to date that Jupiter’s moon Europa contains a salty, liquid ocean beneath its surface. The team had used data from the Galileo probe’s magnetometer to study Europa’s magnetic compass, finding that “the presence of a layer of electrically conducting liquid, such as saltwater” best explained the behavior of the moon’s magnetic compass. Kivelson explained that the team had inferred that the conductor must be a liquid ocean, since ice is not a good conductor of electricity. However, Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that the magnetometer data by itself was insufficient to conclude the presence of a liquid ocean. Johnson explained that scientists needed several further steps of inference, such as precise measurements of gravity and altitude, indicating the effects of tides.(NASA, “Galileo Evidence Points to Possible Water World Under Europa’s Icy Crust,” news release 00-131, 25 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-131.txt (accessed 6 May 2008); Margaret Kivelson et al., “Galileo Magnetometer Measurements: A Stronger Case for a Subsurface Ocean at Europa,” Science 289, no. 5483 (25 August 2000): 1340–1343.)
Mitsuyuki Ueda of the Aeronautics and Space Development Division of Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced that Japan had decided to freeze the development of an unpiloted space shuttle, which was four years behind schedule, because of problems in Japan’s shuttle program, as well as in its H-2 rocket program. Japan had originally conceived its planned 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18.1-tonne) shuttle in the 1980s, modeling it after the U.S. Space Shuttle, and designing it to conduct scientific experiments and to carry into space payloads of up to 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes). Technical and financial setbacks within Japan’s shuttle program contributed to the freeze. In addition, because the original plan had called for Japan to launch the space shuttle aboard a Japanese-designed H-2 rocket, a launch failure of an H-2 rocket had influenced the decision to halt Japan’s shuttle program. In the failed launch of November 1999, officials had to destroy the rocket in midair, leading an advisory panel to suggest that Japan’s planned shuttle should launch from a reusable high-speed jet plane, rather than atop a rocket.(Associated Press, “Japan Freezes Plans To Make Unmanned Space Shuttle,” 2 August 2000.)
Arizona State University and JPL, a division of California Institute of Technology, announced the creation of the Arizona State University Planetary Imaging Facility and Advanced Training Institute (PIF-ATI) for the study of Mars. Arizona State University and JPL would jointly fund the new facility, which the two institutions intended for scientists and students to use. PIF-ATI expanded on a facility originally planned in support of the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS), scheduled to fly on the 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft. PIF-ATI would offer scientists and students outside the project greater access to instruments and data, providing access for university students, for students of the fifth through twelfth grades, and for their teachers.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “New Mars Research Facility To Involve Scientists, Kids,” news release 2000-115, 20 November 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marsasu.html (accessed 17 April 2008).)
New Skies Satellites N.V. selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems (LMCSS) to build a second geosynchronous satellite to provide high-speed Internet access and other multimedia communications to a large coverage area, extending from the eastern Mediterranean and southern Africa to Australia, Japan, and Korea. New Skies selected the LMCSS A
Robert R. Gilruth, “an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo,” died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics’s Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, “his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.”(NASA, “Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies,” news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
