The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASA’s KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle program’s inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASA’s effort to absorb President George W. Bush’s proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, “Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications,” news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida,” Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
A Russian Space Agency launch failed, when an uncrewed Soyuz-U rocket exploded after the rocket’s engine automatically shut down, 29 seconds after liftoff from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The rocket was carrying a Foton-M1 spacecraft with 44 microgravity experiments that ESA, Japan, Russia, and the United States had intended for the ISS. ESA stated that it planned to rebuild the Foton-M1 spacecraft for a later launch.(ESA, “Foton,” http://www.spaceflight.esa.int/users/index.cfm?act=default.page&level=11&page=facfoton (accessed 6 January 2009); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
The U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space began hearings on legislation to reauthorize NASA programs. Subcommittee chairman Ron Wyden (D–OR) expressed concern about the agency’s financial management, particularly cost overruns for the ISS. He also urged NASA to maintain the excellence of the Shuttle program while research continued on a next-generation space vehicle. Members of the subcommittee heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who addressed them for the first time, and from William F. Readdy, Deputy Associate Administrator of the NASA Office of Space Flight. The members of the subcommittee questioned O’Keefe about his vision for NASA and his plans to reduce NASA’s budget by ending particular programs. In his prepared statement, O’Keefe discussed the status of the ISS and Space Shuttle programs.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, NASA Reauthorization, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 May 2002; Karen Masterson, “JSC Mission May Hit Detour,” Houston Chronicle, 9 May 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASA’s Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASA’s second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, “Senate Names New NASA Official,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory,” http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, “Major Component of Space Station Is Attached,” New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA engineers completed a successful demonstration of a solar-powered UAV for remote- sensing applications. Engineers with NASA’s Suborbital Airborne Sciences programs had guided the Pathfinder-Plus UAV throughout a flight lasting nearly 4 hours, during which the aircraft had captured more than 300 high-resolution digital images of a coffee plantation on the Hawaiian island of Kauai. NASA had developed the UAV for Earth science research, but project engineers described the flight demonstration as evidence that their integration of the UAV technology with decision-support systems would have additional practical applications. For example, project engineers hoped that the UAV technology might eventually enable farmers and ranchers to produce harvests more effectively and efficiently. The solar-powered UAV had a ground-controlled aerial imaging system. In fact, an undergraduate student nearly 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) away at California State University in Monterey Bay controlled one of the craft’s digital cameras during the demonstration.(NASA, “NASA Mission Demonstrates Practical Use of UAV Technology,” news release 02-200, 16 October 2002.)
The Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry released its final report on the industry’s health and future well-being. President George W. Bush had created the Commission, composed of aerospace industry executives, lawyers, and policy analysts, to analyze the U.S. aerospace industry’s stability, financial health, and relationship to national security. The Commission had concluded that the United States should establish a national aerospace policy; create a government-wide framework to implement that policy; reduce legal and regulatory barriers, to enable the industry to grow and become more internationally competitive; and increase investments in the nation’s aerospace industrial base, infrastructure, personnel, and long-term research. In addition, the Commission’s report provided numerous recommendations to the industry concerning how to meet those objectives, such as increasing and sustaining public and private investment in the aerospace industry and aerospace technologies, transforming the nation’s air transportation system, and enhancing the defense industrial base.(Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry, Final Report (Arlington, VA, November 2002); The Boeing Company, “Boeing Supports Recommendations of U.S. Aerospace Commission,” news release, 18 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021118a.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
In a meeting with reporters, newly appointed NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe emphasized that, although he wanted NASA to remain at the forefront of science and technology, he also wanted to address NASA’s financial and management problems. O’Keefe, who had received the U.S. Senate’s confirmation on 20 December 2001, said he would spend the next few months learning about NASA. Explaining that he wanted both to refocus NASA and to keep it within its budget, O’Keefe did not rule out the possibility of closing field centers and laying off employees to achieve his objectives. However, he stressed that he considered the budgetary problems of the ISS his immediate concern, and that he would first devote his attention to implementing the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation Task Force’s (IMCE’s) recommendation to scale back the ISS, at least temporarily, to reduce costs.(Warren E. Leary, “New NASA Administrator Says Money Troubles Are Solvable,” New York Times, 9 January 2002; William Harwood, “Panel Urges Space Station Reforms,” Washington Post, 3 November 2001; NASA, “People: Former NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe,” http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/AN_Feature_Administrator.html (accessed 31 July 2008).)
In an article published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters, scientists using data from NASA’s high-altitude research balloon reported a discovery that, potentially, could improve the research methodology for studying gases that contribute to ozone-layer depletion. Although scientists already knew that reactive hydrogen gases destroy stratospheric ozone and were able to detect hydrogen peroxide from space, they had problems with computer models used to analyze hydrogen-peroxide concentration in the atmosphere. However, in the reported study, researchers funded by NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had compared a new predicted rate of hydrogenperoxide formation with the levels of the gas measured by two instruments on board NASA’s high-altitude research balloons. The new data had revealed a high degree of agreement between the actual and the predicted measurements. The researchers noted that, although their newly discovered rate of hydrogen-peroxide formation had no appreciable impact on rates of stratospheric ozone loss, they expected the findings would help to analyze the deleterious effects on Earth’s ozone of other, less easily measured, hydrogen gases.(NASA JPL, “NASA Study Leads to Better Understanding of Ozone Depletion,” news release, 9 May 2002; L. E. Christensen et al., “Kinetics of HO2 + HO2 → H2O2: Implications for Stratospheric H2O2,” Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 9 (7 May 2002): 1299.)
The Russian Space Agency notified NASA that it had abandoned its plan to transport singer Lance Bass of the popular music group ’N Sync to the ISS. Television producers had intended to sponsor Bass, featuring him in a television documentary about his trip to the ISS. However, the sponsors had failed to raise the estimated US$20 million needed to cover the singer’s fare. Therefore, Russian officials had decided to withdraw Bass as a member of the Soyuz crew scheduled to leave for the ISS on 28 October 2002. If the 23-year-old Bass had gone on the Soyuz mission, he would have become the youngest person ever to travel in space, as well as the third space tourist.(Marcia Dunn, “It’s Official: Russia Faxes NASA To Confirm Bass off Space Flight,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2002.)
The Space Shuttle Competitive Source Task Force released its final report on the potential for private-sector operation of the Shuttle program. NASA had commissioned the Task Force to analyze the roles of NASA and its contractors with regard to Space Shuttle operations. More specifically, the Task Force had assessed various scenarios in which NASA would focus primarily on spaceflight research and development, outsourcing to the private sector the operation of the planned replacements of the Shuttles for routine transit to low Earth orbit. The Task Force had concluded that, although NASA faced numerous challenges to competitive sourcing for the Shuttle program, it should pursue some form of this option. Moreover, the panel suggested that the most likely scenario for successful private-sector involvement in the Shuttle program would not involve private operation of the program, but rather a transfer of program assets to private entities at highly deflated prices. Another option would entail the restructuring of existing contracts, perhaps taking steps to expand the pool of program suppliers beyond the existing duopoly of Boeing and Lockheed Martin. In addition, as a first step to privatization, NASA could establish a space authority to operate the Shuttle, as well as future human transportation vehicles.(Space Shuttle Competitive Sourcing Task Force, “Alternative Trajectories: Options for Competitive Sourcing of the Space Shuttle Program” (Final Report, Science and Technology Policy Institute, Rand Corporation, Arlington, VA, December 2002), http://www.rand.org/scitech/stpi/NASA/index.html (accessed 30 December 2009).)
Analyzing observations of the dwarf galaxy NGC 1569, a group of astronomers led by Crystal L. Martin of the University of California Santa Barbara found the first evidence that such galaxies produce most of the heavy elements in the universe. Heavy elements, defined as all elements other than hydrogen and helium, are essential for planet formation and can strongly influence astronomical phenomena such as the rate of galaxy formation. Scientists had theorized that, during the early development of the universe, heavy elements emanating from dwarf galaxies played a dominant role in enriching the intergalactic gas that formed other galaxies. Data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory enabled Martin and her team to test this idea. They found that NGC 1569 emitted large quantities of heavy elements in extremely hot x-ray winds, the first direct evidence of metal-enriched winds from dwarf galaxies. The researchers noted that the findings left open the question of whether or not dwarf galaxies or other galaxies dominate the intergalactic metallic enrichment process.(NASA, “Dwarf Galaxies Give Universe a Breath of Fresh Oxygen,” news release 02-134, 23 July 2002; Crystal L. Martin, Henry A. Kobulnicky, and Timothy M. Heckman, “The Metal Content of Dwarf Starburst Winds: Results from Chandra Observations of NGC 1569,” Astrophysical Journal 574, no. 2 (1 August 2002): 663–692.)
G. Scott Hubbard replaced Henry McDonald as Director of NASA’s ARC. Hubbard, ARC’s Deputy Director of Research at the time of the appointment, had served in a number of management roles at the Center since the beginning of his career with NASA in 1987. In addition, he had helped establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute at ARC and had originated the Mars Pathfinder program. McDonald, who had served as Director of ARC from 1996 to 2002, had left the Center to become a professor of computational engineering at the University of Tennessee in Chattanooga.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 3 October 2008); NASA ARC, “G. Scott Hubbard Named NASA Ames Research Center Director,” news release 02-103AR, 19 September 2002.)
Lockheed Martin, NASA, and the state of Mississippi opened the Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center at NASA’s SSC. Officials planned for the 220,000-square-foot (20,440-square-meter) facility to commence operations by the end of 2002. Lockheed Martin announced that its new facility would include a center for production of propulsion and thermal systems for spacecraft, as well as an integrated metrology center. The company also announced that it would provide engineering and manufacturing services at the facility. Lockheed Martin officials cited the location of NASA’s Center of Excellence for propulsion testing at SSC as a critical factor in their decision to consolidate the company’s capabilities at the single facility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center Opens Doors at John C. Stennis Space Center, MS,” news release, 5 August 2002, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ LockheedMartinMississippiSpaceTechn.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Using data gathered by NASA’s Mars Odyssey spacecraft, scientists discovered direct evidence of water ice on Mars. NASA scientists were using the Odyssey to measure and map soils in Mars’s polar regions when the spacecraft’s gamma-ray spectrometer detected hydrogen, indicating the presence of substantial, subsurface water ice in the upper meter of soil in a region surrounding Mars’s south pole. Scientists had already suspected that Mars possessed large quantities of water near its surface, but the Odyssey’s new information was the first direct evidence supporting this hypothesis. Scientists also found that large areas in Mars’s low and middle latitudes contained “slightly enhanced amounts of hydrogen.” However, their report did not indicate whether the hydrogen was in the form of water ice or chemically bound to minerals in the soil.(NASA, “Odyssey Finds Water Ice in Abundance Under Mars’s Surface,” news release 02-99, 28 May 2002.)
NASA’s KSC launched the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) on a Pegasus XL rocket from a Lockheed L-1011 aircraft. The purpose of HESSI’s two-year mission was to analyze particle acceleration and explosive energy released in solar flares, using imaging and spectroscopic instruments. Solar flares can release in a few minutes, or even just a few seconds, an amount of energy nearly equal to that released by the explosion of 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT, disrupting communications satellites and power grids. Scientists at the University of California at Berkeley, which would manage the US$85 million mission, had designed the 645-pound (290-kilogram) probe.(Houston Chronicle, “New NASA Probe To Analyze High-Energy Flares from Sun,” 5 February 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
Astronomers used images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe, for the first time, the life cycles of x-ray jets ejected from a black hole. Scientists considered x-ray jets an extremely important phenomenon to understand, because they could reveal information about the dynamics of matter that accumulates in intense gravitational fields. From 1998 to 2002, the two satellites had collected the images showing the progressive changes of two jets of high-energy particles emitted from a black hole, microquasar XTE J1550- 564. The images revealed that the jets had initially traveled at nearly half the speed of light, later decelerating and eventually disappearing. Astronomers were surprised to discover that the x-ray jet farthest from Earth was three times brighter than the jet that traveled closer to Earth, a finding that was not explained by existing models of x-ray jets.(NASA, “Chandra Discovers the History of Black Hole X-ray Jets,” news release 02-189, 3 October 2002; S. Corbel et al., “Large-Scale, Decelerating, Relativistic X-ray Jets from the Microquasar XTE J1550-564,” Science n.s. 298, no. 5591 (4 October 2002): 196–199.)
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency awarded the Boeing Company a contract to design a fuel cell–based propulsion system for a pilotless, ultra-long-endurance UAV. According to Boeing, the UAV’s propulsion system would incorporate existing automotive–fuel cell technology, to create a vehicle with a variety of commercial and military applications.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Receives Contract for UAV Advanced Propulsion System,” news release, 3 September 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020903m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
167Inside Wallops, “Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement,” news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, “Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy,” news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad O’Connor, “Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader,” New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
Two separate teams of astronomers reported that NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST had observed two stars, possibly composed of a form of matter unknown to scientists. Researchers examining data from Chandra and the HST had noted that the neutron star RX J1856.5–3754 was far smaller than expected and, therefore, had concluded that the star might be composed, not of neutrons, but of quarkscomponents of protons and neutrons that scientists had never before observed outside of the nucleus of an atom in laboratories on Earth. Another team of astronomers had analyzed Chandra’s observations of neutron star 3C 58 and had found that the star’s temperature was less than 1,000,000°C (1,800,032°F), a far lower temperature than scientists would expect for a star composed of pure neutrons. Thus, that star also appeared to be composed, either of quarks, or of another form of matter unknown to scientists.(NASA, “Cosmic X-rays Reveal Evidence for New Form of Matter,” news release 02-65, 10 April 2002; Jeremy J. Drake, “Is RX J1856.5-3754 a Quark Star?” Astrophysical Journal 572, no. 2 (20 June 2002): 996–1001; Patrick O. Slane, David J. Hefland, and Stephen S. Murray, “New Constraints on Neutron Star Cooling from Chandra Observations of 3C 58,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 1 (20 May 2002): L45–L49.)
NASA’s Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) reentered Earth’s atmosphere nearly 10 years after its launch on 7 July 1992. NASA had initially planned for the spacecraft to operate for only three years but had extended the EUVE’s scientific mission twice, ending operations on 26 January 2001. The EUVE did not have an on-board propulsion system, and NASA scientists had not designed it to survive reentry intact. Thus, in February 2001, mission engineers had left the spacecraft in a decaying orbit, so that it would destruct upon reentering Earth’s atmosphere. The EUVE, the first astrophysics mission to explore the extreme ultraviolet spectrum (the energy range between 70 and 760 Å), had examined nearly 1,000 sources near Earth, including three-dozen objects outside of the Milky Way Galaxy.
Burton I. Edelson, who influenced NASA’s space science and Earth science programs, died at the age of 75. Edelson had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science and
NASA announced an agreement with the National Institute of Aerospace Associates (NIAA), an organization of universities and nonprofit organizations engaged in aerospace research, to create the National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) at NASA’s LaRC. NASA described the agreement with NIAA as a long-term commitment to expand its collaboration with universities, industry, and other entities. The new NIA would host advanced aerospace and atmospheric research and the development of related technologies, offering graduate degrees in engineering and science, facilitating the growth of new business opportunities, and stimulating the commercialization of new intellectual property. The basic five-year cooperative agreement was valued at US$69 million, and the contract’s total value could increase to US$379 million with the acceptance of three five-year options.(NASA, “NASA Selects Corporation To Lead Innovative Research Institute,” news release c02-aa, 26 September 2002.)
President George W. Bush signed National Security Presidential Directive-15 (NSPD-15), initiating a review of all U.S. space policies. According to NSPD-15, the review’s purpose was to update the country’s National Space Policy―last revised in 1996―to better address domestic and international developments affecting the nation’s space capabilities. The review provided recommendations in three specific areas: commercial remote sensing and foreign access to remote-sensing space capabilities; space transportation policy; and existing national policy statements related to space activities. The National Security Council (NSC) was to chair the review with support from the Office of Science and Technology Policy. In addition, the NSC had established the Space Policy Coordinating Committee (Space PCC), which would include representatives from federal agencies with roles in the formation of U.S. space policy, such as the International Trade Administration and NOAA.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 43; U.S. National Security Professional Development Integration Office, “National Space Policy Review: Fact Sheet” (report, National Security Presidential Directive/NSPD-15, Arlington, VA, 2002), http://www.nspd.gov/ rawmedia_repository/4ff02489171c66d9a66ae29824384025.pdf (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Using the most sensitive images ever taken by the HST, scientists found new evidence of star creation, challenging the findings of much of the existing research on the origin of the universe. Although the HST had captured images of portions of the skies that appear empty to the naked eye, the images revealed nearly 5,000 galaxies. Led by Kenneth M. Lanzetta of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, a team of scientists had examined approximately 150 of those galaxies spectroscopically, inferring from color variations their actual distance from Earth, as well as the properties of less visible light from even fainter and more distant galaxies. The scientists had also conducted spectroscopic analysis of remote quasars to measure the early universe’s gas density, because high gas density implies high creation rates of stars, which are the building blocks of galaxies and the birthplaces of solar systems. The new images indicated that countless stars had begun forming at a period closer to the birth of the universe than previous research had suggested. Although the HST had captured the images in 1995 and 1998, using the most advanced available technology, the findings suggested that the peak of star creation had occurred earlier than Hubble’s ability to detect it. However, the scientists believed that they could date the peak of star creation to within a few hundred million years after the Big Bang.(NASA, “Hubble Suggests First Stars Opened in a Blaze of Glory,” news release 02-01, 8 January 2002; William Harwood, “Stars May Have Brightened Infant Universe,” Washington Post, 9 January 2002.)
Scientists with NASA’s JPL made contact with Pioneer 10, the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. NASA scientists had last made contact with the space probe on 9 July 2001 but had lost contact with Pioneer 10 from August 2000 to April 2001. Pioneer 10, launched on 2 March 1972, had been the first spacecraft to pass through an asteroid belt, the first to make direct observations of Jupiter, and in 1983, became the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. After Pioneer 10’s mission had ended on 31 March 1997, scientists with JPL’s Deep Space Network had continued to track the spacecraft’s signal as part of a study of communications technology. In addition, NASA had used the probe for training flight controllers in the acquisition of radio signals from space.(NASA, “An Early NASA Pioneer Still on the Job in Deep Space,” news release 02-44, 4 March 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of two proposals for space missions for its Earth System Science Pathfinder small-satellite program, developed to research Earth’s carbon cycle and the relationship of climate change and oceans. Specifically, the selected proposals would support the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO), which would provide global measurements of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and the Aquarius mission, which would map salt concentrations on oceans’ surfaces to learn how they affect ocean circulation and global heat redistribution. NASA planned to provide up to US$175 million for each of the two proposals selected for the program. NASA appointed David Crisp of JPL as Principal Investigator for the OCO mission and Chester J. “Chet” Koblinsky of GSFC as Principal Investigator for the Aquarius mission. NASA had numerous university, corporate, and international collaborators for both missions, including the Argentine Space Program, a significant partner in the Aquarius mission.
Researchers using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory found a substantial, pulsating source of x-rays in Jupiter’s atmosphere near the planet’s north magnetic pole. Existing theories could not explain either the pulsations or the location of the x-ray source. Scientists had posited that energetic oxygen and sulfur ions steadily precipitate from Jupiter’s inner magnetosphere, entering the planet’s polar regions and producing a northern aurora of x-rays. However, images from Chandra revealed that most of Jupiter’s northern auroral x-rays originate at latitudes that only ions precipitating from Jupiter’s outer magnetosphere could reach. In addition, researchers found that the hot-spot source of the x-rays was pulsating at 45-minute intervals, contradicting scientists’ theory that the x-ray emissions originate from a steady precipitation of ions in the inner magnetosphere. Although this discovery invalidated previous theories, scientists were not yet able to explain the process they had observed. Specifically, according to Chandra’s measurements, the researchers found insufficient energetic oxygen and sulfur ions within the required distance of the ion source―at least 30 times Jupiter’s radius―to account for the observed x-ray emissions.(NASA, “Jupiter Hot Spot Makes Trouble for Theory,” news release 02-34, 28 February 2002; G. R. Gladstone et al., “A Pulsating Auroral X-ray Hot Spot on Jupiter,” Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 1000–1003.)
For the first time, scientists made combined internal and external observations of Jupiter’s magnetosphere, the biggest object with distinct boundaries within the solar system. In the first conjunction of two spacecraft at an outer planet, the Galileo spacecraft conducted observations from inside Jupiter’s magnetosphere, a comet-shaped region of space filled by the planet’s magnetic field. Meanwhile, on the outside of the magnetosphere, the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft monitored the effects of solar windparticles that flow from the Sun through the solar system. Scientists augmented the data gathered during these observations with data from near- simultaneous observations collected from radio telescopes on Earth and from spacecraft orbiting Earth, namely the HST and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Researchers found that, although Jupiter’s magnetosphere deflects solar winds, shock waves carried by solar winds compress the magnetosphere, stimulate radio emissions from within it, and brighten auroras at the planet’s poles. The observations helped bolster researchers’ confidence in their understanding of Earth’s own protective magnetosphere.(NASA JPL, “Solar Wind Buffets Vast Jupiter Region, Team Approach Reveals,” news release, 27 February 2002; Thomas W. Hill, “Magnetic Moments at Jupiter,” Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 965–966.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
Radar images of near-Earth asteroid 2000 DP107 revealed that it is a binary system, composed of two objects orbiting each other. The finding suggested that many near-Earth asteroids could be binaries. The images, taken by NASA’s Goldstone telescope facility and the National Science Foundation’s Arecibo Observatory, revealed that the asteroid was not one, but two objects, a nearly 800-meter-diameter (2,625-foot-diameter) primary and an almost 300-meter-diameter (985-foot-diameter) secondary, revolving around their common center of mass. The researchers suggested that approximately 16 percent of near-Earth asteroids larger than 200 meters (655 feet) in diameter could be binary systems. In addition, the analysis suggested that binaries with similar orbits might result from a close encounter of an asteroid and a planet, in which the planet’s gravitational pull breaks off a portion of the asteroid. Scientists consider binary asteroids potential hazards to Earth and worthy of further study.(J. L. Margot et al., “Binary Asteroids in the Near-Earth Object Population,” Science 296, no. 5572 (24 May 2002): 1445–1448; NASA JPL, “Some Asteroids Have Astronomers Seeing Double,” news release, 11 April 2002.)
Astronomers from the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and the European Southern Observatory published research detailing their discovery of a diffuse emission of x-rays from a cluster of forming stars known as RCW 38. The new discovery contrasted with astronomers’ conventional understanding of bodies that commonly emit high-energy particles, namely supernovas and exploding stars in the intense magnetic fields surrounding neutron stars and black holes. The astronomers, using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, had discovered that neither type of body was evident in the RCW 38 stellar region, which is, instead, an area of active star formation. Although the scientists remained uncertain about the source of the x-rays, as well as the effects of the x-rays on the star cluster, they hypothesized that these x-rays could affect the chemistry of the bodies that would form planets around the stars in the cluster.(NASA, “Young Star Cluster Found Aglow with Mysterious Cloud,” news release 02-251, 18 December 2002; Scott J. Wolk et al., “Discovery of Nonthermal X-ray Emission from the Embedded Massive Star-Forming Region RCW 38,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 580, no. 2 (1 December 2002): L161–L165.)
A combined U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin crew engaged in the first flight of a C-5 Galaxy modified under the Avionics Modernization Program (AMP). AMP was the first phase of an overall C-5 modernization program to upgrade the plane’s communications, navigation, and air-traffic-control surveillance equipment. The program’s objectives were to improve the C-5’s reliability and to satisfy emerging air-traffic-management requirements, so that the C-5 would be able to operate in global airspace without restrictions. During the 5-hour test flight, the crew demonstrated the craft’s basic flying qualities and navigational system, verified new primary flight displays, and engaged in initial testing of stability-augmentation operations. Lockheed Martin planned to introduce additional components of the new, automatic flight-control system and the Global Air Traffic Management–compliant systems. After completing installation of the AMP components, Lockheed Martin planned to commence the second phase of the C-5 modernization, known as the Reliability Enhancement and Re-engining Program.(Lockheed Martin, “Initial C-5 Upgraded Under the Avionics Modernization Program Makes Its First Flight,” news release, 23 December 2002, http: //www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ InitialC5UpgradedUnderAvionicsModer.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Knight and Christopher Bolkcom, “Strategic Airlift Modernization: Analysis of C-5 Modernization and C-17 Acquisition Issues,” (report, Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC, 15 April 2008), CRS-4–CRS-5.)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced its first successful launch of a satellite into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. ISRO launched METSAT, a meteorological satellite, from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India, using it own rocket, the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The new version of the PSLV reflected a significant enhancement of the rocket’s capabilities and a substantial improvement in ISRO’s overall launch capabilities. Previous versions of the PSLV had been capable of placing 900- kilogram (2,000-pound) satellites in a 900-kilometer (560-mile), polar Sun–synchronous orbit, whereas the PSLV-C4 had placed the 1,055-kilogram (2,325-pound) METSAT in a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee (the farthest point from Earth) of 34,700 kilometers (21,600 miles).(ISRO, “PSLV-C4 Launch Successful―Places METSAT in Orbit,” news release, 12 September 2002, http://www.isro.org/pressrelease/Sep13_2002.htm (accessed 3 October 2008); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
The China National Space Administration’s (CNSA’s) Kaituozhe 1 rocket failed during launch, for reasons that remained unclear. Kaituozhe 1 was the first of the CNSA’s new all-solid-fuel, four-stage launch vehicles. CNSA and other Chinese government agencies apparently provided no information to the public about the event or about the reason the launch had failed.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
Astronomer Riccardo Giacconi received the Nobel Prize in physics for research on cosmic x-ray radiation. Giacconi’s projects had included NASA-funded research leading to his discovery of cosmic x-ray sources. A professor at Johns Hopkins University, Giacconi had been the first scientist to discover a source of x-rays outside Earth’s solar system and the first to prove that the universe contained background radiation of x-ray light. In addition, many astronomers believed that x-ray sources Giacconi had discovered contained black holes. Giacconi had also been responsible for the conception and design of the first x-ray satellite and the first operating x-ray telescope. Together with Harvey Tananbaum, he had proposed the design of the x-ray telescope that eventually became NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory. Moreover, Giacconi had been the first Director of the Hubble Space Telescope Science Institute and the Principal Investigator for the Chandra Ultra-Deep Survey, which had obtained the deepest x-ray exposures with a millionth-second observation.(NASA, “Nobel Physics in Physics Awarded to Astronomer for NASA-Funded Research,” news release 02-197, 8 October 2002; Nobel Foundation, “Advanced Information on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2002,” news release, 8 October 2002, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2002/phyadv02.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008). 306 Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Military Influence To Grow at NASA,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 October 2002.)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASA’s SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the “One NASA” initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASA’s various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASA’s MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFC’s Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASA’s KSC.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director,” news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA launched Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) on a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. NASA scientists had created CONTOURscheduled to make close
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aqua’s primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, “Aqua Launched To Study Earth’s Water Cycle,” news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To View Interaction of Earth’s Water and Climate,” New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
NASA scientists published research challenging prominent theories about the growth of the gravitational field at Earth’s equator, a phenomenon that began in 1998. Researchers had suggested that atmospheric change, or the melting of glaciers and polar ice, had caused a geographic shift in the planet’s gravitational field, with a decline in upper latitudes and a corresponding increase in lower latitudes. However, NASA scientists Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao discovered that the quantity, rate, and timing of atmospheric change and ice melt did not correspond to the magnitude and rate of gravitational shift. Based on their analysis of data that 10 satellites had acquired between 1979 and 2002, Cox and Chao found a more probable explanation of this phenomenon. The data suggested that the oceans had been rapidly transporting substantial quantities of water and ice from higher to lower latitudes, thereby shifting Earth’s mass and causing a corresponding alteration in the planet’s gravitational field from the higher to the lower latitudes. The scientists noted, however, that additional data and analysis were necessary to determine whether their interpretation of the data was correct.(NASA, “Satellites Reveal a Mystery of Large Change in Earth’s Gravity Field,” news release 02-147, 1 August 2002; Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao, “Detection of Large-Scale Mass Redistribution in the Terrestrial System Since 1998,” Science 297, no. 5582 (2 August 2002): 831–833.)
In an article in the journal Nature, scientists reported that they had used images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to reveal how objects in the most active area of the Milky Way Galaxy affect each other and other parts of the galaxy. The scientists had used 30 separate images from Chandra to construct a montage of the Milky Way’s central regions, revealing hundreds of white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes, shrouded by the extremely hot gas around a massive black hole. The researchers found that emissions from highly ionized iron, previously attributed to diffuse hot gas, had actually originated from discrete sources in the Milky Way’s white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes. The findings helped clarify the relative contributions of diffuse and discrete sources of x-rays emitted from the galaxy.(NASA, “Chandra Takes In Bright Lights, Big City of Milky Way,” news release 02-03, 9 January 2002; Q. D. Wang, E. V. Gotthelf, and C. C. Lang, “A Faint Discrete Source Origin for the Highly Ionized Iron Emission from the Galactic Centre Region,” Nature 415, no. 6868 (10 January 2002): 148–150.)
A team of NASA scientists using uninhabited aerial vehicles (UAVs) to research electrical storms achieved a flight-duration milestone. The research was part of the Altus Cumulus Electrification Study (ACES), a project that examined the causes of electrical storms and their effects on the planet. The ACES research team employed Altus II UAVs to study thunderstorms over Florida, capping off four weeks of research flights with the study’s longest flight, lasting for 6 hours and 32 minutes and monitoring four successive thunderstorms. General Atomics Aeronautical Systems had built the Altus II, which could fly near thunderstorms for hours, at altitudes of up to 65,000 feet.(NASA MSFC, National Space Science and Technology Center, “NASA Lightning Study Achieves Flight- Duration Milestone, Monitoring Four Storms in Single Mission,” news release N02-011, 23 August 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of the instrument and science teams that would provide instruments for NASA’s Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST), the intended successor of the HST. The team selected to provide the primary near-infrared science camera comprised engineers and scientists from the project team’s leader, the University of Arizona at Tucson, as well as from Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center, EMS Technologies of Canada, and COM DEV Limited, also of Canada. The team selected to build the NGST’s mid-infrared instrument included engineers and scientists from NASA’s JPL, NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC), ESA, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the University of Arizona at Tucson. In addition to the principal instrument scientists, NASA had selected scientists to serve on the NGST Science Working Group, including Heidi B. Hammel, Simon Lilly, Jonathan Lunine, Mark McCaughrean, Massimo Stiavelli, and Rogier Windhorst.(NASA, “NASA Selects Instruments and Science Team for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 02- 109, 10 June 2002.)
NASA announced the extension of its existing six-year contract with Lockheed Martin Space Systems to build 35 super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle program. The modified agreement extended the contract to September 2008, adding US$341 million to the original contract of US$1.15 billion, which NASA had awarded to Lockheed Martin in October 2000. Under the contract, Lockheed Martin would construct, test, and deliver the tanks; maintain and operate NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans; and provide services at NASA’s KSC and its MSFC. Furthermore, under the terms of the extension, Lockheed Martin agreed to provide at least six tanks per year, instead of the eight tanks per year stipulated in the original agreement. (NASA, “NASA Extends Shuttle External Tank Contract with Lockheed Martin to September 2008,” news release c02-m, 12 June 2002.)
NASA scientists Eric J. Rignot and Robert H. Thomas published results of one of the most detailed and widespread examinations of polar ice sheets ever performed. Researchers had already determined that changes in the thickness of polar ice correlated with changes in sea level but disagreed about the extent to which the thickness of the ice sheets was changing. Analyzing recent remote-sensing measurements of ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica, Rignot and Thomas discovered that the thickness of the ice sheets was changing more rapidly than previously thought. Although the data was indeterminate concerning changes in some parts of the ice sheets, Rignot and Thomas found clear evidence that large regions of the polar ice sheets were rapidly changing, with accumulation of ice in some areas and attrition in others. Despite such variations, the scientists found that, overall, the major polar ice sheets were losing mass. Specifically, Greenland’s ice sheet was losing 50 cubic kilometers (12 cubic miles) of mass annually, and the West Antarctic ice sheet appeared to be losing nearly 48 cubic kilometers (11.5 cubic miles) of mass per year.(NASA JPL, “NASA Study Finds Rapid Changes in Earth’s Polar Ice Sheets,” news release, 30 August 2002; Eric Rignot and Robert H. Thomas, “Mass Balance of Polar Ice Sheets,” Science 297, no. 5586 (30 August 2002): 1502– 1506.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although O’Keefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
Administrator Sean O’Keefe selected astronaut Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist. In this post, Lucid became responsible for ensuring that NASA’s programs were of scientific merit. At the time of the selection, Lucid was a spacecraft communicator supporting the Space Shuttle and ISS missions. A veteran of five Space Shuttle flights, Lucid had been one of the first six women selected to become an astronaut and the only woman awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. Lucid replaced Kathie L. Olsen, who had occupied the position since May 1999. Olsen had accepted an appointment as the Associate Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut, Dr. Shannon Lucid, Selected as Chief Scientist,” news release 02-27, 12 February 2002.)
The United States launched the fifth Milstar satellite on a Titan 4B-Centaur from Cape Canaveral, Florida, completing a fleet of communications satellites designed to provide government leaders and military troops with jam-resistant transmission nearly anywhere on Earth.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002 Activities (Washington, DC, 2002), p. 114, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2002.pdf (accessed 29 July 2002); Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002: The Year in Review,” NASA, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2002/yearinrev/ 02YearReview.html (accessed 23 July 2002).)
The ReMAP Task Force of NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) presented its final report to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA had charged the ReMAP Task Force with evaluating the research productivity and priorities of NASA’s OBPR and with providing a framework for prioritizing a research program for the OBPR and the ISS. ReMAP’s 173-page report identified two major goals of these programs: research enabling human exploration of space and basic research of intrinsic scientific interest. In addition, the report made several recommendations, for example, that NASA increase the ISS’s facilities and equipment for scientific research, as well as the amount of time that ISS crew members dedicated to scientific operations. The report stated that, if NASA did not make these and other enhancements to the ISS, then NASA “should cease to characterize the ISS as a science driven program.”(NASA ReMAP Task Force, “Report by the NASA Biological and Physical Research Maximization and Prioritization (ReMAP) Task Force to the NASA Advisory Council” (report, Washington, DC, August 2002).)
NASA’s KSC awarded the Boeing Company the checkout, assembly, and payload-processing services (CAPPS) contract for the Space Shuttle and the EELV. The CAPPS contract had a four- year base period of performance valued at US$332 million. In addition, the contract had two three-year extension options, which could increase the contract’s total value to US$810 million. Under the contract, Boeing would perform payload-processing tasks, such as ensuring that payloads were compatible with launch vehicles and loading payloads into launch vehicles. Boeing had also held KSC’s previous payload-processing agreement, called the payload ground- operations contract.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Wins Major Space Payload Processing Contract,” news release, 29 August 2002. 86)
NASA scientist Zdenek Sekanina published new findings challenging existing ideas about comets. Existing theory had posited that comets rarely break up and that, when they do, the fragmentation usually occurs in close proximity to the Sun. However, basing his research on the analysis of images taken by the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), operated jointly by NASA and ESA, Sekanina had discovered that comets fragment throughout their lifetimes, often at distances far from the Sun. Moreover, Sekanina had found that such fragmentation generally occurs in a somewhat orderly pattern, with a single comet fragmenting into clusters of smaller comets. Sekanina had analyzed a type of very small comet called a sungrazer and discovered that sungrazers are actually fragments of other comets that have broken apart during a previous encounter with the Sun. Moreover, he had found that sungrazers continue to break into pieces throughout their orbits around the Sun. Sekanina had also examined another type of comet―57P/du Toit-Neujmin-Delaporte, finding that this type of comet shows the same pattern of fragmenting into smaller comets as it moves farther from the Sun.(NASA, “Comets Break Up Far and Near,” news release 02-158, 5 September 2002; Zdenek Sekanina, “Runaway Fragmentation of Sungrazing Comets Observed with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory,” Astrophysical Journal 576, no. 2 (10 September 2002): 1085–1089.)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HST’s successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescope’s main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universe’s creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, “NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer,” news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
Using images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists found evidence that an ancient eruption had burst through a cluster of galaxies, which could explain why those galaxies act like massive magnetic fields. Scientists believed that the universe’s largest known structures bounded by gravity―called galaxy clusters―might be the source of highly energetic and recurring explosions, which cause the clusters to behave like huge cosmic magnets. Chandra’s images of the galaxy cluster Abell 2597 had revealed a cloud of hot gas with two dark circular cavities called ghost cavities, containing little x-ray or radio emissions. The images suggested that powerful explosions around a black hole in the cluster’s center might have occurred when these ghost cavities expelled material from the black hole’s vicinity, creating gaps in the cluster’s hot gas. Scientists believed that these cavities might eventually move to the edge of the cluster, similar to the movement of air bubbles to the surface of water, thereby transporting magnetic fields to the cluster gas. The images suggested that these explosions are recurring. If the recurring explosions continue to create more cavities, this could explain the strong magnetic field of the extremely hot gas throughout the cluster.(NASA, “Chandra Finds Ghosts of Eruption in Galaxy Cluster,” news release 02-02, 8 January 2002.)
Crew of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 finished installing several new instruments on the 12- year-old HST and sent the observatory back into orbit. During a series of five spacewalks conducted in as many days, Columbia’s crew had installed a new power-shunting unit, an improved solar panel, and a cooling unit that would restore the Near-Infrared Camera and Multi- Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) to operational status. In addition, Columbia’s crew had installed a new main camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), which NASA had designed to give the telescope unprecedented ability to observe distant galaxies and other objects.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Returning to Mission Able To Peer Deeper Into Space,” New York Times, 10 March 2002.)
In an article in the journal Nature, astronomers at ESA reported that they had found evidence indicating which specific type of stellar object produces gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), the universe’s most energetic phenomena. Prevailing hypotheses had posited that, either GRBs originate from the merger of two neutron stars, or they form from the collapse of one massive star, but researchers had discovered no conclusive proof to support either of these ideas. However, based on their analysis of the speed, temperature, and chemical elements of a GRB that had occurred on 11 December 2001, ESA astronomers found evidence supporting the latter hypothesis. The research team examined two sequential observations of the GRB, both taken by ESA satellites: the BeppoSAX satellite had made the first observation, and, nearly 11 hours later, the XMM-Newton satellite had made the second. The team had found large quantities of argon, calcium, magnesium, silicon, and sulphur, moving at 1/10th the speed of light. These findings supported the idea that a supernova explosion from a single massive star produces GRBs. If the merger of two neutron stars had produced the burst, astronomers would have expected the stars to produce large amounts of elements other than those observed―particularly iron―and to emit those elements at a slower velocity.(J. N. Reeves et al., “The Signature of Supernova Ejecta in the X-ray Afterglow of the γ-ray Burst 011211,” Nature 416, no. 6880 (4 April 2002): 512–515; ESA, “ESA’s X-ray Space Telescope Proves Supernovae Can Cause Mysterious Gamma-Ray Bursts,” ESA news release 22-2002, 4 April 2002.)
Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. became the eighth Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Acting Director Roy S. Estess, who resumed his position as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC). Before assuming the post, Howell had worked for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) administering its safety, reliability, and quality-assurance contract with NASA, to provide safety and mission assurance for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs.(NASA JSC, “Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. Named as Johnson Space Center Director,” news release J02-17, 12 February 2002.)
Scientists found that a bright blue ring of dust surrounds Earth’s solar system, beginning outside of Saturn’s orbit and extending beyond the orbit of Neptune. However, viewed from outside the solar system, this band of dust appears to surround the Sun. The discovery of the dust ring provided empirical support for the idea that this feature around a mature star indicates that the star harbors a planetary system. Therefore, researchers planning missions would be able, based on whether the star has a dust ring, to narrow down the list of which stars to study in their search for planets and planetary systems. ESA scientist Markus Landgraf had led the research team, which had made the discovery using data collected by Pioneer 10 and 11.(ESA, “ESA Scientist Discovers a Way To Shortlist Stars That Might Have Planets,” ESA news release SNR 1- 2002, 15 February 2002.)
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellite’s thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. government’s research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, “Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket,” Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, “Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin,” news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Scientists obtained the first measurements ever taken of the dimensions and compositional matter of a neutron star, providing important new information about the fundamental nature of matter and energy. Using ESA’s XMM-Newton space telescope, Jean Cottam of NASA’s GSFC and other researchers captured the first measurements of the gravitational redshift of a neutron star. Gravitational redshift occurs when an intense gravitational field such as that of a neutron star warps light or other electromagnetic radiation. Thus, by calculating the star’s redshift, the scientists were able to estimate its gravity, compositional material, and other characteristics. The researchers found that the star EXO 0748-676 is likely composed of normal nuclear matter, as scientists had previously theorized. The researchers’ observations regarding neutron stars, specifically, and matter and energy, generally, occurred under conditions that scientists are unable to replicate on Earth. The researchers thought that the findings might reveal new information about the creation of the universe, because, theoretically, the temperature and pressure of neutron stars is similar to the temperature and pressure that was present just one second after the Big Bang.(ESA, “XMM-Newton Closes In on Space’s Exotic Matter,” ESA news release 69-2002, 6 November 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAK117708D_index_0.html (accessed 2 February 2010); NASA, “Exotic Innards of a Neutron Star Revealed in a Series of Explosions,” news release 02-214, 6 November 2002; Jean Cottam, Frederik Paerels, and Mariano Mendez, “Gravitationally Redshifted Absorption Lines in the X-ray Burst Spectra of a Neutron Star,” Nature 420, no. 6911 (7 November 2002): 51–54.)
Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:32 a.m. (EST). During the 11-day mission, the Shuttle crew had conducted five spacewalks and performed several significant modifications of the HST, including the installation of an ACS and an experimental cryocooler, which had restored the operation of the NICMOS. The mission’s total duration was 10 days, 22 hours, and 11 minutes.(NASA, “STS-109,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
ESA launched the International Gamma Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL) observatory from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 10:41 a.m., local time12:41 a.m. (EST). ESA had designed the satellite, and Italy’s Alenia Spazio had developed it, with support from more than 30 European firms. INTEGRAL would study dense objects that are sources of high-energy radiation, such as neutron stars and black holes. Project scientists hoped that INTEGRAL would produce images that would help confirm the presence of black holes at the center of galaxies, beginning with the Milky Way. INTEGRAL had two main instruments for analyzing gamma-ray sources: the Spectrometer on INTEGRAL, or SPI spectrometer, and the Imager on Board the INTEGRAL Satellite, or IBIS imager. The spectrometer and imager had an extremely sharp angular resolution, enabling them to conduct spectral analyses with an energy resolution 40 times better than that provided by any previous satellite. INTEGRAL also carried an x-ray imager and a charged-coupled device (CCD) imager that operated within the visible spectrum waveband. Using the combined data from the four instruments, project scientists would be able to make simultaneous observations of high-energy phenomena, from visible light to gamma rays.(ESA, “Europe Opens a Window onto a Violent Universe,” ESA news release 66-2002, 17 October 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAKXQTHN6D_index.0.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
NASA awarded SLI contracts to Boeing and Lockheed Martin for flight-demonstrator technologies. The flight-demonstrator contracts would support development of the future OSP, which would serve as both the transport vehicle and the escape vehicle for astronauts assigned to the ISS. NASA awarded a contract valued at US$301 million (including options through 2006) to Boeing’s Phantom Works Division, to continue developing its X-37 test vehicle. The purpose of the X-37 was to test technologies that, eventually, NASA could use in the OSP. NASA awarded another contract worth US$53 million (including options through 2006) to Lockheed Martin, to develop a reusable, launchpad-abort demonstrator. The demonstrator, an escape module capable of recognizing problems and evacuating crew within seconds, would assist crews to escape emergencies occurring on the launchpad.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contracts for Flight Demonstrators,” news release c02-gg, 20 November 2002; Chris Kidler, “NASA Awards X-37 Contracts,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 November 2002.)
Boeing and the U.S. Air Force signed a US$9.7 billion contract for 60 C-17 Globemaster III transport aircraft. The contract, an extension of previous agreements between the Air Force and Boeing, would increase the number of C-17s in the Air Force fleet to 180. The Air Force had been using C-17s to transport personnel, equipment, and supplies in support of combat and humanitarian missions.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing and U.S. Air Force Sign $9.7 Billion C-17 Contract,” news release, 15 August 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020815m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TMA-1 from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 8:11 a.m., local time10:11 p.m. (EST). The launch was officially designated ISS Mission 5S. Soyuz TMA-1 was the first of a newly modified version of the Soyuz spacecraft, offering improved safety features and accommodation for crew members of a larger range of sizes. In addition, Soyuz TMA-1 was an automatic passenger craft intended to replace Soyuz TM- 34 as the ISS’s escape craft. The Russian Space Agency had been sending Soyuz vehicles to the ISS every six months as CRVs for scientists residing on the ISS. Soyuz TMA-1’s crew consisted of Commander Sergei V. Zalyotin and two crew members, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov and Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne. The mission’s primary purpose was to provide a CRV for the ISS; however, Soyuz TMA-1’s crew also planned to conduct scientific experiments with the ISS Expedition 5 members. ISS crew would conduct most of these experiments under a commercial contract between Russia and ESA.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; NASA Mission Control Center, “Report #48,” http://quest.nasa.gov/ news/space/2002/10-29a.txt (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology concerning NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Administrator O’Keefe also reported a recent independent audit of NASA’s finances, which NASA planned to release to the public the next day. According to newspaper reports, the lawmakers questioned O’Keefe in a tone that was frequently skeptical and even critical. At the time of O’Keefe’s testimony, NASA was already under public scrutiny regarding its budget overruns and financial accounting procedures, and critics had proposed reductions in its budget for human space travel.(Karen Masterson, “Skeptical Lawmakers Quiz NASA Chief About Budget,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2002.)
