NASA announced the successful test of a launchpad-abort test vehicle designed to support its OSP Program. Wind tunnel tests had demonstrated the Lockheed Martin–designed Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) vehicle’s stability and maneuverability under simulated conditions approximating escape from a catastrophic failure of a launch vehicle. The tests, which followed the completion of September’s PAD Preliminary Design Review, marked a significant success in the development of a safe and effective crew-escape system, clearing the way for the initial testing of the vehicle’s engine in November 2003 and the first set of parachute drop tests in December 2003. NASA had not pursued the PAD Project to integrate crew-escape capability into spacecraft design since the Apollo program ended.(NASA, “NASA Conducts Successful Pad Abort Demonstration,” news release 03-359, 6 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03359_pad_abort_demo.html (accessed 5 February 2009). 551 Agence France-Presse, “France, Russia Sign Deal for European Space Pad,” 7 November 2003.)
The CAIB carried out preliminary tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, firing foam at a fiberglass replica of the wing of an orbiter. The impact of a 1.67-pound (0.76-kilogram) piece of foam fired at 533 miles per hour (858 kilometers per hour) created a narrow 22-inch-long (56-centimeter-long) gash in the fiberglass wings. The CAIB conducted the test in preparation for an official test with panels composed of reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC), a material two and one-half times more resilient than fiberglass. In addition to determining whether foam could damage the fiberglass, the CAIB intended the test to calibrate the mechanism for testing the RCC without using up scarce RCC samples.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, “Mockup Wing Is Torn by Foam in Shuttle Test,” New York Times, 30 May 2003; Mark Carreau, “Foam Test Leaves Gash in Shuttle Wing Replica,” Houston Chronicle, 30 May 2003. 450 Leonard David, “Japan Recovers Capsule That Carried Made-in-Space Product,” Space.com, 29 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/japan_capsule_030529.html (accessed 4 December 2008).)
NASA announced that it had awarded US$39.9 million in additional work under the consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) with Lockheed Martin Space Operations Company, to fund NASA’s JPL’s maintenance and operation of the Deep Space Network in the United States, as well as to provide technical support to the Spanish and Australian Deep Space Network complexes. The additional work brought the total value of the CSOC to US$2.1 billion.(NASA, “NASA Awards $39.9 Million Contract Addition to Lockheed Martin,” news release c03-i, 25 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03i.html (25 August 2008).)
NASA announced the completion of tests, which had taken place on 27 August at Edwards Air Force Base in California, demonstrating the possibility of reducing the impact of sonic booms. The research team showed that modifying an aircraft’s shape alters the shape of its sonic boom, thus reducing the sound level. Northrop Grumman Corporation had modified the fuselage and nose of an F-5E fighter jet for the demonstration. The modified jet and a regular F-5E had each flown at Mach 1.36 from the same supersonic corridor. The two aircraft had demonstrated no difference in performance except that the modified jet’s sonic boom was 33 percent less intense than that of the unmodified F-5E. Analysis and wind tunnel tests had predicted the outcome, but NASA had never before flight-tested the theory. Richard Weizman of NASA’s Office of Aerospace Technology remarked that the demonstration was the culmination of 40 years of work by visionary engineers. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had managed the Shaped Sonic Boom Demonstration (SSBD) program under its Quiet Supersonic Platform Initiative. NASA’s LaRC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC), as well as Northrop Grumman Corporation, had been partners in the SSBD program under a US$7 million cooperative agreement.(NASA, “NASA Opens New Chapter in Supersonic Flight,” news release 03-283, 4 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03283_supersonic_flight.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Irene Mona Klotz for United Press International Science News, “Test Shows Shape Sheds Sonic Boom’s Bang,” 22 September 2003.)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched the Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)–D2 rocket from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The main payload was the GSAT-2, a geostationary communications and space-monitoring satellite, which carried four C-band and two Ku-band transponders that would provide voice and video transmissions to India and neighboring countries. The GSLV-D2 also carried into orbit experimental payloads: a Coherent Radio Beacon Experiment, a Solar X-ray Spectrometer, an external Total Radiation Dose Monitor, a Radiation Sensitive Field Effect Transistor, and a Surface Change Monitor. However, its main mission was to test the GSLV-D2, an improved version of the GSLV first launched in April 2001.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595, 1 June 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx595.html (accessed 20 November 2008); K. S. Jayaraman, “India Launches Second GSLV Rocket with GSAT,” Space.com, 8 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/gslv_launch_030508.html (accessed 1 December 2008).)
NASA’s ARC in Mountain View, California, closed three wind tunnels until the end of FY 2003 because of budget cuts, fewer defense contracts, and the increased use of computer simulations. NASA reported that, unless it received major contracts from the DOD or from the private sector within a year from October 2003, ARC would close the wind tunnels permanently. Two of the wind tunnels, the largest and second-largest wind tunnels in the world, had operated for nearly six decades, testing dozens of aircraft and spacecraft, including Korean War–era fighter planes, helicopters, and the Space Shuttle. The largest wind tunnel, known as “80 by 120” in reference to its height and width, was the only wind tunnel in the world that could accommodate full-size aircraft. With the closure of the three tunnels, ARC dismissed 23 contractors and reassigned 23 employees, changes that would save ARC US$12 million per year in operational costs.(Joshua L. Kwan, “NASA/Ames Center Shuts Wind Tunnels,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 19 May 2003.)
Japan’s Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japan’s NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services’ Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earth’s upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as “the world’s smallest space telescope,” with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileo’s telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellites―CubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1―to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tube―the Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSAT―would image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, “Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads,” Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia,” Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, to head NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a “natural selection to lead the Agency’s premiere center for aviation and space research,” according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred,” 13 June 2003.)
NASA announced the results of its own mishap investigation board’s review of the loss of the X- 43A Hyper-X research vehicle during its launch on 2 June 2001. The experimental plane was the first of three that NASA had developed and produced in a US$185 million program. The board concluded that the flight had failed because “the vehicle’s control system design was deficient in several analytical modeling areas, which overestimated the system’s margins.” For the test flight, the X-43A had launched aboard the nose of a modified Pegasus launch vehicle carried by NASA’s modified B-52 bomber. The bomber had released the Pegasus at an altitude of 24,000 feet (7,315.2 meters), igniting its solid rocket motor (SRM) and sending the research-vehicle payload on its test flight. After beginning its planned pitch-up maneuver, the X-43A had experienced a control anomaly leading to a structural overload of the starboard elevon. The vehicle had then deviated significantly from its planned trajectory, and NASA had destroyed it 48.6 seconds after its release. The mishap investigation board, which had found a number of modeling inaccuracies, had been able to reproduce the flight mishap only after incorporating all of the inaccuracies into its analysis, leading the board to conclude that no single factor or potential contributing factor had caused the mishap. The board also found that preflight analyses, including wind tunnel tests, had failed to predict how the rocket would perform in flight.(NASA, “NASA Mishap Board Identifies Cause of X-43a Failure,” news release 03-246, 23 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03246_X43A_Mishap.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Associated Press, “Rocket Failure Doomed Hypersonic NASA Jet, Investigation Finds,” 23 July 2003.)
NASA awarded its Kennedy Space Center Integrated Communications Services (KICS) contract, valued at approximately US$190.7 million, to InDyne Inc. of McLean, Virginia. Under the cost- plus-award fee/firm-fixed price, indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity contract, InDyne would provide communications services at NASA’s KSC in support of the Space Shuttle Program, ISS Program, Payload Carriers Program, and Launch Services Program Office payloads. The KICS contract was the first of five work packages in NASA’s space mission communications and data services solicitation, which succeeded the NASA consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) and incorporated the requirements of the visual information technical contract as well as the telephone service requirements of the outsourcing desktop initiative.(NASA, “First Contract in SMCDS Solicitation Awarded To InDyne, Inc.,” contract release c03-ff, 17 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_c03ff_indyne_contract.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA researchers announced that the ER-2, a modified U-2 aircraft, had collected tiny interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) in Earth’s stratosphere, which likely contained bits of ancient stars. The particles, collected over a period of two decades, included the only samples of comets that researchers were able to study in a laboratory. Lindsay Keller, a researcher in the Office of Astromaterials Research and Exploration Science at NASA’s JSC, remarked that the stardust grains were typical of the kind of dust available at the beginning of the solar systemthe building blocks of the Sun and planets. Scott Messenger, an astrophysicist at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, described the IDPs as rich in stardust and molecular cloud material, suggesting that the particles had remained essentially unchanged since the solar system’s formation. To detect the remnants of the early stars, scientists had used Washington University’s new type of ion microprobe, which measured isotopic ratios on scales much smaller than previously possible.(NASA, “NASA Finds Remnants of Ancient Stars in Earth’s Upper Atmosphere,” news release 03-084, 27 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03084.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
NASA announced the creation of the first detailed map of the water contained in Earth’s atmosphere, a map that would help scientists better understand the nature of atmospheric water vapor and its implications for climate change and ozone depletion. In July 2002, NASA had taken detailed measurements of water isotopes in the atmosphere using Alias, an aircraft laser infrared absorption spectrometer flying aboard NASA’s WB-57F high-altitude jet aircraft. The new laser technique had enabled scientists to map the water isotopes with sufficient resolution for researchers to use the map to study water transport, as well as to examine the detailed microphysics of clouds―key parameters necessary for understanding atmospheric composition, storm development, and weather prediction. The resulting map showed heavy hydrogen and heavy oxygen atoms, from Earth’s surface to 25 miles (40.2 kilometers) above the planet. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had funded the mission, which had used six aircraft provided by NASA and other federal agencies, to record observations above, in, and below the clouds.(NASA, “The Measure of Water: NASA Creates New Map for the Atmosphere,” news release 03-394, 5 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03394_water_map.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellation’s mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, “US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck,” Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, “Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
NASA announced that it had awarded the contract to manage the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Science and Operations Control Center to a nonprofit consortium, the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA). The contract, valued at US$162.2 million, stipulated that AURA manage the Science and Operations Control Center at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland. AURA would provide products and services required to prepare the science program, develop ground systems, provide science and engineering support, provide integration and test support, perform educational and public outreach, and perform flight and science operations during the launch and commissioning of JWST, scheduled for launch in 2011.(NASA, “Webb Spacecraft Science and Operations Center Contract Award,” contract release c03-r, 6 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_c03r_Webb.html (accessed 6 June 2003).)
The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, “Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space,” 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, “Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness,” Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
NASA successfully launched its Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Lockheed Martin–built SIRTF was the fourth and final of NASA’s Great Observatories, following the HST, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. NASA had designed the 110-pound (50-kilogram), 33.5-inch (85-centimeter) telescope to measure heat from celestial objects. SIRTF would study some of the same deep space objects as the other Great Observatories, as well as studying other parts of the cosmos. Michael Jura, SIRTF interdisciplinary scientist for planetary science at the University of California at Los Angeles, remarked that one of SIRTF’s main scientific goals was to develop a better understanding of star and planet formation. The project, originally proposed in the mid- 1970s, had faced repeated budgetary cutbacks and delays. NASA planned for SIRTF’s mission to last a minimum of 30 months, at an anticipated cost of US$1.19 billion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, “NASA Launches Rocket with Infrared Scope,” 25 August 2003. 154)
NASA announced the successful test of a High Power Electric Propulsion (HiPEP) ion engine using commercial-utility electrical power, marking the first successful test of an engine that could “lead to revolutionary propulsion capabilities for space exploration missions throughout the solar system and beyond.” The test used the largest microwave ion thruster ever built. The test was also the first in a series, demonstrating the high-velocity and high-power thrust necessary for the new nuclear electric propulsion (NEP) applications. NASA’s Project Prometheus had been studying the HiPEP―one of several candidate propulsion technologies―for possible use on the Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter (JIMO). The JIMO Mission’s design included a small nuclear reactor as its power source and electric thrusters to provide propulsion. NASA planned for JIMO to study Jupiter’s three icy moons―Ganymede, Callisto, and Europa. Director of Project Prometheus Alan R. Newhouse remarked that the test represented a “huge leap in demonstrating the potential for advanced ion technologies.”(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests Ion Engine,” news release 03-377, 20 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03377_ion_engine.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
U.S. Representative William L. Jenkins (R-TN) announced that NASA had awarded East Tennessee State University a grant valued at US$363,310 to study light patterns of stars located hundreds of light-years away. The award would grant researchers of the university’s physics and astronomy department access over the next five years to data from COBEthe Cosmic Background Explorer satellite. The scientists would use the COBE data to study the infrared variability of asymptotic giant branch stars, “older stars with shells of gas and dust around them.” During its mission in 1989 and 1990, the COBE satellite had surveyed the sky on 10 infrared wavelengths, observing the cosmic backlight of the universe, as well as asymptotic giant branch stars. Although astronomers in the field had conducted significant research on the backlight data, they had done little with COBE’s infrared data on the stars.(Sam Watson, “NASA Grant To Fund ETSU Study of Stars,” Johnson City Press (TN), 9 January 2003.)
NASA selected the University of Arizona’s Phoenix lander concept for a US$325 million mission to Mars in 2007, beating out finalists from Arizona State University, NASA’s JPL, and NASA’s LaRC. The Phoenix concept, aptly named for the mythical bird that rose from ashes, drew on the technology of past expeditions, such as the canceled 2001 Mars Surveyor Program. Phoenix’s purpose was to search for evidence of water and carbon dioxide gasa robotic arm would scoop soil samples, small on-board ovens would heat the samples, and on-board instruments would analyze them, checking the soil for organic compounds. NASA called the Phoenix mission the first of a type of mission it had designated as Scout missions. If funding remained available, NASA planned to hold competitions every four years to select relatively small missions like Phoenix as Scout missions.(Chris Kridler, “Mission Will Look for Mars Ice,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 5 August 2003)
Japan launched two reconnaissance satellitesInformation Gathering Satellites (IGSs), IGS 1A and IGS 1Batop an H-2 rocket from Tanegashima Space Center. The pair, the first of at least four such spacecraft that Japan intended to place in orbit as part of a US$2.05 billion program, were capable of monitoring global natural disasters and hurricanes, as well as observing nuclear explosions and missile launches in nearby countries. Because the craft were able to monitor weather events, the launch did not violate the terms of the Japan-North Korea Declaration of September 2002. However, Japanese space officials acknowledged that Japan had developed the program in reaction to the “Taepodong shock,” when a North Korean Taepodong ballistic missile flew over Japan’s main island in 1998. North Korea protested the IGS program as a “‘hostile act’ that violates the spirit” of the countries’ bilateral agreement. One of the IGS craft carried optical cameras with 1-meter (3.3-foot) resolution and the other carried synthetic-aperture radar to capture images with resolutions of several meters. Japanese space officials provided no information about which craft carried which instrument.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, “Japan’s First Spy Satellites Reach Earth Orbit,” 27 March 2003.)
Scientists studying data produced by the thermal emission spectrometer (TES) on board NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published findings in the journal Science disputing the theory that Mars once had a warm climate. Using the TES, which measured infrared light from rocks, scientists had searched for patterns of color to identify different minerals, particularly carbonates. Carbonates form only in the presence of liquid water. TES data confirmed small concentrations of carbonates in Martian dust, but no large deposits, such as those that would have formed at the bottom of a lake or ocean. Lead author of the article, Philip R. Christensen of Arizona State University, remarked that, according to the data, it was “extremely unlikely” that large bodies of water exposed to the atmosphere for an extended period had ever existed on Mars. Matthew P. Golombek of NASA’s JPL commented that the new findings directly contradicted the idea that, at one time, Mars may have been warmer and wetter with a denser carbon-dioxide atmosphere. Previously, scientists had proposed this theory to explain Mars’s apparent geological formations resembling the intricate patterns of riverbeds, carved canyons, and delta fans.(Joshua L. Bandfield, Timothy D. Glotch, and Philip R. Christensen, “Spectroscopic Identification of Carbonate Minerals in the Martian Dust,” Science 301, no. 5636 (22 August 2003): 1084; New York Times, “Study: No Past Standing Water on Mars,” 22 August 2003; Kenneth Chang, “New Data Dispute Theory That Mars Had Warm Climate,” New York Times, 22 August 2003.)
While moving NOAA’s 14-foot (4.3-meter) NOAA-N Prime weather satellite from a vertical to a horizontal position, workers at a Lockheed Martin plant dropped the nearly completed US$239 million craft, causing serious damage. Lockheed Martin spokesperson Buddy Nelson stated that the cart holding the spacecraft “was not in the proper configuration for the planned activity.” NASA’s GSFC was responsible for overseeing the construction and launch of the satellite, and NOAA would assume control of the craft once it was in orbit. Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company had been building weather satellites since the NOAA satellites’ initial launch in the early 1960s.(Associated Press, “$239M Satellite Damaged at Lockheed Plant,” New York Times, 10 September 2003.)
Israeli scientists announced that, while traveling aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, astronaut Ilan Ramon had successfully captured images of smoke from a burning rain forest, a dust storm above the Mediterranean Ocean, and a small dust plume off the African coast over the Atlantic Ocean. Operating a twin-camera multispectral instrument in Columbia’s payload bay, Ramon had scanned dust and other aerosol particles, which storms had blown from deserts and high winds had carried across the globe. The instrument had also operated during the night, capturing images of the tops of thousands of thunderstorms. The team of scientists from Tel Aviv University’s Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) intended to use the images to develop a better understanding of climate change, one of the goals of Columbia’s research flight, which had encountered two years of delays. Joachim Joseph, a principal researcher on the project, remarked that the experiment had gathered “very good data, very unique data.” The purpose of the US$2 million experiment was to “provide a better understanding of how migrating dust plumes affect climate.” (NASA, “Shuttle’s Desert Dust Experiment Delivers,” news release N03-010, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/note2edt/2003/n03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2003); Associated Press, “Astronaut Photographs Dust Storm,” 31 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “ Space Shuttle Crew Completes Israeli Dust and Cloud Studies,” New York Times, 31 January 2003.)
NASA engineers and investigators, together with members of the CAIB, watched as engineers fired foam insulation at a mockup of the leading edge of an orbiter wing, creating a 16-inch-wide (40.6-centimeter-wide) hole in the reinforced-carbon-carbon panel. Engineers used a compressed nitrogen gas cannon to fire a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam at the wing mockup at a speed of 530 miles per hour (853 kilometers per hour), duplicating the force exerted on Columbia’s wing when a piece of foam of the same size hit the orbiter during launch. The test results showed that it was possible that a foam block falling from the external tank could have breached the orbiter’s leading edge, allowing hot gases to penetrate the wing structure during reentry and resulting in the breakup of Columbia.(Alan Levin, “Shuttle Foam Test Leaves Hole,” USA Today, 8 July 2003; John Kelly, “Foam Punches Large Hole in Wing: Test is ‘Smoking Gun’, Shuttle Panel Says,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 July 2003.)
Boeing announced that its Integrated Defense Systems unit had signed a contract with the Japan Defense Agency and the trading company ITOCHU Corporation to build the first aircraft of the Japan Air Self Defense Force 767 Tanker Transport Program, comprising four aircraft and support. For its 767 Tanker Transport, Japan had selected the military derivative of the 767- 200ER commercial aircraft, reconfigured with an advanced Boeing air-refueling boom and an advanced remote aerial refueling operator system. With its selection of the convertible freighter configuration, Japan would have the flexibility to carry either cargo or passengers. The 767 Tanker Transport Program would enable Japan to meet its commitment to international cooperative efforts, such as delivering humanitarian aid and meeting the air-refueling needs of Japan and other countries around the world. (The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Japan Sign 767 Tanker Transport Contract,” news release, 4 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030404m.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
The Boeing Company announced that, because commercial launches were costly and in relatively low demand, it would not seek commercial satellite launch contracts for five years, focusing instead on providing service for the U.S. military and NASA. However, Boeing was a member of the consortium International Launch Services (ILS), which would continue to offer commercial launch services. ILS used Russian-made Zenit 3-SL rockets to launch commercial payloads from a floating platform known as Sea Launch. Boeing indicated that it would accommodate customers that preferred to use Delta rockets instead of the Russian-made rockets. The company stated that the change in business strategy would not affect any employees who worked on the launch programs.(Brian Monroe and Wayne T. Price, “Boeing To Bail Out of Commercial Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 July 2003.)
CAIB Chair Harold W. Gehman Jr. and three other Board members appeared before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss the CAIB’s findings. Gehman testified that budgetary pressures that the U.S. Congress and the White House ultimately controlled had been partly responsible for NASA’s management failures. House Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) concurred that Congress shared some of the blame in the 1 February loss of Columbia but reiterated that NASA needed to make changes. Many of the committee’s questions focused on prospective remedies for NASA’s poor risk management. While agreeing that NASA had a tendency to be overly optimistic in risk assessment, Gehman and other investigators explained to the committee that, because of the age of the Shuttle fleet, risk calculations were little more than estimates. Boehlert expressed concern that NASA was rushing to meet unrealistic return-to-flight dates―NASA had proposed a March 2004 launch date―rather than studying the CAIB report carefully and taking deliberate steps toward returning the Shuttles to flight.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Probe Rips White House, Congress,” Washington Post, 5 September 2003; Patty Reinert and Mark Carreau, “Don’t Rush New Launch, Lawmakers Warn NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 5 September 2003.)
NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASA’s plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, “Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition,” news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, “Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary” (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, “Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission,” Space News, 19 August 2003.)
NASA announced its selection of Allied Aerospace Industries of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to manufacture three flight-ready experimental demonstrator vehicles for the X-43C project, a NASA-led initiative. NASA’s LaRC had led the team, comprising members from the U.S. Air Force and from the aerospace industry, to design and develop the X-43C demonstrator vehicle and propulsion system. Following the example of the Hyper-X (X43-A), a vehicle designed to demonstrate short-duration, scramjet-powered flight at Mach 7 and Mach 10, the creators of the X-43C intended it to demonstrate free flight of a scramjet-powered vehicle, with acceleration capability between Mach 5 and Mach 7. Allied Aerospace Industries had also developed the X43-A vehicle. The Air Force had provided a dual-mode scramjet capable of operating as a ramjet or scramjet for the X-43C vehicles. The cost-plus-fixed-fee completion-type contract that NASA awarded to Allied Aerospace Industries was valued at US$150 million over 66 months, covering all work through completion of the Preliminary Design Review; options covered the final design, hardware fabrication, and all support activities. X-43C Project Manager Paul L. Moses remarked that the demonstrator vehicle would validate advanced technologies, design tools, and test techniques for designing reusable space-access vehicles in the future.(NASA, “NASA Selects Allied Team To Provide Hypersonic Vehicles,” contract release C03-ll, 8 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_c03ll_x43c.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Brian Berger, “Hypersonic Efforts Get an Extra Boost: NASA, Air Force Providing $150 Million for Test Program,” Space News, 21 October 2003.)
For the first time, NASA quantified the costs related to the loss of the Shuttle, stating that, in the six months since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, it had spent US$152.4 million to conduct the investigation and recover debris. The figure included US$111.9 million for NASA to support the CAIB’s inquiry with research and analysis, including the expensive high-speed, foam-impact tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, which had provided evidence that foam striking Columbia after lift off had caused the hole in the left wing. NASA had spent US$18.7 million to fund the 13-member investigative board, paying the salaries of the five civilian members, office rent, travel expenses, and the expense of holding public hearings and maintaining the CAIB’s Web site. NASA had also spent US$21.8 million recovering debris from the Columbia accident, compared to the US$30 million it had spent salvaging pieces of Challenger. Shortly after the tragedy, the U.S. Congress had approved US$50 million to cover expenses, and it was considering a supplemental appropriation of US$50 million. John Scofield, spokesperson for the House Committee on Appropriations, remarked that nobody had criticized NASA’s spending, because nobody wanted to do the necessary work “on the cheap.” Scofield added that the committee was conducting its own analysis to confirm that NASA had correctly estimated its expenditures, but that Congress would likely reimburse NASA for much of the cost. NASA had spent a total of US$62 million (adjusted for inflation) to investigate the 1986 explosion of Challenger.
Four witnesses appeared before the CAIB at its first public hearing. Director of NASA’s JSC Jefferson D. Howell Jr. and Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore spoke about workforce issues, particularly, about NASA’s concern regarding the erosion of its skill base. Keith Chong, a senior scientist at the Boeing Company, discussed Boeing’s work on the foam insulation applied to large propellant tanks such as the Shuttle’s external tank and the Boeing Delta 4 booster. Henry McDonald, former Director of NASA’s ARC, discussed the Space Shuttle Independent Assessment Team (SIAT), which he had led before leaving NASA. The SIAT report had identified problems within the Shuttle program. McDonald expressed disappointment that NASA had not implemented some of the SIAT’s recommendations. He said that he believed some of the recommended improvements, such as modernized records, could have significantly influenced decisions that NASA had based on risk assessments.(Leonard David, “Columbia Accident Hearing Probes NASA Workforce Erosion, Shuttle Safety Issues,” Space.com, 6 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_hearing_030306.html (accessed 29 August 2008); Matthew L. Wald, “NASA Records in Disarray, Study Leader Tells Board,” New York Times, 7 March 2003. 385 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593, 1 April 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx593.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Reuters, “Delta 4 Sends Up Its First U.S. Air Force Satellite,” 10 March 2003.)
The CAIB and members of the U.S. Congress reached an agreement giving selected members and staff of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology access to confidential interviews that CAIB had conducted with 225 witnesses, including NASA managers and others involved with Columbia’s mission. Because the most sensitive testimony about management decision making and engineering practices was contained in privileged statements, CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. had resisted unfettered congressional access, fearing the potential effect on witnesses in future investigations of accidents if the CAIB were to release privileged testimony. Gehman had argued that privacy was critical to the Board’s ability to elicit full, frank, and timely information, citing U.S. Supreme Court decisions supporting privileged interviewing, which was a common practice in military aircraft accident investigations. The agreement had granted committee members and a select list of staff access to the statements at the CAIB’s office andin limited circumstances and under the supervision of a CAIB representativeto those at congressional offices. The CAIB retained the right to refuse to make information from statements to the Board available to the public. In addition, the CAIB would keep a record of those who viewed the information.(Kathy Sawyer, “Congress To Review Shuttle Interviews,” Washington Post, 16 June 2003.)
NASA announced the selection of Donald J. Campbell, Director of GRC at Lewis Field, as Special Assistant to the Deputy Administrator for Nuclear and Alternative Power Generation Systems, effective 1 October 2003. In his new position, Campbell would lead the development and integration of high-power generation systems for propulsion, considered fundamental building blocks for sustained robotic and human exploration in outer space and deep space. Campbell had directed GRC since January 1994. Local political and community leaders had criticized Campbell for his leadership style, which had not galvanized the GRC workforce or fully leveraged the Center’s economic potential. NASA named Deputy Director of GRC Julian M. Earls to succeed Campbell as GRC’s Director.(NASA, “Glenn Research Center’s Donald J. Campbell Selected as NASA Deputy Administrator Special Assistant,” news release 03-260, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/ HQ_03260_Campbell.html (accessed 29 December 2008); NASA, “Dr. Julian M. Earls Selected To Lead NASA Glenn Research Center,” news release 03-261, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03261_Earls.html (accessed 29 December 2008); John Mangels and Michael O’Malley, “NASA Glenn Chief Leaves; Deputy Gets Job,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 9 August 2003.)
GenCorp Inc.’s company Aerojet, a member of the Rocket Based Combined Cycle Consortium (RBC3), announced that NASA and RBC3 had successfully completed the first in a series of tests of a full-scale rocket thrust. Conducted at Aerojet facilities in Sacramento, California, the test demonstrated the first successful hot fire of a thruster using a mix of decomposed peroxide, liquid peroxide, and JP-7 jet fuel to generate combustion―a key milestone in NASA’s Integrated System Test of an Air-breathing Rocket (ISTAR) program. The ISTAR program sought to flight- test a self-powered hypersonic flight vehicle at more than six times the speed of sound by the end of the decade. The program was part of NASA’s effort to develop hypersonic technologies by 2025, to create flight vehicles that could provide safe, routine, and affordable space access and air transportation to anywhere on the globe in less than 2 hours.(Aerojet, “NASA, Industry Consortium Successfully Test Full-Scale Hypersonic Engine Thruster,” news release, 7 January 2003, http://www.aerojet.com/program/news/nr_010703_nasa_industry_consortium_ successfully_tests_thruster.htm?program_ID=45 (accessed 30 July 2008); “NASA, “NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel,” news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/ pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
NASA issued new safety standards for future space vehicles, such as the proposed Orbital Space Plane (OSP) and next-generation launch systems, requiring crew-escape systems and methods of aborting launches. Earlier, NASA had rejected recommendations for the proposed systems as too impractical or expensive for the existing Space Shuttle fleet. The new standards represented NASA’s effort to provide “maximum reasonable assurance” that, in the future, mission failures would not automatically endanger the crew. The standards, known as the Human-Rating Requirements and Guidelines for Space Flight Systems, stipulated that NASA would design future spacecraft to allow the crew to escape quickly during prelaunch procedures and to abort the mission or to effect an emergency escape during ascent.(Eric Pianin, “New Standards Are Issued for Space Vehicle Safety,” Washington Post, 18 July 2003.)
NASA awarded a US$9.7 million grant to Colorado State University to study radiation and cancer. The grant was one of three that NASA awarded to institutions as part of a new initiative to establish national centers studying risks associated with deep space travel. The grant established the NASA Specialized Center of Research (NSCOR) at Colorado State University, which would investigate the risk of the development of cancer associated with radiation exposureparticularly with the development of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), which has a direct correlation with radiation exposure. The research, which would study threats to astronauts from radiation in space, would directly benefit cancer patients who develop AML as a secondary cancer after radiation therapy treatments of the initial cancer.(Christiana Nelson, “NASA Grants CSU Almost $10 Million,” Rocky Mountain Collegian (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO), 22 October 2003.)
NASA filed a request for proposal with Federal Business Opportunities, inviting companies to define their schedules for Orbital Space Plane (OSP) design completion, development, testing, and delivery. NASA requested the completion of a crew-rescue vehicle by 2008 and a crew- transfer vehicle by 2012, despite congressional requests that NASA slow down its work on the OSP project. The Boeing Company and a Lockheed Martin–Northrop Grumman team had both been developing concepts for the OSP, a vehicle anticipated as the next space vehicle to ferry astronaut crews to and from the ISS. NASA had hoped to award the prime contract in August 2004 at the earliest. On 29 October, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, responsible for authorizing NASA programs, had restated its position that NASA should halt work on the OSP Program until the White House, Congress, and NASA had agreed on the direction the U.S. human spaceflight program would take after completion of the ISS. Congressional leaders had also questioned NASA’s funding profile for the program.(Jason Bates, “NASA Releases Request for Orbital Space Plane Plans Despite Congressional Concern About the Program,” Space News, 4 November 2003.)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systems–built, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, “U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket,” news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
NASA announced its collaboration with Japan’s NASDA and the Japanese Meteorological Research Institute to study snowfall over Wakasa Bay, Japan. The study would use NASA’s EOS Aqua satellite in conjunction with research aircraft, which would gather data for the study using the coastal radar systems. NASA had begun the Wakasa Bay Field Campaign on 3 January 2003, scheduling the study to run through 14 February 2003. Although, historically, scientists had found it difficult to quantify contributions to the global hydrologic cycle from the northern Pacific Ocean, they expected that the new satellite instruments, which could detect precipitation over water, would provide data needed to interpret the effect of Pacific Ocean hydrology on the world.(NASA, “NASA Joins Snow Study over the Sea of Japan,” news release 03-025, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-025.txt (accessed 29 July 2008).)
NASA announced that the Demonstration for Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft had completed the lengthy design-certification review for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program, verifying the craft’s safety, performance, and functional requirements. The DART team, based at NASA’s MSFC, planned to demonstrate the vehicle without a human pilot in 2004, launching it on a Pegasus rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet. At 40,000 feet (12,192 meters) over the Pacific Ocean, the Pegasus rocket and the DART craft would separate, and DART would travel from a parking orbit to maneuver close to a target satellite or to rendezvous with it. The demonstration would require 24 hours. DART was the first of three flight-testing demonstrators: Boeing Expendable Launch Systems was developing the X-37 flight demonstrator, and Lockheed Martin Corporation was developing the launchpad-abort demonstrator. DART was NASA’s first completely computer-controlled, rendezvous-capable spacecraft.(NASA, “Space Flight Demonstrator Completes Design Certification,” news release 03-274, 21 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03274_dart_design.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
NASA and the U.S. Army transferred an XV-15 tilt-rotor aircraft to the National Air and Space Museum’s Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center near Washington Dulles International Airport in Virginia. J. Victor Lebacqz, Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Aerospace Technology, described the XV-15―a unique type of aircraft possessing the takeoff, hover, and landing capabilities of a helicopter, with the range and speed of a turboprop aircraft―as one of NASA’s most successful research aircraft and a prime example of cutting-edge aerospace research. Tilt-rotor flight research had begun in the 1950s with the Bell XV-3 convertiplane. In 1977 the first of two XV-15s built by Bell Helicopter–Textron had made its maiden flight. The XV-15 had achieved speed and altitude records for its class, receiving multiple awards from national organizations. Its success had led to the development of the V-22 Osprey and to the world’s first civil tilt-rotor, the nine-passenger Bell-Agusta 609, which was under development and scheduled for delivery in 2007.(NASA, “Tilt Rotor Aircraft Joins National Air and Space Museum Collection,” news release 03-295, 16 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03295_tilt_rotor.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
The CAIB questioned NASA flight managers and tank engineers about damage from launch debris―a key concern of the CAIB―during 4 hours of technical testimony at a public hearing. The CAIB sought to uncover why NASA officials had considered the recurrent problem of foam falling during launches a maintenance issue rather than a flight safety concern. NASA testimony included the description of the layers of checks, justifications, and paperwork required to certify a Shuttle for launch, as well as evidence of NASA engineers’ collective conviction that the shedding foam did not present a threat to flight safety and, therefore, was not a sufficient reason to cancel a launch. In October 2002, foam falling from the bipod area of its external tankthe area where two metal struts connect the fuel reservoir to the orbiterhad struck Space Shuttle Atlantis. The foam that had fallen from Space Shuttle Columbia striking its wing had come from the same area of Columbia’s external tank as the foam that had struck Atlantis. However, engineers and managers had examined Atlantis’s debris incident and had determined that falling foam did not present a safety-of-flight concern for Columbia. Nevertheless, because of the Atlantis incident, managers had requested that engineers responsible for the Shuttle’s external tank develop a plan to prevent debris from breaking away from the bipod area of the tank. Engineers had not completed the plan at the time of Columbia’s flight.(Todd Halvorson, “Engineers: Launch Debris Troublesome Since Start,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Foam Problem,” 8 April 2003.)
Northrop Grumman Corporation, Raytheon Company, and the Boeing Company formed a team to develop the U.S. Air Force E-10A Multi-Sensor Command and Control Aircraft (MC2A), a next-generation aircraft that could replace the Airborne Warning and Control System and the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System aircraft. The initial agreement called for the production of five MC2A craft for the U.S. Air Force, but the program could increase to allow for production of as many as 50 such aircraft. Boeing would provide its twin-jet 767-400 transport aircraft as a platform for powerful multifunction radar with the capability of detecting enemy forces on the ground, as well as low-flying cruise missiles. Northrop Grumman and Raytheon would develop a radar and electronic self-defense system to integrate with a Battle Management Command and Control System produced under a separate contract.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing and Raytheon Announce Teaming Agreement for Next- Generation Air Force Surveillance System,” news release, 12 May 2003, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=40216 (accessed 8 December 2008); Congress Daily, “Aerospace Giants To Team Up On Air Force Project,” 12 May 2003.)
The White House unveiled the U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy, which President George W. Bush had approved on 25 April to replace former President William J. Clinton’s 1994 Presidential Decision Directive-23. The new policy loosened government restrictions on the collection and sale of commercial satellite imagery, directing military and civilian agencies first to approach the commercial sector to fulfill satellite imagery needs. The NSC had created the new guidelines as part of a review of U.S. national space policy, which the White House had directed the NSC to conduct in June 2002 with the support of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The new policy retained the government’s ability to restrict operations of commercial satellite imaging companies for national security reasons, but emphasized that the U.S. military should plan actions in the knowledge that adversaries also had access to commercial satellite imagery. The policy encouraged companies to use the most capable systems possible. However, at the same time, the government retained the right to restrict the sale of the most advanced imagery to U.S. government customers. The policy named the U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) as the interface between government and industry for national security applications of commercial satellite imagery. The U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Interior, and NASA would fulfill that role for civilian applications.(Jason Bates, “White House Loosens Curbs on Commercial Satellite Imaging,” Space News, 13 May 2003; Dan Caterinicchia, “Commercial Satellite Policy Released,” Federal Computer Week, 15 May 2003.)
NASA announced the successful completion of the systems-requirement review for the OSP program, evaluating the contractor teams’ concept designs for providing crew rescue and transfer for the ISS according to Level 1 requirements. The Boeing Company, Lockheed Martin, and a team composed of members from Orbital Sciences Corporation and Northrop Grumman had conducted systems analysis, trade studies, and concept feasibility in preparation for the review. The review had also set Level 2 requirements, addressing guidelines for safety, launch, emergency-return and crew-transfer missions, mission frequency, on-orbit mission duration, contingency cargo requirements, and docking and interfacing with the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Completes Orbital Space Plane Design Review,” news release 03-299, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03299_orbital_plane.html (accessed 28 January 2009))
After completing a 16-day orbital science mission that NASA judged a success, the crew of STS- 107 perished when Space Shuttle Columbia broke apart above Texas during reentry. NASA’s Mission Control lost communication with Columbia at 9:00 a.m. (EST) and immediately switched to the contingency plan to preserve all flight-activity information. NASA had scheduled the landing for 9:16 a.m. (EST). NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe issued a statement describing all the steps NASA had taken after the loss of the Shuttle. NASA officials had spoken with President George W. Bush and Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge; met with family members of the crew; assembled an internal mishap investigation team; and appointed a mishap investigation board. The board comprised an external group of people independent from NASA, charged with examining all the information that Mission Control had locked down when it lost communication with Columbia.(NASA, “NASA Statement on Loss of Communications with Columbia,” news release 03-030, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-030.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); NASA, “Statement by NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe,” news release 03-032, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-032.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); Washington Post, “The Columbia Catastrophe,” 2 February 2003.)
SuccessfulI.html (accessed 19 September 2008); The Boeing Company, “Boeing-Built AsiaSat 4 Communication Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/
A team of engineers from academia and industry conducted the first known flight test of a powered, liquid-propellant, aerospike engine, which they had developed under the California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN). The X-33/Venturestar single stage–to–orbit rocket plane, which NASA and Lockheed Martin had shelved, had been a prototype for aerospike-motor technology. Students at California State University at Long Beach had designed and developed the research vehicle Prospector 2 to use a mixture of liquid oxygen and ethanol. The rocket pitched after several seconds of stable flight, crashing to the floor of the Mojave Desert in California and destroying student payloads on impact. However, the aft section of the vehicle, which contained the aerospike, remained mostly intact. The mission achieved its single objective: to lift the vehicle into the air using the liquid-propellant aerospike engine. The test revealed several areas of the aerospike-engine design that needed improvement.(Space News, “Rocketeers Fly Aerospike Engine,” 24 September 2003.)
NASA announced that it had selected several radioisotope-based, power-conversion technologies for research and development. The awards represented the first competitive technology procurement funded entirely by NASA’s Project Prometheus. The projects covered distinct areas in power-conversion technology: thermoelectrics, thermophotovoltaics, Stirling engines, and Brayton engines. NASA intended the awards to lay the foundation for technology development enabling new classes of missions, such as networked science stations on Mars and small spacecraft capable of complex maneuvers in deep space. Each award would cover three one-year performance periods with continued support from one period to the next, contingent on the program’s needs, availability of funds, and each team’s ability to meet milestones. The total funding was US$43 million divided into various increments covering fiscal years 2003 to 2006.(NASA, “Advanced Radioisotope-Power Technologies R&D Teams Selected,” contract release c03-n, 7 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03n.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA awarded a contract valued at up to US$238.7 million to the Physical Science Laboratory at New Mexico State University, to operate and maintain scientific balloon facilities and to provide engineering support for the NASA Scientific Balloon Program. The four-year contract with two three-year options had a baseline value of US$39.8 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects PSL for Balloon Program Support Contract,” news release c03-g, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03g.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
NASA announced the successful first test flight of Altair, its UAV. The purpose of the test flight was to evaluate Altair’s airworthiness and flight controls. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had established performance specifications for the craft, which was an extended-wing version of the MQ-9 Predator B military UAV―one of several UAVs designed for civil applications.(NASA, “NASA’s Newest Unmanned Aircraft Makes Successful First Flight,” news release 03-193, 9 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03193_altair.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA announced that NOAA, Lockheed Martin, and NASA had formed teams to investigate the 6 September accident involving the NOAA-N Prime satellite. While moving the spacecraft from a vertical to a horizontal position, Lockheed Martin workers had dropped it, significantly damaging the craft. NASA and Lockheed Martin had placed the satellite under guard, securing all records. NASA and NOAA were waiting for an assessment of the damage to determine how the accident would affect satellite programs.(NASA, “NASA, NOAA and Lockheed Martin Investigate Satellite Accident,” news release 03-287, 9 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03287_satellite_accident.html (accessed 28 January 2009). 514 Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Boeing Names New ISS Leader,” 12 September 2003.)
The remotely operated Helios Prototype aircraft crashed into the Pacific Ocean during a test flight within the confines of the U.S. Navy Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) test range. Ground-based mission controllers had been flying the solar-electric, propeller-driven, proof-of- concept flying wing remotely. The craft had been aloft west of Kauai, Hawaii, for about 29 minutes at approximately 8,000 feet (2,438 meters), when the accident occurred, destroying it. High-efficiency solar cells, spread across the upper surface of its 247-foot-long (75-meter-long) wing, supplied power to its electric motors and other systems during daylight; at night, an experimental fuel cell–based electrical system generated power. The prototype, designed to fly at altitudes up to 100,000 feet (30,480 meters) had set a world record for altitude of winged aircraft―96,863 feet (29,524 meters)―during a flight in August 2001. NASA had intended the craft to fly single-day atmospheric-science and imaging missions at high altitudes, as well as to perform multiday telecommunications-relay missions at lower altitudes of 50,000 to 65,000 feet (15,240 to 19,812 meters). The prototype was one of several in development that NASA had sponsored and funded under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program.(NASA, “Helios Prototype Solar Aircraft Lost in Flight Mishap,” news release 03-219, 27 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03219_Helios.html (accessed 12 December 2008); B. J. Reyes for Associated Press, “Record-Setting Solar Airplane Crashes,” 26 June 2003.)
NASA released the first pictures from its Space Infrared Telescope Facility and officially renamed the craft Spitzer Space Telescope. NASA had named the telescope for one of the 20th century’s most influential scientists, Princeton University astronomer Lyman Spitzer Jr., who in 1946 had first proposed placing telescopes in space. Spitzer had been a major force behind the 1990 launch of the HST, the first of NASA’s Great Observatories. With the release of the Spitzer Space Telescope’s first observations―a glowing stellar nursery; a swirling, dusty galaxy; a disc of planet-forming debris; and organic material in the distant universe―Project Scientist Michael Werner of NASA’s JPL remarked that the telescope was working extremely well. The fourth of its Great Observatories, NASA had designed the craft with powerful infrared detectors to capture never-before-seen cosmic features. Unlike its predecessor Great Observatories, which circle Earth, NASA had deployed the Spitzer Space Telescope in a novel trajectory that placed it in an orbit closely trailing that of Earth.(NASA, “NASA Releases Dazzling Images from New Space Telescope,” news release 03-411, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03411_newly_named_prt.htm (accessed 23 March 2009); Patty Reinert, “Stargazer’s Delight: NASA’s New Space Infrared Telescope Puts On a Dazzling Show,” Houston Chronicle, 19 December 2003.)
NASA announced the publication in the Journal of Geophysical Research of the conclusions of a research team that had used data spanning the years 1991 through 2000, which the Microwave Limb Sounder on NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite had collected. The team had found that ozone depletion over Earth’s Arctic region varies in amount, timing, and pattern of loss, confirming previous variations in Arctic ozone-loss estimates. The team’s findings provided the first “consistent, three-dimensional picture of ozone loss during multiple Arctic winters.” (NASA, “NASA Finds Wide Annual Fluctuations in Arctic Ozone Loss,” news release 03-125, 28 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03125.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
NASA announced the successful completion of a series of engine and parachute tests, clearing the way for NASA to carry out integrated Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) test flights to support its Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. In November and December 2003, engineers had conducted a series of 14 hot-fire tests of a 50,000-pound-thrust (22,680-kilogram-thrust) RS-88 rocket engine, resulting in a total of 55 seconds of successful engine operation. The Rocketdyne Propulsion Power unit of the Boeing Company had designed and built the engine. On 9 December 2003, engineers had tested the parachutes at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Grounds in Yuma, Arizona, verifying the function, performance, and stability of an 80-foot (24.38-meter) drogue parachute and of four 156-foot (47.55-meter) main parachutes. Testers had dropped a 12.5-ton (11.34-tonne or 11,340-kilogram) pallet from 10,000 feet (3,048 meters) to simulate the size and weight of a vehicle and crew. The pallet had descended to a soft landing under nearly two acres of parachutes.(NASA, “Engine, Parachute Tests Pave Way for Launch Escape System,” news release 03-417, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03417_escape_system.html (accessed 23 March 2003). 573 Chris Kridler, “Beagle 2 On Its Own,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 20 December 2003.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to continue providing scientific and operational support for the Chandra X-ray Observatory. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had provided scientific and operational support since Chandra’s launch in July 1999. The follow-on contract, valued at US$373 million, funded support through 31 July 2010. NASA had planned Chandra’s mission to last five years from the time of its launch, but had extended the mission to 10 years because of Chandra’s success.(NASA, “NASA Awards Chandra X-ray Observatory Follow-on Contract,” contract release c03-z, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_C03z_Chandra_Contrct.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz had won Discover Magazine’s Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Dìaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earth’s solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Dìaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, “Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award,” news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA announced the appointment of Steven J. Dick as NASA’s Chief Historian, to succeed Roger D. Launius, who had departed in July 2002 to become Historian of the National Air and Space Museum. An astronomer and historian of science, Dick had served as the first Historian of the U.S. Naval Observatory and, just before his NASA appointment, had been Acting Chief of the Naval Observatory’s Nautical Almanac Office. As an expert in the field of astrobiology and its cultural implications, Dick had served on a panel examining the potential societal implications of the discovery of life in the Mars rock. He had received the NASA Group Achievement Award in recognition of his contributions to the establishment of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), including the definition of the field of astrobiology. Dick had authored more than 100 works, including a history of the Naval Observatory, Sky and Ocean Joined: The U.S. Naval Observatory, 1830–2000, which had won the John Lyman Award of the North American Society for Oceanic History for best book in 2002 in Science and Technology and the U.S. Naval Observatory’s Captain James Melville Gilliss Award for extraordinary dedication and exemplary service. At the time of his appointment, Dick served on the editorial boards of several journals and was an associate editor of the International Journal of Astrobiology. From 1993 to 1994, Dick had served as Chairperson of the Historical Astronomy Division of the American Astronomical Society, and between 1997 and 2000, he had been President of the History of Astronomy Commission of the International Astronomical Union.(NASA, “NASA Names New Historian,” news release 03-327, 10 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03327_new_historian.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
JAXA officials announced that mission controllers had lost contact with the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite 2 (ADEOS 2), nicknamed Midori 2. The environmental research satellite was conducting a joint mission of the United States and Japan designed to study ocean winds, sea surface temperatures, sea ice, and water vapor distribution in the atmosphere; to monitor plant life and vegetation in marine areas; and to monitor Earth’s ozone layer. The craft had launched 14 December 2002 to replace Midori 1, which had been lost in 1997 when a solar-array malfunction had left it with no power supply.(Justin Ray, “Earth Monitoring Satellite Goes Silent,” Spaceflight Now, 25 October 2003; Jason Bates, “Japan Loses Contact with ADEOS-2 Satellite,” Space News, 27 October 2003.)
2003/q2/nr_030411t.html (accessed 19 September 2008). system intended for space science missions. Under the third contract, EDD would support GRC in developing and testing technologies for the HiPEP project.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing EDD Wins NASA Contracts for Advanced Electric Propulsion,” news release, 14 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030414s.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
The Japanese probe Muses-C―renamed Hayabusa (Falcon) after its deployment―launched from Kogoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu, aboard an M-5 solid- fuel rocket. The probe’s mission was to rendezvous with the asteroid 1998 SF36, gather surface samples, and return to Earth. Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science expected the 510-kilogram (1,124-pound) spacecraft to arrive at the asteroid in June 2005. The craft would then skim the surface several times over three months, collecting 1 gram (0.04 ounces) of surface material from various sites. The Institute had designed the mission to return the samples to Earth in a capsule in June 2007. If the probe succeeded, the samples would be the first space rocks collected since the end of the U.S. Apollo Lunar Exploration Program 30 years before.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, “Japan Launches Rocket To Probe Asteroid,” 9 May 2003.)
NASA announced the selection of the Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services’ Atlas 5 expendable launch vehicle for the Pluto New Horizons mission scheduled to launch in January 2006. The agreement with Lockheed Martin stipulated a firm fixed-price, launch-service task order under the terms of NASA’s launch services contract with Lockheed Martin. NASA planned for its Pluto New Horizons mission to conduct the first reconnaissance of the binary planet system of Pluto-Charon, gathering information about the surfaces, atmospheres, interiors, and space environments of Pluto and Charon.
Boeing announced the successful completion of Phase III testing of the X-31A Vector aircraft―the world’s only international experimental airplane in the X-plane series to receive international collaboration―demonstrating the use of thrust-vectoring technologies for performing extremely short takeoff and landing (ESTOL) operations. The U.S. Navy, Germany’s defense procurement agency, the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, and Boeing Phantom Works had conducted the ESTOL demonstrations, carrying out the final flight on 29 April at Patuxent River Naval Air Station in Maryland. The demonstrations had consisted of a series of fully automated ESTOL landings on an actual runway using a high angle-of-attack landing, proving that an integrated flight-and-propulsion control system had potential use in ESTOL. Such capabilities would give fighter aircraft greater operational flexibility and lower life-cycle costs.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing X-31A Vector Completes International Flight Test Program,” news release, 7 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030507a.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
SpaceShipOne broke the sound barrier during its first powered flight, but a partial landing gear collapse caused the privately built supersonic aircraft to veer off its desert runway. Test pilot Brian Binnie was not injured during the landing. Scaled Composites LLC, which built the craft, stated that engineers could easily repair the damage the craft had sustained. The test flight represented a milestone―the first piloted supersonic flight of an aircraft developed by a small private company. SpaceShipOne’s specially designed jet aircraft, the White Knight, carried SpaceShipOne to an altitude of 48,000 feet (14.63 kilometers) before releasing it. Traveling near Mach 1.2, the rocket shut down after firing for 15 seconds. Binnie then placed the craft into a vertical climb to reach 68,000 feet (20.72 kilometers). Nine seconds into the climb, the craft broke the sound barrier. Binnie then reconfigured the craft to its conventional shape, and glided to touchdown, at which time the landing gear collapsed.(Associated Press, “Private Rocket Plane Breaks Sound Barrier,” 18 December 2003; Leonard David, “Privately Funded SpaceShipOne Breaks Sound Barrier,” Space.com, 18 December 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/rutan_update_031217.html (accessed 30 March 2009).)
Lockheed Martin announced it had teamed up with Argon Engineering to conduct a flight test and evaluation of Argon’s Lighthouse Communications Intelligence (COMINT) processing capability in a high-density urban environment. The test team had flown the Lighthouse COMINT sensor in the area of Phoenix, Arizona, for more than 24 hours, during eight flights ranging in altitude from 5,000 to more than 20,000 feet (1,524 to more than 6,096 meters). The series of flights confirmed that the sensor was “capable of handling the high dynamic signal densities of urban and military environments.” Wes Colburn of Lockheed Martin ISR Systems remarked that Argon’s open architecture Lighthouse COMINT system provided a dynamic sensor suite capable of meeting fighters’ needs in complex and modern electromagnetic threat environments. The flight tests had validated that the Lighthouse COMINT system was extremely capable in an airborne environment, as well as on submarines, ships, and land sites where it was already in use.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin and Argon Engineering Team Up for the First Flight of the Lighthouse COMINT System,” news release, 21 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/LockheedMartinArgonEngineeringTeamU.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
The ISS marked its five-year anniversary in space. Since the Russian Zarya control module had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 20 November 1998, the ISS had grown from an uninhabited module to a permanently staffed research facility the size of a three- bedroom house. After five years, the ISS was not completely constructed―NASA was preparing more than 80 tons (72,575 kilograms or 72.58 tonnes) of equipment and hardware, including solar arrays and support structures, for launch at the Space Station Processing Facility at its KSC. Also in launch preparation at KSC was the Node 2 module, which would connect the U.S., European, and Japanese research laboratories; and the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module. The eventual launch of the European Columbus laboratory under construction in Bremen, Germany, would expand the station’s volume to that of a five-bedroom house. The first crew to live aboard the orbiting facility had arrived on 2 November 2000, and since that date, eight successive crews―22 people―had staffed the ISS, conducting research in bioastronautics, physical sciences, fundamental space biology, space product development, and spaceflight disciplines.(NASA, “International Space Station Marks Five Years in Orbit,” news release 03-374, 19 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03374_iss_five_yrs.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
NASA opened its inaugural annual Service Life Extension Program (SLEP) Summit at the NASA Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. SLEP was part of the new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) established to “ensure the viability of the Space Shuttle Program.” NASA intended the annual summit to provide a forum to aid the U.S. spaceflight community in shaping long-range strategy, setting priorities, and determining the selection and recommendation process to sustain the Shuttle system. In the wake of the Columbia tragedy, the summit also addressed return-to-flight issues in its first meeting. The summit brought together approximately 200 government and aerospace industry professionals who heard from seven SLEP panels: Safety, Sustainability, Infrastructure, Aerospace Industry, Performance, Operations, and Resources. Panels consolidated and submitted their recommendations to NASA’s Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which then identified 60 candidate projects for further consideration and chartered a team to prepare an internal submission, which SLEP would vet over the summer, during NASA’s upcoming FY 2005 budget process. SLEP intended to refine its long-term strategy further at the following year’s summit.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Holds First Summit,” news release n03-030, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_n03030.html (accessed 25 August 2008); NASA, “NASA Develops Long-Term Planning Process for Space Shuttle,” news release 03-119, 24 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03119.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
