Shana L. Dale became Deputy Administrator of NASA, replacing Frederick D. Gregory, who had announced his resignation from NASA in September 2005. Before joining NASA, Dale had worked at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, serving as Chief of Staff, General Counsel, and, finally, as Deputy Director for Homeland and National Security. In addition, Dale had served as Staff Director for the House Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1995 to 2000.(NASA, “Dale Sworn In as NASA Deputy Administrator,” media advisory M05-186, 29 November 2005; NASA, “Griffin Applauds Confirmation of Dale as NASA Deputy Administrator,” news release 05-386, 4 November 2005.)
JAXA successfully tested an experimental aircraft capable of flying at Mach 2, which is twice the speed of sound. JAXA launched the aircraft, formally known as the Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport (SST), on a rocket from Australia’s Woomera Test Range at 7:06 a.m. (local time). After its release from the rocket, the SST flew for nearly 15 minutes at speeds of Mach 1.9 to 2 (1,446 to 1,522 miles per hour or 2,327 to 2,449 kilometers per hour) and at altitudes ranging from 12 to 19 kilometers (7.5 to 11.8 miles). Mitsubishi Heavy Industries had developed the SST as part of a US$10 million program to create an aircraft capable of transporting 300 passengers between Los Angeles and Tokyo in approximately 4 hours.(Meraiah Foley, “Flying High: Speedy Japanese Jet Passes Test,” Houston Chronicle, 11 October 2005; JAXA, “Flight Trial Result of Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport,” news release, 10 October 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/10/20051010_sst_e.html (accessed 15 July 2009).)
The Boeing Company announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power business to Pratt & Whitney, a United Technologies Corporation unit, for about US$700 million in cash. Rocketdyne, primarily a rocket engine developer and builder that provided booster engines for the Space Shuttle and the Delta series of expendable launch vehicles, had helped pioneer space exploration in the 1950s and1960s. The sale reflected Boeing’s struggle to make a profit in the space-launch business and marked the company’s latest move toward focusing on large-scale weapons and aerospace systems. United Technologies intended the acquisition to broaden the product line at Pratt & Whitney, which, in recent years, had lost market share in its core business of providing jet engines.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Sell Rocketdyne Propulsion Unit to Pratt & Whitney; news release, 22 February 2005, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2005/q1/nr_050222o.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Los Angeles Times, “Maker of Rocket Engines Is Sold,” 23 February 2005.)
Scientists published research based on data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, which provided the first observational evidence that black holes not only destroy stars, but also create them. Sergei Nayakshin of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom and Rashid A. Sunyaev of the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Garching, Germany, compared x-ray emissions from stars in the Orion nebula with x-ray emissions from stars orbiting within one light-year of the central Milky Way’s black hole Sagittarius A*. According to current scientific theories, a black hole’s immense gravity is able to pull millions of stars close to the black hole and to destroy stars. However, Nayakshin and Sunyaev had discovered that Sagittarius A* is not consuming its surrounding stars. Furthermore, the number of stars near the black hole is around 10,000, far less than scientists would expect if the black hole’s gravity had drawn the stars toward it. Therefore, the scientists had concluded that the Chandra data supports an alternative theory of why stars are near black holes. This theory holds that dust around a black hole creates dense gas clouds. The gravity of the clouds counteracts the gravity of the black hole, thereby creating an environment in which stars form.(NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Reveals New Star Generation,” news release 05-344, 10 October 2005; Sergei Nayakshin and Rashid Sunyaev, “The ‘Missing’ Young Stellar Objects in the Central Parsec of the Galaxy: Evidence of Star Formation in a Massive Accretion Disc and a Top-Heavy Initial Mass Formation,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 364, no. 1 (13 October 2005): L23–L27.)
NASA and its partner the Spaceward Foundation, a publicly funded, nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing the cause of space access, announced prizes totaling US$$400,000 for four competitions. The competitions would be the first under NASA’s Centennial Challenges program, designed to promote technical innovation in support of the Vision for Space Exploration and NASA’s goals. The first two competitions, the Tether Challenge and the Beam Power Challenge, would challenge innovators to focus on developing lightweight, yet strong, tether materials and wireless power transmission technologies. Winners of each of the initial 2005 challenges would receive a prize of US$50,000. The Tether Challenge would require teams to make the strongest tether of a specified diameter. Competing in a tournament-style bracket system, the tethers would be stretched until they broke, with the overall winner competing against NASA’s “house tether” to win the cash. The Beam Power Challenge would require teams to use wireless technology to lift a weight off the ground. NASA planned a second set of Tether and Beam Power challenges, with a greater degree of difficulty, for 2006.(NASA, “NASA Announces First Centennial Challenges’ Prizes,” news release M05-083, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_m05083_Centennial_prizes.html (accessed 2 September 2005); Robert Roy Britt, “NASA Details Cash Prizes for Space Privatization,” Space.com, 24 March 2005, http://www.space.com/news/050323_centennial_challenge.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
A California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN) research team successfully launched and recovered the Prospector 6 (P6) test vehicle at the Mojave Test Area owned and operated by the Reaction Research Society. The test was part of a joint industry/academic effort to develop a low-cost Nanosat Launch Vehicle, a booster capable of delivering 22-pound (10- kilogram) payloads to low Earth orbit. Researchers at Garvey Spacecraft Corporation of Long Beach, California, and California State University at Long Beach had designed and built the partially reusable 27-foot (8-meter) P6 test vehicle, which had flown to just under 3,000 feet (914 meters), a milestone toward the team’s goal. P6 had also carried student payloads from across the country: a mini-DV camera to capture on-board video of the entire flight sequence; a real-time telemetry system that adapted off-the-shelf Wi-Fi technology to relay key propulsion- system parameters; and a measurement-logging package to record acceleration, pressure, and temperature data that the research team would use to assess the vehicle’s performance.(Leonard David, “High Hopes for Low-Cost Rocket After Successful Launch Test,” Space.com, 27 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050526_prospector6_test.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
An international group of astronomers led by Debra A. Fischer of San Francisco State University announced that they had discovered the largest solid core yet found in an exoplanet. The planet, called HD 149026b, has a solid core that is approximately 70 times larger than Earth’s mass. The discovery was the first observational evidence of the core accretion theory of planetary formation, which posits that planets begin as small rock-ice cores and acquire additional mass through gravitational attraction of gas and other matter. The competing gravitational instability theory holds that planetary formation occurs after the rapid gravitational collapse of large gas clouds. Fischer and the other astronomers reported that they had determined that the mechanism of gravitational instability was unlikely to have produced the large, rocky core of HD 149026b.
NASA’s Space Shuttle Program reached another milestone: filling a 154-foot-high (47-meter- high) external tank with fuel and oxygen. The test, intended to assure engineers that all changes to the tank operated as expected, marked the first time since Columbia’s accident that NASA had prepared an external tank for flight. The foam was necessary to keep the liquid fuel cool and to reduce ice build-up on the tank, but NASA and Lockheed Martin had redesigned the tank to reduce the amount of foam debris during launch. Changes to the tank design included removing the foam from the bipod ramp and replacing the foam with heaters. The designers had also added a “drip-lip” to reduce ice accumulation on the joints that permit the adjustment of the tank’s fuel line. In a dress rehearsal for Discovery’s upcoming launch, engineers pumped more than 500,000 gallons of fuel into the tank, monitoring the tank and the Shuttle’s systems down to the T-minus 31-second mark in a mock countdown. N. Wayne Hale Jr., Deputy Manager of the Space Shuttle Program and Chair of NASA’s Mission Management Team, remarked on the outstanding performances of the newly modified external tank, the Shuttle, and the launchpad.(Philip Chien, “NASA Tests Tank on Space Shuttle,” Washington Times, 15 April 2005; William Harwood, “NASA Managers Elated with Shuttle Fueling Test,” Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2005; Kelly Young, “Shuttle’s External Fuel Tank Tested Successfully,” New Scientist, 15 April 2005, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn7270-shuttles-external-fuel-tank-tested-successfully.html (accessed 25 November 2009); Physorg.com, “NASA Puts Space Shuttle External Tank to the Test,” 15 April 2005, http://www.physorg.com/news3738.html (accessed 25 November 2009).)
NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar storms―extremely powerful explosions in the Sun’s atmosphere―can affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmosphere―currents associated with changes in solar magnetic fields―are the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts,” news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., “The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field,” Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501–513.)
NASA selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Broomfield, Colorado, to develop, manufacture, and provide prelaunch and postlaunch support for the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Microwave Imager (GMI) instrument. The total contract value was approximately US$100.2 million over a period of seven years and nine months. The GMI, a conical-scan microwave radiometer, would fly on the GPM Core spacecraft as part of a multinational collaborative effort to measure global precipitation. The spacecraft, which NASA had not yet built, would be the first in a constellation of spacecraft deployed under NASA’s GPM mission. The GMI instrument would make calibrated, radiometric measurements from space at multiple microwave frequencies and polarizations. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that scientists need to know the amount and distribution of precipitation worldwide so that they can assess the quantity and quality of fresh water resources for food and fiber production, human consumption, and other societal needs. Experts in water resource management, agriculture, transportation, forestry, weather forecasting, and other fields, would be able to use future research findings based on GMI data.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Provide GPM Microwave Imager Instrument,” news release c05-g, 15 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_c05g_gpm_imager.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Matt Branaugh, “Ball Gets In On NASA Mission,” Boulder Daily Camera (CO), 16 March 2005.)
Astronomers announced that they had discovered the source of short gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), which had been an enigma for decades. Gamma rays are the most energetic and deadly form of electromagnetic radiation. Although scientists had already discovered that supernovas cause long GRBs, which last for approximately 2 seconds, they had remained uncertain of the causes of short GRBs, which last less than 1 second. Using data from numerous NASA satellites, 130 astronomers from around the world found that short GRBs originate from neutron stars and not―as some theories had suggested―from supernovas. More specifically, satellite data showed that short GRBs originate from collisions involving a neutron star and either another neutron star or a black hole. However, the data was not conclusive regarding the exact type of collision that causes short GRBs, because the brevity of these events makes them difficult to observe directly.(Luigi Pir, “Short-Burst Sources,” Nature (London) 437, no. 7060 (6 October 2005): 822–823; Dennis Overbye, “Scientists Trace Gamma Rays to Collision of Dead Stars,” New York Times, 6 October 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists had finally agreed that Voyager 1, launched in 1977, had reached the solar system’s final frontier, passed through the termination shock region―the point at the edge of the solar system where the solar wind slows abruptly, and entered the heliosheath―a frontier of unknown thickness defining the border with interstellar space. In November 2003, the Voyager team had announced unusual events in the mission’s history, signaling that Voyager 1 had reached the edge of the solar system. However, scientists disagreed as to whether the craft had actually encountered termination shock or was merely approaching the region at the edge of interstellar space. NASA explained that scientists had based the evidence that Voyager 1 had encountered termination shock on the craft’s measurement of a sudden increase in the strength of the magnetic field carried by the solar wind, combined with an inferred decrease in speed, which happens when the solar wind slows down. Additionally, Voyager had observed an increase in the number of high-speed, electrically charged electrons and ions, as well as a burst of plasma-wave noise, which scientists had expected to occur when Voyager 1 passed the termination shock. Eric Christian, Discipline Scientist for the Sun-Solar System Connection Research Program at NASA Headquarters, remarked that Voyager’s observations over the past few years had shown that termination shock is far more complicated than previously thought. When Voyager 1 entered the heliosheath, the craft was 8.7 billion miles (14 kilometers) away from Earth, the farthest any human-made object had traveled.(NASA, “Voyager Spacecraft Enters Solar System’s Final Frontier,” news release 05-131, 24 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05131_Voyager_agu.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Guy Gugliotta, “Voyager at Edge of Solar System,” Washington Post, 25 May 2005.)
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected the most powerful eruption measured in the universe to date, generating a supermassive black hole that is growing at a remarkable rate. The eruption in the galaxy cluster MS 0735.6+7421 had been in process for more than 100 million years, generating energy equal to that of hundreds of millions of gamma- ray bursts (GRBs). In the past, scientists had usually detected the rapid growth of supermassive black holes by observing very bright radiation from galaxies. However, MS 0735.6+7421 had no detectable bright, central radiation, and the galaxy cluster’s radio jets were faint. Chandra’s x-ray observations of the hot cluster gas had revealed the true nature of the black hole. Michael R. Wise of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology remarked that, until Chandra had captured this information, scientists had no idea that the black hole was “gorging itself.” Chandra’s discovery demonstrated that, to observe and understand some of the most violent events in the universe, astronomers need x-ray telescopes.(NASA, “Most Powerful Eruption in the Universe Discovered,” news release 05-004, 5 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05004_chandra.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASA’s FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States’ obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttle’s retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
The American Academy of Arts and Sciences released “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities,” a research paper highly critical of the Vision for Space Exploration. In the paper, former Director of NASA’s JSC George W. S. Abbey and former White House science advisor Neal F. Lane stated that the Vision for Space Exploration does not address major obstacles to the United States’ progress in space exploration and science. Those problems include predicted shortfalls in the U.S. engineering and science workforce and declining international cooperation on existing and planned space missions. Abbey and Lane also stated that the United States would be unlikely to realize the Vision’s objectives because of the diminishing U.S. commitment to the country’s commercial space industry and the declining role of basic science in the U.S. space program and in the national economy. NASA officials did not comment on the paper, stating that they had not yet seen it.(John Schwartz, “Report Says Space Program Is Lacking Money and Focus,” New York Times, 23 June 2005; George W. S. Abbey and Neal F. Lane, “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities” (Occasional Paper, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, 2005), 1–2.)
NASA and the Florida Space Research Institute (FSRI) announced the third Centennial Challenges competition: the Moon Regolith Oxygen (MoonROx) challenge. The MoonROx challenge would require teams to develop hardware, within mass and power limits, able to extract a minimum of 5 kilograms (0.005 tonnes or 0.006 tons) of breathable oxygen from simulated lunar soila volcanic ash called JSC-1within a period of 8 hours. The first team to accomplish the oxygen-production goal before June 2008 would win US$250,000. Existing state-of-the-art technologies were incapable of extracting oxygen from simulated lunar soil. FSRI Executive Director Samuel T. Durrance remarked that oxygen-extraction technologies would be critical for robotic and human missions to the Moon.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Centennial Challenge,” news release 05-128, 19 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05128_Centennial_Challenge.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Jeremy McGovern, “Astro Bytes: Extracting Oxygen from ‘Lunar’ Soil,” Astronomy News, 24 May 2005.)
NASA announced the inauguration of SERVIR, an innovative regional monitoring system designed to provide early warnings to Central American decision makers about various ecological and climatic changes. SERVIR, Spanish for “to serve,” is the acronym for the Spanish phrase, Sistema Regional de Visualización y Monitoreo (Regional Visualization and Monitoring System). The purpose of the system was to aid the governments and industries of the seven countries of Central America and the southern Mexican states. NASA scientists had developed the system to track weather, climatological, and ecological eventsfor example, to monitor wildfires, red tides, and toxic algae bloomsusing NASA’s research in Earth sciences and space-based observations. Daniel E. Irwin, SERVIR Project Manager at NASA’s MSFC, remarked that the system was an excellent tool for gauging slow or periodic shifts in climate that could lead to drought or other long-term problems, in addition to identifying quick-forming weather phenomena that threaten human lives.(NASA, “NASA Develops Central American Monitoring System,” news release 05-038, 4 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05038_panama.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope had captured the light from two known planets that are orbiting stars other than the Sun, enabling scientists to measure and compare extrasolar planets directly. This event marked the beginning of a new era in planetary science. Previously, scientists had confirmed the existence of extrasolar planets using one of two techniques of indirect discoverythe “wobble” technique or the “transit” technique. The wobble technique detected the gravitational tug that a planet exerts on its parent star, and the transit technique inferred the presence of a planet when the planet passed in front of its star, causing the star to dim. Both techniques depended on visible-light telescopes. By contrast, Spitzer observed infrared light, enabling astronomers to contrast a planet against the glow of its parent star. If detected using the transit technique, the glow of the parent star would have overwhelmed the glimmer of light reflected by the planet.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Marks Beginning of New Age of Planetary Science,” news release 05-082, 22 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05082_Spitzer_First_Light.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
J. Stephen Fossett landed the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer experimental aircraft in Salinas, Kansas, after flying the first solo, nonstop, non-refueled, around-the-world airplane trip. The flight had lasted three days, during which Fossett had not slept and had only consumed 12 milkshakes. The craft, designed by X Prize–winning SpaceShipOne creator Burt Rutan, carried NASA’s advanced experimental Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) transceiver, the Low Power Transceiver (LPT) that NASA researchers believed would provide a flexible and inexpensive option for relaying information between spacecraft. NASA had placed the new transceiver on board GlobalFlyer to test the device’s function during a real flight, especially its performance in delivering a constant video feed. NASA had loaned GlobalFlyer a modified version of its Personal Cabin Pressure Monitor to alert the pilot of potentially dangerous or deteriorating cabin pressure. Because the background noise in GlobalFlyer’s cockpit was too loud for the pilot to hear an alarm, the modified monitor vibrated to signal a problem. The mission had successfully overcome periodic failures of GlobalFlyer’s navigation system. Furthermore, while passing through Japanese airspace, the aircraft had appeared to be running out of fuel too quickly, but a solid tailwind had helped Fossett avoid making a landing in Hawaii.(NASA, “NASA Technology Supports Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer,” news release 05-068, 3 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05068_globalflyer_congrats.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “NASA Helps Record Flight,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2005.)
Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director,” news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
NASA scientists announced the first measurements ever taken of changes in sea level that were unrelated to changes in land height. Although researchers believed that rising sea levels were related to global warming, they were unsure of how much sea levels had changed, the degree to which sea-level changes were attributable to upward and downward land movements, and the causes of those changes. However, using data from numerous satellites, NASA scientists had discovered that global sea levels had increased during the previous 50 years, at an estimated rate of 1.8 millimeters (0.07 inches) annually, and that the rate of increase had accelerated to 3 millimeters (0.12 inches) annually in the previous 12 years. The scientists attributed half of the rise in sea levels to the expansion of water from warmer ocean temperatures and the remainder to various other sources, such as the melting of ice covers in Antarctica, Greenland, and elsewhere.(Juliet Eilperin, “NASA Able To Pinpoint Changes in Sea Levels,” Washington Post, 8 July 2005; NASA, “NASA Satellites Measure and Monitor Sea Level,” news release 05-175, 7 July 2005.)
NASA signed a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in an effort to improve global conservation through increased use of NASA’s Earth science research and remote-sensing data. Under the agreement, UNESCO would use NASA-generated data to share scientific information about how Earth functions. In addition, the MOA would further an existing partnership between the NASA- supported Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) education program and UNESCO’s World Heritage Centre. NASA and UNESCO would train teachers in UNESCO-member states to work with UNESCO’s Natural World Heritage Site managers on collaborative conservation program activities.
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company announced the formation of a joint venture called United Launch Alliance, combining the production, engineering, testing, and launch operations associated with U.S. government launches of Boeing Delta and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. The merger ended a two-year legal battle between the two largest government contractors, in which Lockheed Martin had accused Boeing of cheating to win rocket-launch work. The venture eliminated market competition for launching weather satellites for NOAA, scientific satellites for NASA, spy satellites for the National Security Agency, and communications satellites for the U.S. Air Force. According to the agreement, the joint venture would produce both Boeing’s Delta and Lockheed’s Atlas rockets, consolidating production at Boeing’s Decatur, Alabama, facility. Lockheed’s Denver, Colorado, office would serve as headquarters, housing the engineering and administrative functions. Lockheed Martin’s Vice President of Financial Strategies Jeffrey D. MacLauchlan remarked that the preservation of the two separate rocket families was the crux of the venture’s appeal to the federal government.(Lockheed Martin, “Boeing, Lockheed Martin To Form Launch Services Joint Venture,” news release, 2 May 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/BoeingLockheedMartin FormLaunchServi.html (accessed 17 September 2009); Renae Merle, “Boeing, Lockheed Join Rocket Division,” Washington Post, 3 May 2005.)
The FAA published the first proposed regulations on commercial human spaceflight, a growing industry often referred to as space tourism. The Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492) required the U.S. Department of Transportation, which oversees the FAA, to implement regulations on commercial human spaceflights. Congress had passed the bill for to establish a balanced and clear regulatory regime that promoted the development of the growing commercial human spaceflight industry. Most of the FAA’s proposed regulations addressed passengers’ informed consent and crew members’ qualifications, as well as the training of both passengers and crew. The proposed regulations would remain subject to public comment for 60 days (until 27 February 2006). The FAA was required to issue the final regulations by 23 June 2006.(Darlene Superville for the Associated Press, “Gov’t Issues Proposed Space Tourism Rules,” 29 December 2005; Human Space Flight Requirements for Crew and Space Flight Participants, 70 Fed. Reg. 77, 262 (29 December 2005) (to be codified at 14 C.F.R. pt. 401, 415 et al.).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
ESA’s CryoSat spacecraft was destroyed during a failed launch from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome. ESA had intended CryoSat as one of a series of Earth-observation spacecraft called Earth Explorers. ESA had built CryoSat to monitor the thickness of land and sea ice, to determine whether climate change is reducing Earth’s ice masses. Initial assessments of the launch failure indicated that the rocket launching the satellite had experienced a problem with its on-board flight-control system, a problem that had prevented the rocket’s upper stage from separating from its second stage.(ESA, “CryoSat Mission Lost Due to Launch Failure,” ESA news release 44-2005, 8 October 2005. http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMR3Q5Y3EE_index_0.html (accessed 14 July 2009); New York Times, “Arctic Study Satellite Crashes into Ocean,” 9 October 2005.)
Astronomers using NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) detected, for the first time, a large population of black holes known as type-2 quasars. Quasars―supermassive black holes―are the universe’s brightest objects. Although scientists had observed the light from type-1 quasars, they had never before been able to detect type-2 quasars because, despite the brightness of type-2 quasars, the gas and dust rings that surround them obscure the quasars’ visible light and block their emission of x-rays. Space telescopes and other scientific instruments rely on x-ray emissions to detect and to analyze these celestial phenomena. However, Alejo Martínez-Sansigre of the University of Oxford led a team of astronomers who used the SST to detect infrared light emitted by type-2 quasars, thereby capturing evidence of 21 quasars. The research also indicated that the growth of black holes has been concentrated in obscure regions of the universe and has tended to occur in the cores of forming galaxies during brief, highly productive periods. The new data suggested that thousands more such quasars might exist in the universe.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Finds Hidden, Hungry Black Holes,” news release 05-211, 3 August 2005; Alejo Martínez-Sansigre et al., “The Obscuration by Dust of Most of the Growth of Supermassive Black Holes,” Nature 463, no. 7051 (4 August 2005): 666–669.)
Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it had finalized an agreement with the Boeing Company to compete as a team to develop NASA’s new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and related human lunar-exploration systems, in anticipation of NASA’s formal request for proposals (RFPs). NASA intended the CEV to serve as the central human space-transportation system within the Project Constellation, which would incorporate human and robotic space systems, ferrying astronauts to the Moon and beyond. According to the agreement, Northrop Grumman’s Integrated Systems sector would serve as team leader and prime contractor during the initial development phase, Spiral 1. During the Spiral 1 phase, the team hoped to demonstrate the CEV’s ability to operate safely in low Earth orbit with astronauts aboard. Boeing NASA Systems, an operating unit of Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, would serve as principal subcontractor. The two companies’ roles would reverse to implement the second phase, Spiral 2. During the Spiral 2 phase, NASA intended to begin to expand human space exploration to the Moon and beyond.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing Finalize Space Exploration Teaming Agreement,” news release, 24 January 2005, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=71298 (accessed 17 August 2009); Los Angeles Business Journal, “Northrop, Boeing Finalize Deal To Team for NASA Contract,” 25 January 2005.)
President of Canadian Arrow Geoff Sheerin and Indian-American entrepreneur Chirinjeev Kathuria joined forces to create a new corporation called PlanetSpace. The company’s goal was to make spaceflight available to the public within two years. Canadian Arrow was creating a rocket based on the German World War II V-2 rocket. Although the company had not completed its rocket in time to compete for the US$10 million X Prize in 2004, it had successfully completed a drop test of the vehicle in August 2005 and expected to complete the rocket within one year. PlanetSpace planned to charge US$250,000 per person for a suborbital flight that would include 14 days of training and 15 minutes of flight time. The rocket would launch from a Canadian site with a pilot and two passengers and would reach a maximum velocity of four times the speed of sound. The rocket would coast to a maximum height of 70 miles (112 kilometers), providing a few minutes of weightlessness and a view of the curving Earth with a black sky above. Finally, a crew capsule would separate from the rocket during its descent and would parachute down to a water landing.(PlanetSpace, “Canadian Arrow Partners with Leading American Entrepreneur To Launch First Commercial Passengers to Space,” news release, 17 May 2005, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/ps-press-rel-001.pdf (accessed 17 September 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Partners Plan Flights in 2007,” MSNBC.com, 18 May 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7879142/ (accessed 17 September 2009).)
NASA-funded researchers reported that they had discovered that lightning in clouds a few miles above the ground clears a safe zone in the Van Allen Beltthe radiation belt located thousands of miles above Earth. Without this zone, satellites would have no safe area in which to orbit. The discovery, which NASA described as unexpected, resolved a 40-year debate about how the safe zone forms and how the region clears after magnetic storms fill it with radiation. Previously, the prominent theory held that turbulence in the zone generates radio waves in space, which clear the radiation. However, lightning also generates radio waves. The research team had confirmed the lightning theory using a global map of lightning activity created from data that the Micro Lab 1 spacecraft had collected. The team had also collected radio-wave data from the Radio Plasma Imager aboard the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft, combining that data with archival data from the Dynamics Explorer spacecraft. These two data sets showed that radio-wave activity in the safe zone closely follows terrestrial lightning patterns; if the radio waves had originated in space rather than Earth, no such correlation would exist. Therefore, the team had concluded that lightning clears radiation within a few days following magnetic storms. According to NASA, engineers could eventually design spacecraft that generate radio waves at the correct frequency and location to clear radiation belts around other planets, enabling humans to explore planets and moons such as Jupiter’s Europa.(NASA, “NASA Finds Lightning Clears Safe Zone in Earth’s Radiation Belt,” news release 05-070, 8 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05070_radiation_belt.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Agence-France Presse, “Lightning Cuts Safe Zone Between Earth Radiation Belts: NASA,” 9 March 2005.)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
NASA launched a 40 million-cubic-foot (12.2 million-cubic-meter) balloon, the Deep Space Test Bed facility, from Fort Sumner, New Mexico, carrying an automobile-sized aluminum gondola containing scientific experiments prepared by university and elementary school students. NASA had collaborated with the students to carry out research to analyze characteristics of Earth’s atmosphere from the unique laboratory traveling 30 miles (48.3 kilometers) above Earth. The primary payload was the High Energy Replicated Optics (HERO), a hard x-ray–focusing telescope. Engineers from NASA’s MSFC had designed HERO to create images from high- energy x-ray light. Undergraduate students from Pennsylvania State University, Montana State University, the University of Alabama, and Auburn University in Alabama had prepared experiments for the new laboratory. The experiments would identify pollution-related aerosols in the atmosphere, measure radiation and its impact on the integrity and behavior of the balloon, measure the external temperature of the balloon material, and gather magnetic-field data. Students from eight grade schools had prepared experiments to observe the effect of the flight environment on microscopic organisms and seeds, placing their experiments in brick-size plastic containers inside two large containers on board the balloon.(NASA, “NASA and Students Partner for High Altitude Research,” news release 05-121, 11 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05121_Student_Experiments.html (accessed 14 September 2009). 792 Richard M. Jones for the American Institute of Physics, “New NASA Administrator Appears Before Senate Appropriators,” FYI Bulletin 69, 17 May 2005, http://www.aip.org/fyi/2005/069.html (accessed 17 September 2009).)
JAXA launched its Suzaku astronomy satellite at 3:30 a.m. (GMT) from Uchinoura Space Center (formerly called the Kagoshima Space Center) on an M-5 rocket. Suzaku, known as Astro-E2 before the launch, was JAXA’s replacement for its first Astro-E satellite, which had been lost during launch in 2000. JAXA and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science had built the satellite to monitor space in conjunction with NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton. The Suzaku satellite was equipped with three telescopes: a Hard X-ray Detector, an X-ray Spectrometer, and an X-ray Imaging Spectrometer.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 621, 1 August 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx621.html (accessed 12 June 2009); NASA, “Suzaku: Mission Overview,” 3 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/astro-e2/ main/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
The NASA Advisory Council (NAC), responsible for providing counsel and policy advice to the NASA Administrator on important programs and issues, held its first meeting after its organizational restructuring. NASA had restructured the NAC to provide it with better support as NASA implemented the Vision for Space Exploration. Under the reorganization, the NAC had incorporated standing committees that it had previously chartered. The six committees composing the restructured Council were Aeronautics, Audit and Finance, Exploration, Human Capital, Science, and Space Operations. Each committee was responsible for examining particular subject areas and providing findings to the full Council, which would consider the findings and supply specific recommendations to the Administrator. Former U.S. Senator and Apollo program astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt chaired the 24-member NAC, which also included former Apollo program astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first person to walk on the Moon.(NASA, “New NASA Advisory Council Holds Inaugural Meeting,” news release 05-416, 29 November 2005; NASA, “NASA Advisory Council (NAC),” 19 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/nac/home/ index.html (accessed 22 July 2009).)
The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecraft’s sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the public’s knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann Druyan―Sagan’s widow―had founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particles―photons―on the spacecraft’s large, triangular, mirror-like “solar sails” were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine,” 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, “Projects: Solar Sailing,” http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
Japan successfully launched a geostationary weather satellite MTSAT-1R aboard an H-2A rocket from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima prefecture, after a glitch in communications between the rocket and ground systems had caused a 76-minute delay. The launch was Japan’s first launch of a heavy-lift vehicle since November 2003, when one of the H-2A’s solid boosters had failed to jettison as expected after completing its burn, causing the launch to fail. In the failed launch, Japan had lost the second pair of the four spy satellites that it had built after North Korea had fired a missile into Japanese territory in 1998. The other pair of the four satellitesone optical and one radar-sounding satellitewere all Japan had left to monitor its threatening neighbor. Furthermore, the launch failure had dashed Japan’s plans to enter the commercial satellite-launch business and had caused Japan to lose its international credibility. The successful launch of the MTSAT-1R restored morale to Japan’s rocketry program. A second mission of the MTSAT-1R was to replace a satellite lost in November 1999 when the final H-2 rocket, the predecessor of H-2A, had failed to reach orbit. Japan had designed the MTSAT-1R to service the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency, fulfilling the two missions of facilitating air-traffic management and obtaining satellite imagery for meteorologists.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616; James Brooke, “After Failures, Space Effort in Japan Gets a Lift,” New York Times, 28 February 2005; Justin Ray, “Beleaguered H-2A Rocket Roars Into Orbit,” Spaceflight Now, 26 February 2005.)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASA’s 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean O’Keefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five master’s degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASA’s decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles’ safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASA’s development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States’ dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, “Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator,” news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, “NASA Nominee Says He’ll Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope,” New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-108, legislation that provided US$16.5 billion in appropriations to NASA for FY 2006. In the bill’s conference report, Congress noted some specific programs that it wanted NASA to pursue. For example, Congress specified that NASA use the funds to develop the Crew Exploration Vehicle and Crew Launch Vehicle, as described in the Exploration Systems Architecture Study, NASA’s master plan for meeting the goals of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, Congress also directed NASA to make more effective use of NASA Television―NASA’s own television station, which it had primarily used for internal communications―to promote public knowledge about and interest in space exploration.
NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASA’s HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenite―composed of iron, oxygen, and titanium―as a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source,” New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, “Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals,” Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
NASA officially refuted news reports that had circulated on 16 February claiming that NASA scientists affiliated with ARC had found strong evidence that life might exist on Mars. According to the news reports, during a private meeting in Washington, DC, two astrobiologists from Ames had told a group of space officials that they had found strong evidence, in the form of methane signatures, that life currently exists on Mars, hidden in caves and sustained by pockets of water. NASA stated that it did not have any observational data from any current Mars missions to support the claim. NASA further stated that the work the scientists had conducted did not directly support any conclusion regarding the existence of life on Mars but, rather, that the scientists’ research could help formulate a strategy for searching for such life. The scientists had not submitted any research papers asserting the existence of Martian life to any scientific journal.(NASA, “NASA Statement on False Claim of Evidence of Life on Mars,” news release 05-052, 18 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05052_mars_claim.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Bloomberg News, “NASA Says Claims of Evidence of Current Life on Mars Are False,” 19 February 2005; Brian Berger, “Exclusive: NASA Researchers Claim Evidence of Present Life on Mars,” Space.com, 16 February 2005, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/mars_life_050216.html (accessed 28 August 2009).)
NASA launched its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) at 7:43 a.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida on an Atlas 5 launch vehicle. The occasion marked the first time that NASA had used an Atlas 5 to launch an interplanetary mission. NASA had designed the MRO to conduct highly detailed analyses of Mars’s atmosphere, surface, and subsurface. From low orbit, the MRO would evaluate landing sites for future Mars missions and search for sites where water might have previously existed. NASA planned to examine the MRO data to seek evidence of previous life on the planet and to study planetary climate change. After two years of gathering data, the MRO would relay the information to Earth, using two robotic probes scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2008 and 2010.(NASA, “NASA’s Multipurpose Mars Mission Successfully Launched,” news release 05-218, 12 August 2005; Thomas H. Maugh II, “New Mars Orbiter Embarks on Ambitious Fact-Finding Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 13 August 2005.)
A group of scientists led by David N. Burrows of Pennsylvania State University announced that they had found evidence of black holes behaving in a manner previously unknown. Using observations from NASA’s Swift satellite, the scientists had discovered newly formed black holes that were simultaneously consuming matter while propelling away other material. They also observed that, after the black holes had emerged from large star explosions, the energy from the black holes’ initial formative activities had caused several subsequent explosions during the following minutes, with a gamma-ray burst (GRB) from the first explosion followed by x-ray flares from later explosions. Previously, scientists had believed that black holes and GRBs were only associated with single explosions of collapsing stars, rather than with a rapid succession of explosions. The scientists had been able to conduct their analyses because NASA’s Swift satellite could observe GRBs within minutes after their occurrence, whereas other satellites had only been able to observe GRBs hours after they had occurred.
ESA successfully launched the Venus Express on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4:33 a.m. (CET). ESA had created the spacecraft to analyze Venus’s atmosphere, chemistry, and structure, while the craft was orbiting the planet. ESA planned to use the analysis of Venus’s surface and its hot, stormy atmosphere to study climate change on Earth, as well as to help determine why Venus had evolved so differently from Earth, despite numerous structural similarities between the two planets. The spacecraft was ESA’s second probe designed to orbit a specific planet, the first being Mars Express, which ESA had launched in 2003.(ESA, “Venus Express En Route To Probe the Planet’s Hidden Mysteries,” ESA news release 50-2005, 9 November 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM56Q638FE_index_0.html (accessed 19 July 2009); Melissa Eddy for Associated Press, “European Space Agency Launches Venus Probe,” 9 November 2005.)
Russian Space Agency Chief Anatoly N. Perminov and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed an agreement allowing Russia to use ESA sites for space launches and enabling Russia and Europe freely to exchange research and development information. Specifically, ESA would permit Russia to conduct Soyuz launches from Kourou, French Guiana. In addition, the two would share information on the design of new launchers and fuelsinformation once closely guarded by both sideswith the intention of developing new launchers jointly. For example, Russia and Europe had studied the option of developing new reusable launchers and new propulsion systems.
NASA’s Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASA’s first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, “NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, “STS-114: Return to Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, “Return to Flight: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, “NASA Grounds Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
Alliant Techsystems announced the successful completion of the first in a series of ground tests for solar-sail technology, developed to enable solar-powered interplanetary probes and solar observatories. At NASA’s GRC’s Plum Brook Station in Ohio, NASA engineers fully deployed a 20 x 20 meter (65.6 x 65.6 feet) version of the solar-sail system, in a 100-foot-diameter (30.5- meter-diameter) vacuum chamber, to test the system’s functional deployment and attitude control. The test marked a critical milestone in the development of in-space propulsion technology using the Sun’s energy, instead of fuel propellant, to provide thrust. The In-Space Propulsion Program of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate was developing the solar-sail propulsion system.(Alliant Techsystems, “ATK and NASA Successfully Test First Solar Sail Propulsion System,” news release, 6 May 2005, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=447 (accessed 16 September 2009).)
Woodrow Whitlow Jr. became Director of NASA’s GRC, replacing the retiring Julian M. Earls. Whitlow had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s KSC since September 2003. Before that, he had served as Director of Research and Technology at GRC. Whitlow, who held bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees in aeronautics and astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had begun working for NASA in 1979 as a research scientist at LaRC.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Center Director: Dr. Woodrow Whitlow Jr.,” 10 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/about/bios/whitlowbio.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-155, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005, which authorized NASA’s appropriations for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 and directed NASA to pursue particular programs during that period. More specifically, the new law directed NASA’s Administrator to ensure that NASA would pursue a balanced set of programs related to aeronautics research and development, human spaceflight, and scientific research―including robotic missions to the Moon. Among the specific programs the law directed NASA to pursue was the launch of the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) at a date as close to 2010 as possible, and the landing of Americans on the Moon by 2020. Both objectives were components of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, the law specifically authorized appropriations for only two years―US$17.9 billion for FY 2007 and US$18.7 billion for FY 2008.(H.R. Rep. 109-354, at 22 (2005) (Conf. Rep.).)
NASA announced findings from research exploring the impact of black carbon or soot on Earth’s climate, findings that provided new and additional evidence that pollution generated through the process of incomplete combustion contributes to the accelerated melting of sea ice and snow, as well as to the changing atmospheric temperatures in the Arctic region. Dorothy M. Koch, of Columbia University and NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), and James E. Hansen, also of GISS, coauthored the study, using satellite data and computer models to recreate the climate and to track pollution. In addition to confirming past findings regarding the relationship between pollution and climate change in the Arctic region, the study had found that most of the pollution in the environment and the atmosphere of the Arctic did not originate in the developed world, but rather in southern Asia, which had the highest level of industrial soot emissions in the world. Using the GISS General Circulation Model (GCM) to locate the origins of Arctic soot, Koch and Hansen had found that one-third of the pollution originated in southern Asia, one-third was the result of burning vegetation and natural materials around the world, and the remainder originated in Russia, Europe, and North America.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Soot May Be Changing the Arctic Environment,” news release 05-084, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05084_arctic_soot.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Miguel Bustillo, “Airborne Soot Adds To Arctic Melting, Study Finds,” Los Angeles Times, 24 March 2005.)
