Four years behind its original schedule, JAXA successfully launched Kaguya, also called the Selenological and Engineering Explorer (SELENE), aboard an H-2A solid-fuel rocket from Tanegashima Island at 1:31 (UT). The 2.9-tonne (2,900-kilogram or 3.2-ton) lunar orbiter carried various instruments that would enable it to obtain detailed data about the lunar topography and surface-mineral composition. JAXA had promoted the mission as the most significant lunar expedition since America’s Apollo program of the 1960s and early 1970s, in terms of its scope and ambition. JAXA claimed that the mission would outpace the former Soviet Union’s Luna program, NASA’s Clementine mission of 1994, and NASA’s Lunar Prospector mission of 1998– 1999. Kaguya’s launch occurred at a critical time for the Japanese space agency, which was facing accusations that it lacked a vision capable of challenging the ambition of the People’s Republic of China to lead East Asia in space exploration. At the time of the launch, JAXA also lacked popular and political support. Japan’s citizens had such poor regard for the civilian space program that JAXA had to negotiate with the local fishermen of Tanegashima for acceptable launch times. Because September was one of two launch windows that Tanegashima fishermen’s unions had offered JAXA, Kaguya’s launch took place during typhoon season. Kazuto Suzuki, a specialist in global space issues at Tsukuba University in Tokyo, explained that JAXA was only beginning to realize that, to enhance the political importance of Japan’s space initiatives, it would need to market Japan’s space program to appeal to the Japanese public.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647, 1 October 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx647.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Bruce Wallace, “After Long Delay, Japan Launches Lunar Orbiter,” Los Angeles Times, 14 September 2007; Associated Press, “Japan’s Space Agency Launches Lunar Probe,” 14 September 2007.)
Four teams competed at NASA’s Regolith Excavation Challenge to dig a minimum of 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of simulated lunar soil—regolith—within 0.5 hours, using no more than 30 watts of power. However, none of the teams succeeded in winning the US$125,000 first prize. The top performer was the entry from Technology Ranch of Pixmo Beach, California, the only machine to run for a full 30 minutes in its first attempt and to scoop up 75 kilograms (165 pounds) of regolith. The Regolith Excavation Challenge was the seventh centennial challenge NASA had held since 2005. However, the only person who had won any of the competitions was Peter K. Homer, who had won US$200,000 for his entry in the Astronaut Glove Challenge on 3 May. Kenneth Davidian, Program Manager of NASA’s Centennial Challenges Program, stated that NASA would add the unawarded prize money to the winnings for the 2008 Regolith Excavation Challenge, increasing the value of the prize for that competition to US$375,000. Davidian said that he expected the number of teams competing in the challenge would double and that many more NASA engineers would observe the competition in the future.(Dana Mackenzie, “No One Scoops the Prize at Moon Digger Contest,” New Scientist, 14 May 2007.)
NASA announced the selection of the Boeing Company of Huntsville, Alabama, as the production contractor for the Ares-1 upper stage. Under the contract, valued at US$514.7 million, plus US$610 million in options, a NASA-led design team would receive support from Boeing during the design phase. Boeing would take responsibility for production of the upper stage, manufacturing a ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support NASA’s flight manifest through 2016. The cost-plus-award-fee contract covered a126 performance period that would begin in September 2007 and last through December 2016.
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced the successful completion of subscale-main-injector hardware, an early step in the development of the RS-68 engine that would power the core stage of NASA’s Ares 5. Under the Constellation Program, Ares 5 would serve as NASA’s cargo launch vehicle, delivering large-scale hardware and systems to space, in support of NASA’s exploration missions to the Moon. MSFC engineers had conducted multiple hot-fire tests on the inject hardware, a major component of the engine. The hardware would inject and mix liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants in the engine’s combustion chamber, where they would ignite and burn to produce thrust. Because injector hardware for the RS-68 and the J-2X engine systems shared design features, engineers planned to use data collected during the tests to develop the J-2X engine systems for the upper stages of Ares 5 and for Ares 1, the crew launch vehicle (CLV) that would carry the Orion spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Completes Engine Hardware Tests for Ares V,” MSFC news release 07-053, 8 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/marshall/news/news/releases/2007/07-053.html (accessed 1 April 2010).)
NASA’s Science Mission Directorate awarded a US$9.3 million contract to Dartmouth College of Hanover, New Hampshire, to conduct a project using more than 40 high-altitude balloons to capture data about Earth’s Van Allen Belts. The Balloon Array for Radiation-belt Relativistic Electron Losses (BARREL) would fly in 2013 or 2014 in conjunction with NASA’s Radiation Belt Storm Probes satellites, scheduled to launch in 2011. Under the terms of the contract, the mission’s Principal Investigator Robyn M. Millan and her team would conduct test flights of the balloons and their instrumentation. In 2013 the team would launch 20 balloons from South African and British research stations in Antarctica, at a rate of one per day. Each balloon, separated by approximately 620 miles (998 kilometers) and carried by winds, would float at an altitude of approximately 21 miles (34 kilometers) for as long as two weeks, forming a ring encircling the South Pole. In the first experiment of its kind working in tandem with a satellite mission, the balloons would use sensors to measure the influx of radiation from the Van Allen Belts into Earth’s atmosphere. Millan and her team would repeat the procedure with 20 more balloons the following year.(NASA, “NASA To Use Balloon Flotilla To Study Radiation That Affects Earth,” news release 07-265, 5 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07265_Balloons_and_Van_Allen_ Belts.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Kristen Senz, “Dartmouth Professor Gets $9.3 Million NASA Grant,” Manchester Union Leader (NH), 14 December 2007.)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing on NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2008 budget request, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. On 5 February, President George W. Bush had presented to Congress NASA’s proposed US$17.3 billion budget for FY 2008, as a component of the federal budget, including US$4 billion for five Space Shuttle flights and US$2.24 billion for ISS activities. Administrator Griffin urged Congress to fund NASA’s FY 2008 Exploration Systems request fully, enabling NASA to develop the Orion and the Ares-1 crew vehicles. He cautioned that NASA was unlikely to succeed in bringing new exploration capabilities online by 2014 because of several factors, including the cost of retiring the Space Shuttle and making the transition to the new vehicle, the cost of supporting the ISS, and the impact of the overall reduction in funding for NASA mandated by the FY 2007 Continuing Resolution. However, Griffin stated that NASA would continue to “transition the workforce, infrastructure, and equipment from the Space Shuttle to new Exploration systems.” Committee Chair Bart Gordon (D-TN) criticized the Bush administration’s failure to recommend the funding levels necessary to support the exploration initiative, the ISS, the termination of the Space Shuttle program, and the upgrade of the aging Deep Space Network.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2008 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 1st Sess., 15 March, 2007, 28, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg33803/ pdf/CHRG-110hrg33803.pdf (accessed 20 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s ‘Lean’ Budgetary Outlook Will Have Wide-Ranging Impact on Agency Programs,” press release, 15 March 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1724 (accessed 28 September 2010).)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) released images of “an odd, six-sided, honeycomb- shaped feature circling the entire north pole of Saturn.” NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had collected the images in thermal-infrared light during a 12-day period beginning on 30 October 2006. NASA’s Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft had also collected images of the hexagon-shaped feature more than 20 years before, indicating the long-lived nature of the feature. The Cassini images also revealed that the hexagon, which is 25,000 kilometers (15,000 miles) across, extends approximately 100 kilometers (60 miles) into the atmosphere, much deeper than previously thought. Kevin H. Baines, an atmospheric expert and member of Cassini’s visual and infrared mapping spectrometer team at NASA’s JPL, remarked that scientists had never seen a feature like the hexagon on any other planet. Because of its thick atmosphere, where circularly shaped waves and convective cells dominate, Saturn was the last place scientists had expected to see such a feature.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), “Cassini Images Bizarre Hexagon on Saturn,” news release 2007-034, 27 March 2007, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-034 (accessed 1 February 2010).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to the Boeing Company to provide engineering and technical support for four specialized research aircraft—two F-15s and two F/A-18s—at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). NASA had modified the aircraft to conduct a variety of flight-research missions to support NASA and other government agencies, as well as private industry. The contract’s value was as much as US$28 million during the five-year performance period lasting through April 2012.(NASA, “NASA Awards California Aircraft Support Contract to Boeing,” contract release C07-20, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0720_Boeing_Aircraft_Support.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA released images of solar activity captured by the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO), a pair of spacecraft launched on 25 October 2006 to study the Sun. The images revealed a close view of the Sun’s activity, as well as a progressive view of the Sun’s radiation as it reaches Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists intended to use STEREO images to study the flow of energy from the Sun to Earth, in particular, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), which can cause dangerous solar storms. STEREO Principal Investigator Russell A. Howard stated that the new view from the spacecraft would improve scientists’ ability to forecast the arrival time of severe space weather, enabling them to predict the arrival of solar storms to within a couple of hours, instead of within a day.(Aalok Mehta, “Photo in the News: Stunning New Images of Sun Captured,” National Geographic News, 1 March 2007.)
Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), a private company based in El Segundo, California, launched its Falcon-1 rocket from Omelek Island in the Kwajawlein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The 70-foot-long (21.3-meter-long), two-stage rocket, powered by liquid oxygen and kerosene, successfully reached space, accomplishing stage separation and second-stage ignition before reentering the atmosphere. Although the rocket failed to reach its desired orbit of 425 miles (684 kilometers), SpaceX’s founder Elon Musk, also the cofounder of PayPal, considered the launch a success because the rocket had successfully achieved many of the riskiest milestones of launching and entering space. The company’s first attempt at launching a Falcon-1 rocket in 2006 had failed when leaking fuel caught fire just after liftoff. SpaceX had designed the most recent mission—Demo 2—to gather flight data for the company’s main customer, DARPA, which was seeking more economical means of reaching space. The typical commercial launch service cost US$30 million, but Musk had pledged to launch satellites for US$7 million.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “SpaceX Launches New Rocket Into Space,” 21 March 2007; John Schwartz, “Private Rocket Lost Shortly After Launch,” New York Times, 21 March 2007.)
NASA announced its selection of four universities to conduct suborbital scientific research. NASA intended the projects to reinvigorate its Sounding Rocket Program. The four projects had a combined value of US$4.2 million. NASA’s Science Mission Directorate’s Heliophysics Division had selected two of the programs, and the Directorate’s Astrophysics Division had selected the other two. The University of Wisconsin proposed to design a payload to make astronomical polarization measurements in the far-ultraviolet spectrum and to explore new diagnostics of the geometry and magnetic fields in stellar envelopes and interstellar medium. Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, planned to launch a payload to investigate substorm auroras and their variations. The team from the University of Colorado, Boulder, proposed to investigate the ratio of molecular hydrogen to carbon monoxide in gas clouds of other galaxies, to help determine accurately the masses of those galaxies. The team from the University of Southern California at Los Angeles proposed to test a new photoelectron focusing system, which scientists could use in future solar observations to calibrate space research. A panel comprising external reviewers and representatives from NASA’s scientific staff had selected the proposals, based on each project’s scientific and technical merits, costs, and relevance to NASA programs.(NASA, “NASA Funds Universities’ New Experiments for Suborbital Flights,” news release 07-121, 23 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07121_Suborbital_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
IBM announced that NASA had selected, for its James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), IBM’s Rational Rose Real-time software, which used unified modeling language (UML). The choice marked a change in NASA’s strategy for software development and management of its space- based telescopes. Because a number of organizations had used proprietary software to build components and instruments for the HST, the software had lacked a UML, preventing the software codes of the various programs from relating to one another. Furthermore, the contractors who had built the scientific instruments had not maintained them after the launch of the craft. Instead, NASA staff had assumed that responsibility. Glenn Cammarata, leader of NASA’s Integrated Science Instrument Module (ISIM) flight-software development team at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), explained that the management of telescopes with instruments containing incompatible software was a nightmare. Resolving problems in the HST software had often required NASA to locate the person who wrote the code in the original software, whereas IBM’s UML would allow any programmer to examine JWST software and to understand its system architecture. Additionally, the UML would allow close collaboration among the various developers working on individual components of the JWST.(IBM, “NASA Eyes Open Standard Software for Next-Generation James Webb Space Telescope,” press release, 19 January 2007, http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/20901.wss (accessed 30 October 2009); Jon Brodkin, “The Software Plan for NASA’s New Space Telescope,” Infoworld, 23 January 2007.)
107U. S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA’s Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs: Status and Issues, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 24 July 2007, 14, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE% 2FCommittee+on+Science+and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg36737&packageId=CHRG- 110hhrg36737&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Subcommittee Examines Challenges Facing Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs,” press release, 24 July 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle. aspx?NewsID=1928 (accessed 29 October 2010); Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Future in Doubt,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 26 July 2007.
NASA announced that it had begun testing SOFIA, the highly modified Boeing 747SP aircraft that NASA intended to use as an airborne observatory for “first light” infrared observations of the universe. Before arriving at NASA’s DFRC, engineers had installed a 17-tonne (18.7-ton or 17,000-kilogram) telescope in the aircraft’s aft fuselage and had cut a 16-foot-high (4.9-meter- high) telescope door in the fuselage. At DFRC, engineers had installed test instrumentation critical for the initial flight tests. In addition, they had equipped a telescope-cavity environmental-control system, designed to keep the telescope dry when the cavity door was closed, as well as when the craft had achieved the altitude required for operating the observatory. The first series of flight tests, conducted with the cavity door closed, would study the aerodynamics, structural integrity, stability and control, and handling qualities of the modified aircraft.(NASA, “Sofia Observatory Enters Aircraft Testing Phase,” news release 07-225, 12 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07225_sofia_first_flights.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) released a study conducted over two years, examining the United States’ Earth-observing satellite missions. The study, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond, was the first 10-year plan to recommend a path forward that would restore U.S. leadership in Earth science and prevent the collapse of the U.S. system of Earth- science satellites. The report recommended that, to accomplish this goal and to rebuild the aging network of environmental spacecraft, the U.S. government should fund 17 Earth-observing-satellite missions between 2010 and 2020. To fund these missions, NASA would need to resume spending US$2 billion per year on Earth science, and the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) would need to maintain funding levels at US$1 billion each year. According to the report, NASA’s budget for Earth science had decreased 30 percent since 2000, while NOAA had experienced major cost overruns and schedule delays in its primary mission to study weather and climate. Without reinvestment, the number of NASA’s satellites monitoring the Earth’s climate could decrease by 2017 from 25 to 7, leaving the United States without scientific information to analyze severe storms and to determine changes in the Earth’s climate.(Brian Berger, “Report Urges Reinvestment in U.S. Earth Science Satellites,” Space.com, 16 January 2007, http://www.space.com/aol/businessmonday_070122.html (accessed 4 March 2010); Marc Kaufman, “Cutbacks Impede Climate Studies,” Washington Post, 16 January 2007; National Research Council, Space Studies Board and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), http://www.nap.edu/catalog. php?record_id=11820#toc (accessed 5 November 2009).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to review the findings of two reports that NASA had made public on 27 July 2007. The reports examined NASA’s medical and behavioral health care system for its astronauts. The NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review had identified a number of issues related to NASA culture, communication, and behavioral concerns, including some astronauts’ alleged preflight alcohol abuse. However, NASA’s internal JSC review had contradicted the finding, stating that the investigators had been unable to verify any instance of alcohol abuse. At the hearing, Richard E. Bachmann Jr., Chair of the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, stated that NASA’s rebuttal of reports and derision of the claims that astronauts had imbibed alcohol during the preflight alcohol-restriction period had discouraged open communication. Moreover, Bachmann expressed deep concern about NASA’s apparent disregard of mental health and behavior issues among astronauts and about the reluctance of flight surgeons and astronauts alike to report improper conduct. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) remarked that the findings of the two panels seemed to describe two different organizations. Udall instructed
NASA released images of the Sun, captured by the X-ray Telescope aboard the international spacecraft Hinode, formerly known as Solar B. The images showed that the Sun’s magnetic field “is much more turbulent and dynamic than previously known.” Richard R. Fisher of the Heliophysics Division of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate remarked that, for the first time, scientists could detect tiny granules of hot gas rising and falling in the Sun’s magnetized atmosphere. Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin, also a professor of physics at Stanford University, added that Hinode images revealed irrefutable evidence of the presence of turbulence-driven processes that bring magnetic fields to the Sun’s surface, resulting in an extremely dynamic gaseous envelope around the Sun. A collaborative mission, led by JAXA and including ESA and Britain’s Particle Physics Astronomy Research Council, Hinode had launched on 23 September 2006. Hinode carried three primary instruments—the Solar Optical Telescope, the X-ray Telescope, and the Extreme Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrometer—to study the Sun’s magnetic field and how its explosive energy propagates through the various layers of the solar atmosphere.(NASA, “International Spacecraft Reveals Detailed Processes on the Sun,” news release 07-72, 21 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07072_Hinode_Images_of_Sun.html (accessed 14 October 2009);)
The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) announced that a landmark test flight of a balloon-borne solar telescope had succeeded, clearing the way for long-duration polar balloon flights to capture unprecedented details of the Sun’s surface. The project, called Sunrise, was an international collaboration among NCAR, NASA, Germany’s Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research and Kiepenheuer Institute for Solar Physics, Spain’s Astrophysics Institute of the Canary Islands, and the Swedish Space Corporation. U.S. partners Lockheed Martin and the University of Chicago were also participating. The balloon, which was larger than a Boeing 747 jet, launched 3 October carrying a gondola containing 6,000 pounds (2,722 kilograms) of scientific instruments. The balloon flew for 10 hours, reaching an altitude of 120,000 feet (36,576 meters), and released the gondola to descend to Earth via parachute. During the flight, the telescope captured stable images of the solar surface, and the various instruments on board captured additional data. David Elmore of NCAR confirmed that the test flight had verified the operations of the entire system, allowing the team to continue planning the first full-scale mission. NASA and the NSF had funded the projects. Associate Administrator of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate S. Alan Stern, in congratulating the NCAR team for their successful test flight, advocated the use of suborbital flight as a less expensive method of studying space than satellites and spacecraft.(National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), “Solar Telescope Reaches 120,000 Feet on Jumbo-Jet-Sized Balloon,” news release, 23 October 2007, http://www.ucar.edu/news/releases/2007/sunrise.shtml (accessed 29 September 2010); Katy Human, “Balloon Test Flight Hailed,” Denver Post (CO), 22 October 2007.)
underwater telephone. The Atlantis had an on-board telephone connected to a satellite telephone, which could contact anyone on shore. Atlantis had telephoned NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where a high-powered dish transmitter had contacted the ISS directly. Oceanographers and astrobiologists were equally enthusiastic about the telephone call because much of the information oceanographers learn researching the sea floor applies to space exploration. Astrobiologist Richard Shand of Northern Arizona University described the feat of communicating with people who are not currently on Earth’s surface, using three different media—water, air, and vacuum—as an astonishing accomplishment. Apollo astronauts, who had called Houston from a distance of 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles), retained the record for a long-distance call. The call from the Alvin submersible to the ISS was a 253-kilometer (157-mile) long-distance call.(Christina Reed, “Houston, We Have a Phone Call,” Science Now, 26 January 2007.)
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSC’s ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASA’s Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parson’s experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASA’s human spaceflight community, made him the “right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.”(NASA, “Parsons Assumes Role as NASA’s Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, “Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director,” 8 January 2007.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC) and Virgin Galactic signed a MOU, providing a framework to explore potential collaborations, such as developing spacesuits, heat shields for spacecraft, hybrid rocket motors, and hypersonic vehicles. The press also reported that the MOU included provisions for training NASA astronauts, for NASA to buy seats on a Virgin Galactic flight, and for NASA to provide technical advice to Virgin Galactic; however; these provisions were not, in fact, part of the agreement. A newly formed organization in the NASA Research Park at Ames—NASA’s Space Portal—had enabled the negotiation with Virgin Galactic to help NASA promote the development of the commercial space economy.(NASA, “NASA, Virgin Galactic To Explore Future Cooperation,” news release 07-49, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07049_Virgin_Galactic.html (accessed 14 October 2009); NASA, “NASA Provides Additional Information on Agreement with Virgin Galactic,” news release 07-50, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07050_Virgin_Galactic_info.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Associated Press, “NASA, Virgin Galactic Sign Agreement,” 22 February 2007; Matthew Moore, “Virgin Galactic To Train NASA Astronauts,” Daily Telegraph (London), 22 February 2007.)
NASA announced a landmark achievement of its Spitzer Space Telescope (SST). For the first time the SST had captured enough light from exoplanets—planets outside Earth’s solar system— to identify molecular signatures in their atmospheres. NASA described the event as a significant step toward achieving the ability to detect life on rocky exoplanets. Using a spectrograph to reveal the “fingerprints” of the objects’ chemical composition, the space-based infrared SST had obtained the data from two different gaseous exoplanets—HD 189733b, located 63 light-years from Earth in the constellation Vulpecula, and HD 209458b, located 150 light-years away in the constellation Pegasus. The telescope had monitored the planets as they transited behind their stars and temporarily disappeared from view. Once the exoplanets were no longer visible, Spitzer’s spectrograph measured the dip in infrared light. The data collected through this method, known as the secondary-eclipse technique, indicated that the two planets—known as “hot Jupiters,” because they are gaseous like Jupiter, but orbit much closer to their stars—are drier and cloudier than scientists had previously predicted. Although scientists had predicted that water vapor would prove a common feature of the atmospheres of hot Jupiters, the SST found no evidence of water vapor on either HD189733b or HD 209458b.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer First To Crack Open Light of Far Away Worlds,” news release 07-48, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0748_Spitzer.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Eric Berger, “Another Step Closer To Finding a Planet Like Ours,” Houston Chronicle, 22 February 2007.)
DARPA decommissioned its experimental Orbital Express satellites, officially ending the demonstration of on-orbit satellite servicing and robotics. The two craft comprising Orbital Express—ASTRO and NextSat—had launched together in March 2007, to demonstrate ASTRO’s ability to approach NextSat with limited interaction from the ground, to grapple the craft with a robotic arm, and to transfer fuel and hardware to NextSat. The decommissioning of the satellites followed the completion of one last maneuver. ASTRO had found NextSat and homed in on the craft from long range, assisted by the U.S. Space Surveillance Network. Beginning on 16 July, ASTRO had traveled approximately 250 miles (402 kilometers) away from NextSat, so that its sensor suite lost track of NextSat. ASTRO then required input from the ground-based network to help it locate the target satellite. DARPA had originally scheduled the decommissioning to occur on 5 July but had extended the mission two weeks to allow the research team to attempt the long-range rendezvous maneuver. Orbital Express had met all of DARPA’s criteria for mission success, including demonstrating its capability to track and to rendezvous with long-range targets.
On the 50th anniversary of the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik, publisher Harry N. Abrams released America in Space, a photographic record of the history of space exploration, documenting NASA’s achievements in aeronautics, science and technology, and human spaceflight. Published in cooperation with NASA, the book contained 500 color and black-and- white photographs, including many previously unpublished photographs, selected from NASA’s archives. Heralding the space age, the launch of Sputnik led to the creation of NASA one year later.(NASA, “New Book Chronicles NASA’s First 50 Years,” news release 07-210, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07210_NASA_book.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Jeremy Hsu, “NASA Book Commemorates 50 Years of Spaceflight,” Space.com, 5 October 2007, http://www.space.com/entertainment/ 071004-nasabook-anniversary.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
NASA announced that one of its STEREO satellites had recorded images of an April 2007 collision between a comet and a solar hurricane, marking the first time that scientists had observed such an event. Encke’s comet, traveling in the orbit of Mercury, had encountered a CME. NASA had designed STEREO to observe this type of solar event. As the CME swept by, the comet’s tail had brightened and then had disconnected, as the front of the ejection carried it away. Scientists had known that a comet’s plasma tail could disconnect from the comet, but the conditions necessary for this to occur had remained a mystery. Preliminary analysis of the images, which NASA researchers had combined into a movie, indicated that a phenomenon called magnetic reconnection had caused the tail to detach. In a magnetic reconnection event, the magnetic fields in a CME crunch together the oppositely directed magnetic fields around a comet, causing the comet fields to link together suddenly. This sudden reconnection releases a burst of energy that detaches the comet’s tail. Angelos Vourlidas of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, was lead author of an article about the event, published in the 10 October 2007 issue of Astrophysical Journal Letters. Remarking on the researchers’ sense of awe when they viewed the images, Vourlidas described their surprise at seeing the disconnection of the tail, calling the event “the icing on the cake.”(NASA, “NASA Satellite Sees Solar Hurricane Detach Comet Tail,” news release 07-214, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07214_Comet_Collision.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Andrea Thompson, “Solar Storm Rips Tail Off Comet,” Space.com, 1 October 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/071001_hurr_comet.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
NASA announced a modification to its contract with Lockheed Martin to design, test, and build the Orion CEV. The modified contract had three significant changes, including the addition of two test flights of Orion’s launch-abort system and the deletion from the initial design phase of the production of a pressurized cargo carrier for the ISS. The contract also added two years to the development period, extending it to December 2013, and increased the contract’s value from US$3.9 billion to US$4.3 billion. The modification reflected the continuing progress on Orion’s development and NASA’s evolving budgetary landscape.(NASA, “NASA Modifies Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Contract,” contract release C07-21, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0721_Orion_Contract_Mod.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to discuss the status and future of the ISS in the context of NASA’s FY 2008 budget request. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern about the significant cutbacks in NASA’s ISS research program, warning that these cuts had “potentially serious implications for the productivity of the station as a research facility once it is assembled.” Christina T. Chaplain of GAO testified that NASA had planned 15 more Space Shuttle launches—an average of one every 2.7 months—through 2010, when NASA intended to end the Space Shuttle program. Compared to the existing launch schedule of once every 10.8 months, the new Shuttle schedule would provide little allowance for delays related to mechanical failure or weather. Thomas W. Holloway, Chair of the IISTF, expressed doubt that commercial space vehicles under development would be ready to ferry supplies to the ISS when the Space Shuttle retired. Associate Administrator of NASA’s Space Operations Mission Directorate William H. Gerstenmaier testified that, after the first test flights of the commercial cargo vehicles, scheduled for 2008, NASA would be better able to judge their readiness. Subcommittee Ranking Minority Member Thomas Charles “Tom” Feeney III (R-FL) expressed concern about the loss of skilled KSC workers when NASA ended its Shuttle Program and shifted its focus to the Moon and Mars programs, warning, “We can’t repeat past mistakes—like the Apollo-to-Shuttle transition— where America frittered away hard-earned space-faring skills, which are almost impossible to replace.”
NASA announced that it had selected proposals for future lunar-science activities and had established two new programs to enhance the research that the Vision for Space Exploration had made possible. Under the Lunar Sortie Science Opportunities (LSSO) Program, NASA had selected seven from among more than 70 proposals to develop simple, autonomous instrument packages that future astronauts could deploy on the lunar surface. Scientists planned to use these packages, known as suitcase science studies, to study the Moon’s interior; to examine lunar dust, which creates problems for astronauts; to search for natural resources on the lunar surface; and to use lasers to provide precise information about the position and features of the Moon. The studies complemented two new programs already established in the Science Mission Directorate’s Planetary Science Division at NASA Headquarters—the Lunar Advanced Science and Exploration Research (LASER) Program and the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Participating Scientist Program. The LRO mission, scheduled to launch in 2008, would help NASA prepare for long-duration human operations on the Moon. For that program, NASA planned to fund researchers analyzing data from the orbiter’s six instruments. Under the LASER program, NASA intended to solicit proposals for research investigating the lunar environment to determine how to enable humans to live and work on the Moon in the future.(NASA, “NASA Prepares for Performing New Science on the Moon,” news release 07-141, 21 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07141_moon_science.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, “NASA Sets New Lunar Science Programs,” Aviation Week, 28 June 2007, http://www. aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/lro062707.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
NASA celebrated the 80 anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s solo transatlantic flight with Lindbergh’s grandson Erik Lindbergh, himself an aviator, who had recreated his grandfather’s historic flight in 2002. Erik Lindbergh joined NASA in its rededication of a unique astronomy craft, a 747 airliner, which Pan American Airways had christened “Clipper Lindbergh” in 1977. NASA had modified the aircraft, enabling it to carry a 45,000-pound (22.5-ton or 20.4 tonnes) infrared telescope system. Designed to fly at more than 40,000 feet (12,192 meters), the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) would operate at an altitude above nearly 99 percent of Earth’s atmospheric water vapor, greatly enhancing the observatory’s ability to study the cosmos. The German Aerospace Center had provided the telescope, and NASA had modified the craft.(NASA, “NASA’s SOFIA To Be Rededicated on Historic Lindbergh Anniversary,” media advisory M07-52, 11 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_M07052_SOFIA_event.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Aero-News Network, “Erik Lindbergh Dedicates NASA’s Sofia in Honor of Grandfather,” 22 May 2007. 71 NASA, “Mars Rover Spirit Unearths Surprise Evidence of Wetter Past,” news release 07-118, 21 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07118_Spirit_discovers_wet_Mars.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Space.com, “NASA Rover Finds Surprising Evidence for Mars’ Watery Past,” 21 May 2007, http://www. space.com/scienceastronomy/070521_rover_wetterpast.html (accessed 6 April 2010).)
South Korean Vice Minister of Science and Technology Chung Yoon announced the selection of Ko San, a 30-year-old expert on artificial intelligence, to visit the ISS as South Korea’s first astronaut. Ko San had been one of two finalists. The other finalist, Yi So-yeon, was a 29-year- old female doctoral student in biotechnology. More than 36,000 South Koreans had applied to become the first person in South Korea to travel in space. Ko and Yi had been training in Russia when South Korean authorities selected Ko as the winner. They appointed Yi as his backup, in the event Ko was unable to participate in the mission. They selected Ko over Yi because he had performed better in certain experiments and had demonstrated a stronger capability of communicating with Russian cosmonauts. As backup, Yi would continue to train with Ko and would serve as a consultant in planning Ko’s mission.(Kurt Achin, “S. Korea Names Astronaut for the Country’s First Voyage into Space,” Voice of America, 6 September 2007; “Space Mission To Help Boost Aerospace Research,” Korea Times, 6 September 2007.)
“Alvin” Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffe’s backup during NASA’s teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavour’s payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavour’s 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavour’s time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavour’s heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, “STS-118: Endeavour,” NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, “Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter,” NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, “Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off,” New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used data from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to create the first three-dimensional map of the distribution of dark matter in the universe, an undertaking fundamental to understanding how galaxies have grown and clustered over billions of years. The research team had focused HST’s camera on an area of the sky 2° wide during 600 HST orbits, the largest investment of viewing time for a single project since the telescope had launched in 1990. Astronomers had measured the shapes of half a million faraway galaxies, constructing a map of dark matter that “stretches halfway back to the beginning of the universe and shows how dark matter has grown increasingly ‘clumpy’ as it collapses under gravity.” The map provided the best evidence to date that normal matter, such as that composing galaxies, collects along the densest concentration of dark matter, thereby revealing a loose network of filaments that intersect in massive structures at the locations of clusters of galaxies. One of the researchers, Richard Massey of the California Institute of Technology, described the dark matter as “scaffolding,” stating that the stars and galaxies had assembled themselves inside of the scaffolding.(NASA, “Hubble Maps the Cosmic Web of ‘Clumpy’ Dark Matter in 3-D,” news release 07-02, 7 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07002_Hubble_Dark_Matter.html (accessed 7 January 2007); Richard Massey et al., “Dark Matter Maps Reveal Cosmic Scaffolding,” Nature 445 (18 January 2007): 286–290, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v445/n7125/full/nature05497.html (DOI 10.1038/nature05497; accessed 4 March 2010); John Johnson Jr., “Dark Matter Is Mapped Unseen,” Los Angeles Times, 8 January 2007.)
NASA announced its selection of four research teams, which would receive five-year grants valued at approximately US$7 million per team. The teams would become new members of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), increasing the number of the NAI’s members to 16. The University of Wisconsin team proposed to study organic and mineralogical environments and signatures of life on Earth and on other planets, focusing on technologies for detecting microbial life within rock chemistry. The team from the California Institute of Technology planned to extend the research it had conducted at NAI during 2001−2006, using the Virtual Planetary Laboratory that the team had developed to explore the habitability and biosignatures of extrasolar Earth-like planets. The Montana State University team would investigate the role of iron-sulfide compounds in the transition from the nonliving to the living world, supporting NASA’s mission to investigate prebiotic chemistry and the development of signatures for terrestrial and extraterrestrial life. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology planned to investigate requirements for the development of multicellular life in Earth’s ancient past, concentrating on organic biosignatures preserved in the rock record and on the state of Earth’s early atmosphere.(NASA, “NASA Selects New Members of Astrobiology Institute,” new release 07-108, 9 May 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07108_Astrobiology_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) launched two ocean-surveillance spacecraft from Cape Canaveral aboard an Atlas-5 Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), marking the rocket’s first NRO secret mission. The NRO had designed the two craft to track ships that might be concealing al-Qaeda operatives and to monitor Iranian and Chinese sea-based military operations. However, the rocket had stopped firing prematurely, causing the craft to launch into the wrong orbit. Although the satellites separated safely from the malfunctioning booster, they did not have enough rocket propellant to reach the correct orbit. Lockheed Martin had built the Atlas 5 using a Lockheed Martin Centaur upper stage, with a Pratt & Whitney RL10 rocket engine powered with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. United Launch Alliance, which operated the Atlas program, managed the launch in conjunction with NRO and the U.S. Air Force’s 45th Space Wing.(Craig Covault, “NRO Spacecraft in Wrong Orbit,” Aviation Week, 16 June 2007, http://www.aviationweek.com/ aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/mission06157.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
NASA released findings from the collective efforts of its Chandra X-ray Observatory, HST, SST, and ground-based telescopes—the Very Large Array in New Mexico and the Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network (MERLIN) in the United Kingdom. The telescopes had captured imagery showing, for the first time, a powerful jet from a supermassive black hole striking a nearby galaxy. The system, called 3C321, contained two galaxies orbiting each other, each with a supermassive black hole at its center. However, NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory had shown a jet emanating from the black hole at the center of the larger galaxy and “punching” the smaller galaxy, which had swung into the larger galaxy’s path. The study’s leader, Daniel A. Evans of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, remarked that, although scientists had seen many black holes produce similar jets, this was the first time scientists had observed such a jet punching into another galaxy. Coinvestigator Martin J. Hardcastle of the University of Hertfordshire in the United Kingdom added that, although these jets are common in the universe, scientists struggled to understand some of their basic properties. Hardcastle said that 3C321 had provided the chance to learn about the behavior of jets when they slam into a galaxy and about the subsequent effect of such events on jets.(NASA, “‘Death Star’ Galaxy Black Hole Fires at Neighboring Galaxy,” news release 07-280, 17 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07280_Death_Star_Black_Hole.html (accessed 20 October 2010). 184 Todd Halvorson, “Whitson, ‘The Queen of EVA’: Commander Sets Record for Female Spacewalkers,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 2007; Robert Z. Pearlman, “Astronauts Mark 100th Station Spacewalk,” Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/news/cs-071218-100th-iss-spacewalk.html (accessed 29 November 2010); Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Inspect Space Station’s Solar Wing Joints,” Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/071218-expedition16-fourth-spacewalk-wrap.html (accessed 29 November 2010).)
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASA’s SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSC’s A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, “NASA’s Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration,” news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
NASA announced that it had begun testing two NASA robots in the Arctic Circle in preparation for a return to the Moon in 2020. For the mission to the Moon, scientists would need autonomous robots that could perform activities unsuitable for humans and could respond quickly to human commands. On 12 July, the research team had arrived at Haughton Crater at Devon Island, Canada, with two test robots—K10 Black and K10 Red. NASA planned to operate the robots until 31 July. The robots carried 3-D laser scanners, capable of mapping topographic features from 3,280 feet (1,000 meters), and ground-penetrating radar, which could map below ground to a distance of 16.4 feet (5 meters). The robots navigated using GPS, stereo cameras, laser scanners, and Sun trackers. For the practice session, the robots conducted a survey of an area called Drill Hill in Haughton Crater. Researchers sent commands to the robots from a base camp more than 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) away from Drill Hill. The key objective of the research expedition was to test the robots’ instruments and software, as well as the equipment and software that humans could potentially use to supervise the robots at lunar outposts. Scientists had chosen Haughton Crater as the test site because of its extreme environmental conditions, lack of infrastructure and resources, and geologic features. Haughton Crater bears geographic similarities to Shackleton Crater at the south pole of the Moon—both are impact craters measuring approximately 12.4 miles (20 kilometers) in diameter.(NASA, “NASA Robots Practice Moon Survey in the Arctic Circle,” news release 07-163, 20 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07163_Ames_Lunar_Sim_Robot_Survey.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Stefanie Olsen, “NASA Tests Lunar Robots in Arctic Crater,” CNET News.com, 20 July 2007, http://news. cnet.com/NASA-tests-lunar-robots-in-Arctic-crater/2100-11397_3-6198044.html?tag=mncol (accessed 8 July 2010). 106 Brian Berger, “Pentagon Pulls Plug on Satellite Refueling Prototypes,” Space.com, 25 July 2007, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/070725_darpa_orbitalexpress_end.html (accessed 9 June 2010); Stephen Clark, “Satellite In-Space Servicing Demo Mission a Success,” Spaceflight Now, 24 July 2007.)
The Boeing Company announced that, on 20 July, the X-48B flight-test vehicle, a Blended Wing Body (BWB) experimental aircraft, had made its first test flight. Boeing Phantom Works had developed the BWB in cooperation with NASA and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory. The remotely controlled X-48B had taken off from NASA’s Edwards Air Force Base in California, climbing to an altitude of 7,500 feet (2,286 meters) and landing 31 minutes after takeoff. Boeing had developed two X-48B research vehicles to gather detailed information about the stability and flight-control characteristics of the BWB design, particularly during takeoff and landing. Previously, Boeing had used Ship 2, the test-flight vehicle, for ground and taxi testing. Ship 1, which had completed extensive testing in 2006 at the Old Dominion University’s NASA Langley Full-Scale Wind Tunnel in Virginia, was the backup vehicle for the flight-test program. The BWB design resembled a flying wing, but the wing blended smoothly into a wide, flat, tailless fuselage, helping the craft gain additional lift with less drag than a circular fuselage. NASA’s DFRC had provided engineering and technical support for the BWB, based on its years of operating cutting-edge, remotely controlled aircraft. NASA had focused on developing fundamental flight dynamics and structural concepts for the BWB, as well as helping to validate and verify its hardware and software and to integrate and test the aircraft’s systems and the pilot’s ground-control station. NASA’s range group had provided critical command and control communications and telemetry during the test flight.
During a ceremony rededicating its Glenn Research Center (GRC) Plum Brook site in Ohio, NASA announced its intention to use the Plum Brook Station’s Space Power Facility (SPF) to test the CEV Orion. NASA had designed Orion, which was in development, to enable research on the Moon, Mars, and other destinations in Earth’s solar system. NASA intended for the SPF—the only facility in the world large enough to undertake full-scale testing—to conduct environmental tests of the Orion spacecraft, using simulations of conditions during launch, in- orbit operations, and reentry. The facility would also conduct thermal, acoustic, mechanical- vibration, and electromagnetic-interference tests.
Jeanna Bryner, “Twisted Solution to Sun’s Mystery Heat,” Space.com, 21 March 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/070321_solarb_update.html (accessed 28 January 2010). NASA-AHS Robert L. Lichten Internship Award. The basis of the award was a paper that Greenwood had submitted to the AHS International 2007 Robert L. Lichten Competition, “Helicopter External Noise Radiation in Turning Flight: Theory and Experiment.” During his eight-week NASA-sponsored internship, Greenwood would divide his time between two NASA centers: ARC at Moffett Field, California, and Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia. Greenwood would work on NASA’s science and technology projects involving rotary wings.(NASA, “NASA Announces First Lichten Intership Award Winner,” news release 07-79, 30 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07079_ARMD_Intern.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Kenneth J. Krieg had signed the National Partnership for Aeronautical Testing (NPAT) Agreement. NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) would use the integrated national strategy NPAT to manage their respective aeronautical test facilities, including wind tunnels, propulsion-test facilities, simulation facilities, and open-air ranges. The agreement fulfilled one element of the two agencies’ response to the National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed in December 2006. In addition to expanding the dialogue beyond the test-and-evaluation communities, to include industry, academia, and the science and technology programs of NASA and DOD, the agreement established a council responsible for developing projects to streamline and economize management of aeronautical test facilities. Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator of NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, and John B. Foulkes of DOD’s Test Resource Management Center would cochair the council.(NASA, “NASA and Department of Defense Partner for Aeronautical Testing,” news release 07-52, 26 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07052_DoD_MoU_aero.html (accessed 14 October 2009); United Press International, “NASA Signs Defense Department Agreement,” 28 February 2007.)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA workforce issues and recommendations made in recently released reports of two independent review panels—the National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA), and the NRC. The subcommittee noted a sizeable shift in NASA’s programmatic activities, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration; retire the Shuttle by 2010; complete the ISS; develop the Orion CEV and the Ares CLV; and deal with the growing retirement-eligible workforce, all within the framework of a limited budget. NASA Assistant Administrator for Human Capital Management Toni Dawsey testified that NASA’s Workforce Strategy, submitted to Congress in April 2006, articulated three underlying principles: “building and sustaining ten healthy Centers; maximizing the use of NASA’s current human capital capabilities; and evolving to a more flexible, scalable workforce.” John G. Stewart, a member of NAPA’s Panel on NASA Multi- Sector Workforce, summarized the panel’s major recommendations, including NASA’s adoption of “a longer range, risk-based planning strategy to anticipate and respond effectively to future program needs, budget shortfalls, and schedule revisions for [its] total multi-sector workforce.” David C. Black, co-chair of NRC’s Committee on Issues Affecting the Future of the U.S. Space Science and Engineering Workforce, testified that the committee had concluded that NASA did not currently have the in-house expertise, particularly in the areas of systems engineering and project management, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Black recommended that NASA adopt policies enabling it to obtain the highest quality personnel over the long term. Toni Dawsey acknowledged that NAPA’s and NRC’s reports confirmed NASA’s “assessments of the challenges facing us in the workforce arena and validate the actions that we have initiated to address the most critical and encompassing issues.”(National Research Council, Committee on Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration, Building a Better NASA Workforce: Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007); National Academy of Public Administration, NASA: Balancing a Multisector Workforce To Achieve a Healthy Organization (report, Washington, DC, February 2007), 95−101, in U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Building and Maintaining a Healthy and Strong NASA Workforce, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 17 May 2007; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Subcommittee Focuses on Ensuring the Health and Vitality of NASA’s Current and Future Workforce,” news release, 17 May 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1833 (accessed 9 August 2010).)
Associate Administrator for NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missions—STS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASA’s efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitz’s resignation, praising the former astronaut’s tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASA’s decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttle’s reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, “Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA,” news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, “Scott J. ‘Doc’ Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former),” http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family,” Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASA announced the completion of its Systems Requirement Review (SRR) of the Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV), marking the first major milestone in Orion’s engineering process. In conducting the review of Orion’s requirements data set, NASA scientists and engineers had discussed more than 1,700 topics, covering all aspects of Orion’s performance, design, and qualifications. The SRR would provide a baseline for the design, development, construction, and safe operation of the spacecraft that NASA would use to carry astronauts beyond Earth orbit. In November 2006, NASA had completed an overall review of requirements for the Constellation Program, which also included the Ares launch vehicles and systems for the human exploration of planetary surfaces.(NASA, “NASA Completes Key Review of Orion Spacecraft,” news release 07-58, 7 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07058_Orion_SRR.html (accessed October 14, 2009); Jefferson Morris, “Baseline Requirements Completed by NASA for Orion,” Aviation Week, 9 March 2007; “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft One Step Closer to Assembly,” Aero-News Network, 9 March 2007.)
NASA announced that, after a full and open competition, it had selected the Boeing Company as the prime contractor for the production, delivery, and installation of avionics systems for the Ares-1 rocket, a key component of the Constellation Program. NASA planned for Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV into orbit. Under the terms of the US$799.5 million contract, Boeing was responsible for developing and acquiring the avionics hardware, and for assembling, inspecting, and integrating the systems’ components on the upper stage of the rocket. During the performance period, which would last through 16 December 2016, NASA required Boeing to provide one instrument-unit avionics-ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support integrated flight tests and missions. The selection was the final major contract award for the Constellation Program, wrapping up a five-month period in which NASA had awarded nearly US$5 billion in contracts. The award was the second to go to Boeing, which had also won the US$1.1 billion contract to build the upper stage of the Ares rocket.(NASA, “NASA Selects Prime Contractor for Ares 1 Rocket Avionics,” news release C07-060, 12 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07060_Ares_1_Avionics.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Associated Press, “Boeing Wins Final NASA Rocket Deal,” 13 December 2007; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Boeing Wins Final Ares 1 Contract,” 13 December 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Q—all CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)—were technology demonstrators, including two—CalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)—that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSat—CAPE 1—with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawn’s mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and Jupiter—Vesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawn’s instrument suite to measure the asteroids’ elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, “NASA’s Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt,” news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, “Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, “NASA’s Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids ‘Frozen in Time’,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, “NASA’s Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids,” Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
