NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had invited industry to develop advanced solid rocket motor designs. The preliminary designs called for both a segmented motor design and a monolithic motor design. Requests for these designs, called Phase B studies, followed completion of "Phase A" conceptual studies of alternative solid rocket motor designs. Those designs were done by five aerospace firms. (NASA Release 8790)
The Soviet newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya reported that two Soviet cosmonauts grew taller while in space. According to the paper, cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko grew fourtenths of an inch taller during his record ten and a half months in space, and his crewmate Alexander Alexandrov grew sixtenths of an inch. The gain in height was because of lack of gravity in space. (NY Times, Dec During December: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher reviewed Agency activities during 1987 and declared that "NASA is on the road to recovery." He believed, "the United States can maintain a leadership role in space,...but only if the Nation stays truly committed to the space program." (NASA Release 87184) Industry officials said that the U.S. aerospace industry recorded the most profitable year in its history in 1987. (P Inq, Dec 17/87)
Five aerospace firms were awarded contracts by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, to develop preliminary advanced solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the awards were Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, Sacramento, California; Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., Brigham City, Utah; and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San Jose, California. The results of the preliminary studies would determine whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of an advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASA Release 87120)
NASA scientists successfully ordered the Voyager 2 space probe, which was some 2 billion miles away from earth, to fire its thrusters changing the spacecraft's course for its 1989 encounter with the planet Neptune. The course was altered so that Voyager 2, launched on August 20, 1977, would avoid the debris that might be orbiting the planet. The spacecraft was expected to arrive on August 24, 1989, within 3,100 miles of cloud tops above Neptune's north pole and was expected to pass within 25,000 miles of Neptune's moon Triton. (B Sun, Mar 14/87; P Inq, Mar 15/87)
Astronaut John A. McBride was named acting Assistant Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He would replace John F. Murphy, who was appointed Chief of the Office of External Affairs at NASA's Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 87116)
The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz TM4 from Baikonur Space Center in Soviet Central Asia. The spacecraft, scheduled to dock with the Soviet space station Mir on December 23, 1987, carried three Soviet cosmonauts: mission commander Vladimir Titov, flight engineer Musakhi Manarov, and research scientist Anatoly Levchenko. They were expected to work together with the crew already aboard Mir for about a week, then Levchenko would return to Earth with Yuri Romanenko, who had been in the space station for 322 days. The new crew aboard Mir was expected to remain for a year, breaking Romanenko's record. (B Sun, Dec 22/87 & Dec 29/87; CSM, Dec 30/87; LA Times, Dec 26/87; NY Times, Dec 22/87, Dec 27/87, Dec 29/87; P Inq, Dec 22/87, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87)
NASA reported that an 18inch telescope, aboard a nineyearold orbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite, was monitoring the intense emissions of ultraviolet radiation from recently discovered supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a neighbor galaxy of our own Milky Way. (NASA Release 8720) During February: NASA's latest space technology led to new discoveries about ancient civilizations. Using Earth Observation Satellite and Earth Resources Observation Systems imagery and the Landsat 5 satellite, which has an advanced multispectral sensor Thematic Mapper, NASA's Ames Research Center scientists made first attempts to study Maya civilization settlement patterns, environmental settings, and natural resource use. (NASA Release 8715)
In a major organizational shift, NASA announced the adoption of new postChallenger era commercial activity policies. The released decision memoranda, covering the new policies, were signed by Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers. The new policies resulted from the report of the Commercialization of Space Reviewh)0*0*0*Task Force and covered such general activities as joint endeavor agreements, microgravity research, secondary payloads on the Space Shuttle, expendable launch vehicles, and commercial activities. According to the new policies, the Office of Commercial Programs would henceforth determine, in coordination with concerned Headquarters offices, whether NASA should participate in any proposed joint program. Responsibility for programs utilizing the microgravity environment was transferred from the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology to the Office of Space Science and Applications. Secondary payload space would be carefully allocated by the Deputy Administrator and implemented by the Office of Space Flight to accomplish specific NASA objectives. To encourage and facilitate as much as possible the private domestic access to space, NASA's Office of Space Flight would contract private industry for launch of Expendable Launch Vehicles. Finally, the Office of Commercial Programs would, to the fullest extent possible, facilitate the utilization of space for commercial purposes. (NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Responsibility for Programs Utilizing the Microgravity Environment, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Secondary STS Payloads, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV's) Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; LA Times, June 13/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
NASA announced that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle launch had again been rescheduled, this time for June 1988. The 4month delay was caused by the need to perform further tests on the liquidfuel main engines and because of needed redesigning and testing of the Shuttle's rocket boosters. The postponement caused a decrease in the number of crew tended flights planned for 1988 and 1989. NASA said that three Spaceh)0*0*0*Shuttles, instead of the five originally planned, would be flown in 1988 and seven, instead of the ten planned, would be flown in 1989. The reductions in Space Shuttle launches, NASA believed, would further slow U.S. efforts to regain primacy in space exploration and utilization. (LA Times, May 21/87; NY Times, May 21/87; B Sun, May 21/87; W Post, May 21/87)
The 10ton Soviet satellite Cosmos1871 plunged harmlessly into the Pacific Ocean west of Hawaii. Soviet news agency Tass reported that the satellite, launched into a polar orbit on August 1, 1987, carried scientific equipment for space exploration. (B H&Sun, Aug 11/87; W Post, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 10/87)
Five NASA and U.S. Air Force pilots completed the first phase of research flying of the Advanced Fighter Technology Integration F111 aircraft at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During the first phase of research flying, the aircraft's wing was modified so that it could fly with optimum wing curvature at subsonic, transonic, and supersonic speeds. The MAW system was operated only manually, and the pilot selected the aircraft's wing curvature. The aircraft, with its distinct Mission Adaptive Wing (MAW), entered the second phase of research flying where the computers were modified so the wing curvature could adjust automatically. (NASA Release 87118; Def News, Aug 24/87)
NASA selected Lockheed Engineering and Management Services Company to negotiate an engineering support contract for Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The contract would consolidate work currently performed by Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and Northrop Services, Inc. (NASA Release 8742; WSJ, Mar 27/87; H Chron, Mar 27/87)
The Soviet Union launched a 20ton, selfcontained astrophysical observatory whose mission was to dock with the orbiting Mir Space Station. Viktor Blagov, the deputy mission director, said that the observatory would "open a new chapter" in human space flight and would become a key building block of a permanently habitable scientific space complex. When docked with the Mir Space Station, the 19footlong observatory, with a 13.6 foot diameter, would double the working space available and would create a sort of a "high rise" structure in space. (P Inq, Apr 1/87; W Times, Apr 1/87) h)0*0*0*During March: India failed to launch an augmented satellite launch vehicle, developed by the Indian Space Research Organization, when the vehicle malfunctioned and fell into the Indian Ocean. The launch from Sriharikota, India, was the first of four such planned launches, and was to have placed a stretched Rohini series scientific satellite into a low Earth orbit. (AvWk, Mar 30/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that its Denverbased Space Systems group was one of the companies awardedh) 0*0*0*two NASA contracts to study and design spacecraft for a mission to Mars. A contract to study the techniques of robotic rover to traverse Martian surface was awarded by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA awarded a similar contract to the FMC Corporation of Santa Clara, California. The second contract was awarded by NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. It called on Martin Marietta to study braking methods that would allow a spacecraft to orbit Mars, enter its atmosphere, and descend to the surface of the planet. The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of Sunnyvale, California, was the other company awarded this study contract by the JSC. Martin Marietta was the company that designed, built, and tested the twin Viking spacecraft that landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 and 1977. (AVWK, Oct 26/87; B Sun, Oct 1/87, Rocky Mountain News, Oct 1/87)
According to a news release from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, NASA would manage a major international experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, part of the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, would employ over 100 scientists from more than 25 institutions to study the interaction between the land system and climate system. Over 25 ground measurement stations would be set up on the Konza Prairie in Kansas for the experiment. Six research planes and five Earthorbiting satellites would also be used. (NASA Release 8795)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Dr. Lew Allen selected a Virginia site for a Space Station Program office. The 110,000 square feet of leased space in Reston, Virginia, would house NASA's Space Station Program director and some 400 JPL and NASA personnel. Initial occupancy was planned for summer 1987. (NASA Release 8749)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a contract for continuation of maintenance and operations of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN). The DSN provides tracking and data acquisition for planetary spaceflight missions and for NASA's crewtended and untended space programs. The fiveyear contract, with an option for an additional five years, was expected to begin April 2, 1987. (NASA Release 879)h)0*0*0*February 5: Jesse W. Moore resigned from NASA, effective February 8, 1987. Moore joined NASA in 1966. Among the varied positions he held included Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science (19781979); Director of Space Flight Division (19791981); Director of the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (19811983); Acting Associate Administrator of Space Flight (April 1984August 1984); and Associate Administrator of Space Flight (August 1984January 1986). He was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in January 1986, and in October 1986 he moved to Headquarters as a Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Policy and Planning. (NASA Release 8710; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87)
NASA announced that Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, were studying concepts for designing and building a robot space vehicle for Mars exploration and samplereturn mission. If approved, the robotic space vehicle mission would be launched in 1998 and return with martian samples in 2001. The mission would precede human exploration of Mars. (NASA Release 8744)
The Boeing Commercial Airplane Company was selected by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, for major aeronautical flight experiments. NASA tasked Boeing with providing data on the aerodynamic and operational effectiveness of a hybrid system to achieve laminar air flow control at flight conditions, particularly at high subsonic speeds. The tests were to be conducted on both commercial and military transport airplanes. H&(NASA Release 87140; Def News, Oct 12/87)
NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, at Headquarters in Washington, D.C., selected 29 life sciences investigators for space flight study. According to Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, Director of NASA's Life Sciences Division, the first phase of the study, the definition phase, which is expected to begin in the early fall of 1987 and last less than a year, would be followed by selection of investigators for actual flights aboard the Space Shuttle. Chosen investigators could participate in future Space Shuttle missions anytime between 1991 and 1994, or even later. (NASA Release 8754)
NASA announced that its Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) supercomputer system, the world's most advanced, had become fully operational. The NAS system will make possible a wide range of aerospace vehicle technologies and capabilities and will ensure the Nation's preeminence in aeronautical research. By the end of 1987, the operational system was expected to be capable of a billion calculations per second, and within a decade its capability should reach 10 billion calculations per second. The 90,000squarefoot NAS building, located at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and containing a 15,000squarefoot central computer room was equipped with an array of systems for the optimal functioning of the computers. (NASA Release 8721; NY Times, Mar 10/87; CSM, Mar 10/87; SF Chron, Mar 10/87)
NASA and the ESA announced solicitation of scientific investigation from the United States, European Space Agency member states, and Canada, for two missions. The four spacecraft CLUSTER mission would study basic plasma processes in the Earth's magnetosphere. The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission consisted of a spacecraft studying solar processes and solarterrestrial relationships. (NASA Release 8722)
Officials from NASA and the LockheedGeorgia Company, Marietta, Georgia, announced that flight testing had begun on a new, highly fuelefficient, "propfan" engine. Aircraft equipped with the propfan propulsion system, which was developed as a result of a $56million NASA sponsored research program, was expected to be 1530 percent more fuel efficient than the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990's. (NASA Release 8773)
NASA announced that in the next three years it would reduce Shuttle use by launching only 19 space flights. During the same time, it would launch 49 satellites on untended rockets. About 30 nonmilitary payloads originally planned to be carried into orbit by the Shuttle through 1995, will now be carried on untended rockets. NASA said that it would launch five science missions in 1989, some with international cooperation. Four of these missionsthe Magellan, to map Venus; the Hubble Space Telescope, in cooperation with the European Space Agency; and the ASTRO1 ultraviolet observatory and Galileo, in cooperation with Germany to make a comprehensive survey of Jupiter and its moonswould fly on the Shuttle. A fifth mission, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) toh)"0*0*0*investigate cosmic background noise, was to launch on a Delta. Another scheduled Shuttle launch was the cooperative ESA/NASA Ulysses mission to observe the polar region of the Sun. From 1990 through 1995, NASA expected to accelerate deployment of other space science missions by fully utilizing expendable launch vehicles. For example, NASA anticipated Delta launches of a Roentgen Satellite in February 1990 and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer in August 1991. (NASA Release 87158; LA Times, Oct 23/87; NY Times, Oct 23/87; W Times, Oct 23/87)
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
NASA announced that beginning March 14, 1987, the Pioneer 12 spacecraft, orbiting Planet Venus, would study the newly discovered Comet Wilson. The Comet was to be tracked by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, from March 1421,h)0*0*0*and again from March 31 to April 30. (NASA Release 8725)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an accord on cooperation in space exploration. The accord culminated a three day visit to Moscow by Secretary of State George P. Shultz. The accord formalized the ongoing exchange of information between NASAh)0*0*0*and the Soviet Academy of Sciences. It provided for no dramatic joint venture in space. Rather it called for coordination of projects in solarsystem exploration, space astronomy and astrophysics, earth sciences, solarterrestrial physics and space biology, and medicine. (NY Times, Apr 16/87; P Inq, Apr 16/87)
NASA officials declared that Space Station deployment, scheduled for 1994, could be delayed up to two years or the Station could be scaled down. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher said that the cost of the Space Station, once estimated at $8 billion, was now estimated at between $13 and $14.5 billion. Fletcher, who said that the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union in human space flight, predicted that a U.S. crewtended Space Station would help the country catch up to the Soviets. Testifying before the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Dr. Fletcher stressed that the Space Station program retained high priority with the Reagan administration. (LA Times, Feb 4/87; USA `"Today, Feb 4/87; NY Times, Feb 5/8)
NASA announced that it had chosen the final design for the Space Shuttle's new rockets. Also, the Agency declared it had resolved the problem of Challenger's leaking seals. Hot gasses escaped during launch and the seals failed to close properly because of cold weather. John Thomas, Manager of the rockets design team at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, stated that henceforth the oring seals would be heated in cold weather rather than constructed of new materials. He also said that the new design would contain three oring seals instead of two. Thomas emphasized that up to eight more test firings of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motor were planned before flights resume. (NY Times, July 17/87; W Post, July 17/87; W Times, July
Officials at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, reported that NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory would leave on October 31, 1987, for New Zealand on a monthlong mission to study the supernova SN1987a. Scientists aboard the Kuiper would make eight research flights to study the supernova, located 170,000 light years away. Supernova SN1987a is the closest supernova to Earth since the invention of a telescope some 400 years ago. (NASA Release 87162; AvWk, Nov. 9/87)h)#0*0*0*November 3: NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs James T. Rose announced new program initiatives to encourage and expand commercial space activity. Rose told some 270 executives from across the country, meeting for a threeday workshop in Nashville, Tennessee, that the new programs will build on earlier NASA commercial development policies. According to Rose, the agency already had awarded $50,000 grants to 206 small businesses for feasibility studies in this area. One of the program initiatives announced by Rose called for 28 percent space allocation for commercial secondary payloads aboard the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 87/165; NY Times, Nov 5/87; Tennessean, Nov 4/87; W Times, Nov 5/87)
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
Despite the efforts of Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin, who had tended the space station since February 7, 1987, the first attempts to dock the Soviet Union's Kvant space module with the space station Mir failed. The Kvant, a selfcontained astronomical observatory, was to be the first experimental module to link with Mir. (NY Times, Apr 10/87; W Times, Apr 9/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Chairman ofh)0*0*0*France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales JacquesLouis Lions signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint satellite oceanographic mission. The mission, called TOPEX/POSEIDON, which would chart ocean topography and observe ocean circulation on a global scale, was scheduled for a late 1991 launch. The TOPEX/POSEIDON mission would be part of the international World Climate Research Program. (NASA Release 8741)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced the composition of the Atlas Centaur 67 Investigation Board. The Board, chaired by Jon R. Busse, Director, Office of Flight Assurance, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would investigate the loss of the Atlas Centaur 67 mission on March 26, 1987 and recommend corrective action. The mission vehicle was destroyed 51 seconds after an apparently normal liftoff. (NASA Release 8745)
NASA announced that the allowable endofmission landing weight for Space Shuttle orbiters would be increased from 211,000 to 230,000 pounds. The increase means that roughly 19,000 pounds more payload can be carried aloft. The new capability was made possible by structural analysis and additional review of forces encountered by the orbiter during maneuvers shortly before landing. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly said that this new capability would add considerable flexibility and efficiency to NASA's Space Transportation System. (NASA Release 87168; AvWk, Nov 9/87; W Post, Nov 10/87)
NASA selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Silver Spring, Maryland, to negotiate a contract for systems, engineering, and support services. The services provided by the contract would be in support of the Mission Operations and Data Systems Directorate, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8739)
Pilots from NASA, the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy, and the Grumman Aerospace Corporation completed the first phase of experimental flying of the forwardsweptwing X29 aircraft. During the tests, the X29, with its threesurface pitch control system, reached an altitude of 50,200 feet and speeds of about 1.5 times the speed of sound. After a total of 104 flights, the pilots began the second phase of the flight research program at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During this phase, further flights would test the forward swept wing structure divergence tendencies and the overall aerodynamic performance of the wings and canards. Researchers would also investigate the aircraft's control system and handling qualities, as well as maneuvering characteristics applicable to military use. (NASA Release 87113)
NASA announced that researchers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, had successfully tested a passenger vehicle satellite antenna. The newly developedh)0*0*0*antenna, designed to be mounted on the roof of a passenger vehicle, was expected to play an important role in NASA's mobile satellite experiment program. This program and other technologies were expected to lead eventually toward a mobile satellite communications system. The first success in the program was achieved when researchers, using an antenna on moving passenger vehicle, were able to track an inorbit satellite. (NASA Release
NASA announced that it had established a team to review launch decision processes used for NASA expendable launch vehicles and the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the review, which was to be completed by July 3, 1987, was to ensure consistent approaches and risk evaluations for all NASA launches. Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, and Robert L. Crippen, Deputy Director of the National Space Transportation System Operations, were selected as cochairmen of the team. (NASA Release
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
NASA announced that scientists and researchers from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, would conduct, on March 2326, the first in a series of tests related to development of the mobile satellite communications system. The test in Erie, Colorado, would be part of the Mobile Satellite Experiment program. (NASA Release 8738)
A spokesman at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that NASA's Deep Space Network station near Canberra, Australia, configured with Australia's Parkes Radio Observatory, was observing radio wave emissions from Supernova 1987a, first detected by astronomers in the large Magellanic cloud on February 24, 1987. (NASA Release 8731)
NASA announced that it, together with the Universities Space Research Association, in Columbia, Maryland, and the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence in Space Data and Information Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new research facility would serve as the nerve center for a network of researchers from leading universities and from industry computer science departments. The emphasis would be on research in areas of potential longterm application to NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 8770)
The world's two largest wind tunnels became fully operational at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The two tunnels, the upgraded 40by80 foot wind tunnel and the new, open circuit, 80by120 foot wind tunnel, are housed in the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex. Both tunnels are used for fullscale and largescale testing of advanced aircraft. They offer new capability for testing of rotorcraft and vertical and shorttakeoff and landing aircraft (V/STOL). (NASA Release 87180; P Inq, Dec 12/87)
NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, announced that more than 400 modifications were planned for the Space Shuttle program. Speaking at a news conference called to discuss NASA's recovery from the effects of the Challenger accident, which killed all seven Shuttle crew members, Truly emphasized the Agency's commitment to "a trueh)0*0*0*enhancement to safety." Included among the safety modifications listed were better brakes, more efficient engines, and eventually an escape system for the Shuttle crew. However, it was pointed out that the escape system probably would not be ready for the next planned Shuttle flight in February 1988. (UPI, Jan 20/87; LA Times, Jan 21/87; NY Times, Jan 21/87; P Inq, Jan 21/87; W Post, Jan 21/87)
NASA announced that it would begin, in late March, a new aircraft flight research program at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility, in Edwards, California. The aim of the program was the study of super maneuverability and prevention of dangerous spins and related crashes. (NASA Release 8737)
NASA released a report, requested by the U.S. Congress, on the extendedduration Space Shuttle orbiter. The report examined key aspects of a program that would allow the Space Shuttle to perform Earthorbital missions for as long as 16 days. An extendedduration orbiter, according to the report, would be of great benefit for space science and technology. It also could prove useful in developing experiments and crew procedures in preparation for the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87174)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
James Elliott, a spokesman for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying an upperatmosphere plasma experiment, detonated when its second stage malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87)
Pioneer 12, which had been orbiting the planet Venus, was directed, by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to begin tracking the newly discovered Comet Wilson. This would be the fourth time that Pioneer 2, orbiting Venus since 1986, interrupted observations of the planet H&to study a comet passing Venus on its way to the Sun. (LA Times, Mar 15/87)
Flight controllers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, reported that the untended spacecraft Voyager 2 was on course for a rendezvous in two years with the planet Neptune. Launched on August 20, 1977, Voyager 2, travelling at a speed of 41,600 miles an hour, was 642 million miles away from its target. It was expected to come within 3,000 miles of Neptune on August 24, 1989. (NY Times, Aug 18/87)
An international panel of scientists selected three experiments submitted by NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission to be launched in early 1990's. The cometary ice and dust experiment (CIDEX) was designed to capture and analyze dust, ices, and gasses evolved from the comet as the coma and tail develop during its pass around the sun. The thermal infrared radiometer experiment (TIREX) would measure the thermal emission and the scattering of solar radiation from the comet. The third experiment would consist of an interdisciplinary scientist for exobiology, the study of chemical processes and physical events leading to emergence of life in the universe. The CIDEX mission was managed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. (NASA Release 8763)
Willis H. Shapley was selected for NASA's newly established position of Associate Deputy Administrator (Policy), effective March 9, 1987. Shapley held the third ranking position, created in response to the reorganization recommended by the NASA Management Study Group. Shapley began Government service in 1942 with the Bureau of the Budget, Executive Office of the President, where he specialized in research and development, national defense, and space programs. From 1965 to 1975, he was NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator. In July 1975 he was the senior NASA representative in the Soviet Union during the joint USUSSR ApolloSoyuz space mission. Shapley retired from NASA in 1975 to become a consultant to a number of private institutions and Government agencies, including NASA. (NASA Release 8724)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced NASA had completed negotiations with Rockwell International to build a replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. The new orbiter would contain existing structural spares, but would also feature the latest technology evolving from the current returntoflight activities. The new Space Shuttle orbiter was expected to be ready for use within 45 months. (NASA Release
NASA announced plans for three balloon flights to study ray radiation produced by Supernova 1987a. The Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility at Wallops Island, Virginia, which manages NASA's balloon program, would provide launch services and helium. The first launch, from Alice Springs, Australia, was to take place no earlier than May 7, 1987, and the third balloon was to be launched within a month's time. (NASA Release 8760)
Dr. Lew Allen, Director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), announced that construction of JPL's new Microdevices Laboratory would start January 21, 1987. On the same day, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Dr. Marvin Goldberger, President of the California Institute of Technology, signed a memorandum of understanding for a Center for Space Microelectronics Technology to be established at JPL. The Center would be the successor to the Advanced Microelectronics Program established at JPL in 1983 and headed by Dr. Carl Kukkonen. The Center for Space Microelectronics Technology will be governed by a Board of Governors chaired by Dr. Lew Allen. Dr. Carl Kukkonen was named Center Director. (NASA Release 873; StarNews, Jan 20/87; The Foothill Leader, Jan 21/87)
NASA scientists announced that they have direct proof that exploding stars produce most of the 90odd chemical elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. These elements are part of the composition of planets and moons in the solar system and also are found in plants and animals on Earth. The findings came from observations and analysis of the gammaray emissions from radioactive cobalt produced in the Supernova 1987a explosion. The observations were conducted by the Solar Maximum Mission satellite, which had been studying the supernova since August 1987, and two balloonborne experiments flown in October and November from Alice Springs, Australia, as part of NASA's Fall Supernova Observations Campaign. (NASA Release 87185; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 17/87; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 17/87)
Dr. Robert Watson, NASA Chief Scientist for the Airborne Antarctic Ozone project, reported that, midpoint of the project, both aircraft involved were performing very well and that mission scientists were very pleased with the quality of data being returned by the instruments. The Antarctic Ozone Project employed two NASA aircraft, a modified flying laboratory DC8, and an advanced highaltitude ER2. The goal of the project was to study the cause and nature of the ozone layer depletion. (Untitled release from NASA Headquarters, Sept 17, 1987; NY Times, Sept
NASA's Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology selected five proposals for the development of space flight technology experiments as part of its Industry/University InSpace Technology program. (NASA Release 87164)
NASA announced reopening, after major modifications, the wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Constructed in 1944, the 40by80foot wind tunnel was used for fullscale testing of civilian and military aircraft. Modifications to the tunnel included increasing power from six 6,000horsepower electric motors generating airspeeds of up to 230 mph to six 22,500horsepower motors generating top airspeeds of 345 The modified 40by80foot wind tunnel represented the first phase of the creation of the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex, which included the Outdoor Aerodynamics Research Facility, at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The second phase, including the new "straight through" leg with its 80by120foot test section, was expected to be completed in late 1987. (NASA Release 8798)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced that the next Space Shuttle orbiter would be assembled in Palmdale, California. He gave costs and schedule factors as the reasons why this site was chosen over Califonia's Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 87100; H Chron, June 18/87)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel Hinners would replace Dr. Frank McDonald as Chief Scientist, effective August 24, 1987. At the same time, Dr. Hinners would retain his position as NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator(Institutions). NASA also announced Dr. Frank McDonald would return to the Goddard Space Flight Center as Associate Director/Chief Scientist. (NASA Release 87121)
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
NASA reported that two techniques were being used to monitor the Supernova SN 1987a. In the first case, the Supernova was observed by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN) located at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and connected by microwave with Australia's CSIRO Parkes Radio Telescope 200 miles away. Dr. Robert Preston of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which operates the DSN for NASA, said that the second technique, called Very Long Baseline Interferometry, consisted of an even wider network of four antennas: Tidbinbilla, Parkes, a Landsat ground station in central Australia; and a 26meter dish at Hobart on Tasmania, an island southeast of Australia. The supernova, an exploding star whose emissions were just arriving on Earth at the time of this report, was detected in the neighboring Large Magellanic Cloud galaxy. It was about 163,000 light years from the Earth. Supernova 1987a was the first such detectable star explosion close to our own galaxy since 1604. (NASA Release 8764)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Lew Allen announced that Richard P. Laeser had been appointed to manage JPL's new support office in Washington, D.C., for NASA's Space Station Program. Laesar, who until his new appointment had been the manager of the Voyager mission to outer planets, would also serve as Director of the Office of Requisitions and Assessments for the Space Station. Norman R. Haynes was appointed the new manager of the Voyager mission. He formerly was manager of JPL's Systems Division. StarNews, Jan 5/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Canadian Science Minister Frank Oberle approved the agreement on Canadian participation in the U.S. Space Station program. The terms of the preliminary agreement were spelled out in a memorandum of understanding worked out by negotiators from NASA and the Canadian Ministry of State for Science and Technology. The agreement called for cooperation between the two nations in the detailed design, development, operation, and use of the Space Station. The agreement would then be submitted for approval to the governments of the two countries. (NASA Release 87182; NY Times, Dec 12/87)
NASA announced that on June 15, 1987, Dr. JohnDavid F. Bartoe began a 2year appointment as Chief Scientist of the Space Station program, advising the Associate Administrator on program plans, policies, and userrelated requirements. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Bartoe served with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in a variety of positions, most recently as Head of the Solar Spectroscopy section, Space Science Division. He expected to return to the NRL at the end of the Chief Scientist appointment. (NASA Release 87103)
NASA announced that within hours of its discovery on February 24, 1987, NASA scientists were monitoring the Supernova 1987a with the Earthorbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and the Solar Max Mission (SMM) spacecraft. Subsequently, as previously announced, NASA began monitoring the supernova with a network of ground antennas. The major supernova science program mounted by NASA and the intense, worldwide scientific interest in the supernova resulted from the fact that the discovery of Supernova 1987a provided scientists the opportunity to study not only the death of the star, but also the resultant rebirth of matter. The explosion, shock waves, and tremendous energies of Supernova 1987a were expected to provide direct evidence of the creation of heavy elements such as silicon and nickel. This marks the first time a supernova has been so close to the Earth and so bright since the 1604 supernova, when the telescope had not yet been discovered. The advantageous circumstances allowed scientists to study the supernova in all radiation wavelengths from nearly the moment of its explosion. Scientists expected that the array of instruments and the variety of NASA'sh)0*0*0*methods of monitoring the supernova would not only yield a new understanding of the chemistry and physics of the comet, but also potentially would provide a better understanding of the creation of The supernova program was expected to extend at least over the next 21/2 years. It would consist of multiple, continuous satellite observations, balloon and sounding rocket missions, aircraft flights, and radio observations. A special computer communications network would allow scientists from NASA, American and foreign universities, and other international scientific organizations to analyze the great amount of data generated by the In addition to the IUE and SMM spacecraft, managed and operated by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, a Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the Supernova 1987a. The IUE satellite provided data from ultraviolet observations and monitored the overall brightness of the supernova. It also was expected to help define exactly which star in the Large Magellanic Cloud exploded creating the supernova. The SMM satellite, a sunobserving instrument, was used to monitor the expected gamma ray emissions from the supernova. The Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the supernova for Xray emissions. NASA's Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a C141 jet transport stationed in New Zealand, was also used in supernova observations to measure infrared energy. It was expected to be involved in a number of flights through the spring of 1989, using new and increasingly more sophisticated instruments. (NASA Release
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the promotion of Dr. John M. Klineberg, Deputy Director of Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, since July 1979, to Director of the Center, effective immediately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis from NASA Headquarters, where he had served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. An internationally recognized expert in the field of transonic flow, he first joined NASA in 1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 8786)
The XWing, a NASA experimental aircraft, made its first brief venture into the air, lifting 25 feet off the runway for about 16 seconds. The XWing concept uses a fourbladed rotor system for vertical takeoff and landing. The first major test flight was expected to follow in about two weeks. (NASA Release 87172; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 19/87)
NASA named a board to investigate the July 13, 1987, Atlas Centaur 68 accident which resulted in extensive damage to the vehicle. James B. Odom, Director of the Science and Engineering irectorate, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was appointed Chairman of the Board. The Board was expected to report the results of its investigation to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly,h)0*0*0*Associate Administrator for Space Flight, by August 14, 1987. (NASA Release 87112; LA Times, July 14/87; NY Times, July 16/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced thath)0*0*0*Isaac T. Gillam, NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, would retire effective September 1, 1987, and that Lawrence Herbolsheimer, Deputy Assistant Administrator in the Office of Commercial Programs, would serve as the Acting Assistant Gillam had served in a number of positions at NASA. In June 1978 he was appointed director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center in Edwards, California. Prior to that appointment, he was Dryden's Deputy Director and Director of Shuttle Operations. He subsequently served at NASA Headquarters as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and then moved on to head the Office of Commercial Programs. (NASA Release 87126)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
NASA awarded a contract to the Computer Sciences Corporation, El Segundo, California, for operations support to the Mission Support Directorate of Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. Under the contract, Computer Sciences Corporation would provide maintenance, operations, and sustaining engineering of institutional ADP facilities, networks and work stations, and user support. About 30 percent of the work would be performed by two Computer Sciences Corporation subcontractors, International Business Machines Corporation and Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation, a unit of Ford Motor Company. (NASA Release 87148; WSJ, Oct 7/87)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers announced that James T. Rose had been selected as Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, effective October 5, 1987. He would be responsible for NASA's commercial programs, the use of space by the U.S. private sector, the use of NASA technology by private industry, and NASA's support of innovative research by small business firms. James T. Rose joined NASA in 1957 as a research engineer for the Vanguard Program experiments. In 1962 he became head of the Manned Spacecraft Center's Mission Planning Office for the Gemini flights. From 1964 to 1974, Rose held a series of key positions at the McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He returned to NASA in 1974 as Director, Space Shuttle Engineering, in the Office of Space Flight. From 1976 to 1986, he was Director of McDonnell Douglas' Space Manufacturing Initiatives. In June 1987, he again returned to NASA to become the Director of Space in NASA's Office of H&Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 87145; Huntsville Times, Oct 1/87)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, and the Department of Energy's Argon National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, signed an agreement to begin joint research in the development of hightemperature superconductivity (HTS) materials and technology. The objective of this major research effort would be to exploit recent rapid advances in HTS technology for significant space and aeronautical applications. Research and technology development would be undertaken in those areas where HTS could be an enabling technology or substantially improve existing Initially, research would concentrate on advanced studies and critical exploratory experiments to identify the most promising applications for further development. Among the first candidate applications would be superconducting magnetic energy storage, space electromagnetic propulsion, microwave power transmission, aeropropulsion, and electromagnetic launch systems. (NASA Release
NASA announced that a scientist at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a new, ground breaking computational model that could accurately simulate the complex, fluctuating air flow within aircraft engine turbines and compressors. The new computational model, developed by NASA scientist, Man Rohan Rai, was expected to generate significant savings for the aircraft engine industry once it became ready for commercial applications. The model performed one of the most complex computer simulations ever undertaken and provided the most accurate calculation to date of air flow within turbines. Engine concepts and designs had been tested primarily by experimental methods, most often by building prototype engines and subjecting them to a battery of tests. Advanced computer techniques were far less expensive and much faster. Current computational work was performed on a Cray2 supercomputer at the new Ames Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility. (NASA Release 8894; ARC Release 8850; SF Chron, Jul 13/88; Bus Week, Jul 25/88)
A report released by an international panel of over 100 scientists assembled by NASA showed that the depletion of the Earth's ozone layer over the Northern Hemisphere had increased at a much faster rate than previously believed. The report, prepared over 17 months, provided definitive evidence showing that the ozone layer, which shields life on Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation, had been depleted by an average of about 2.3 percent, since 1969 over most of the United States, and by as much as 5 percent over the South Pole. The observed ozone loss was at least twice as large as scientists had predicted and was attributed primarily to the continued release of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). The NASA study group reexamined years of groundbased and satellite observations of the atmosphere in order to remove the normal biennial fluctuations of many atmospheric characteristics and the effects of the 11year solar cycle. The groundbased observations were limited to midlatitudes in the Northern Hemisphere because there were few stations elsewhere in the world. This was the first effort by scientists to separate the effects of solar and biennial fluctuations from the monthly data at different latitudes. The release of the study results followed ratification by the U.S. Congress of the Montreal Protocol, an agreement endorsed by 46 countries, which calls for a 50 percent reduction in emissions of CFCs by the end of the century. (UPI, Mar 15/88; NY Times, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 16/88; W Times, Mar 16/88; USA Today, Mar 16/88; WSJ, Mar 16/88;CSM, Mar 16/88;B Sun, Mar 16/88; P Inq, Mar 16/88; C Trib, Mar 16/88; LA Times, Mar 21/88)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, inaugurated its Mark III Hypercube parallel supercomputer, the result of a 5year research and development effort at the JPL Center for Space Microelectronics Technology and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). The Mark III spearheaded the arrival of massively parallel supercomputing. Its first module, placed online at the Caltech computer network, contained 32 nodes, or processing units, which together had a peak speed of about 512 million floating point operations per second. Three more 32node modules would be added during the next nine months to form a 128node hypercube with a peak speed of 2 billion floating point operations per second. The Mark II Hypercube was being used for scientific, engineering, and defense research applications, including analysis of NASA multispectral space imaging data; analysis of NASA synthetic aperture radar images taken from the Space Shuttle; and simulation of the Strategic Defense System. (NASA Release 8888)
Thomas L. Moser was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Station by the head of the Space Station Office, James B. Odom. Moser had been serving as Director of the Space Station Freedom program in Reston, Virginia, since October 1986. (NASA Release 88163) During November: NASA continued its multifaceted program of observation of Supernova 1987a, using untended scientific balloons and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO): NASA launched two heavylift balloons from Australia in November to continue scientific studies of Supernova 1987a. A 28.4 million cubic foot balloon was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 1100 pounds, to measure gammaray and hard xray emissions. A second, 29.47 million cubic foot balloon also was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 3700 pounds, that would measure gammaray emissions, but over a different energy band. These scientific missions were part of the overall NASA Balloon Program managed by the Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 88154; MSFC Release 88160) ')0*NASA deployed the C141 Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), to observe Supernova 1987a. KAO completed a fiveweek deployment to New Zealand to conduct high altitude observations of charged particle and heavy metals emissions produced in the explosion of the giant blue star, first detected in February 1987. The
outward at 868 miles per second. Previous Kuiper observations of the expanding ejected cloud had greatly contributed to understanding how the explosion proceeds. KAO Supernova 1987a research was being conducted by the Astrophysics Branch, Space Science Division, Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 88168; ARC Release 8889)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was rolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) to Launch Pad 39B in preparation for mission STS26, scheduled for late September. (UPI, Jul 4/88; NY Times, Jul 5/88; W Post, Jul 5/88; WSJ, Jul 5/88; W Times, Jul 5/88; P Inq, Jul
NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)
Using NASA's new supercomputer at the Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility, Dr. Kozo Fujii, a research fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, developed a computer model that simulates the airflow field physics associated with vortex breakdown and provides new insights into its causes. Vortex breakdown is a complex phenomenon that can cause loss of lift and control for highperformance aircraft. Understanding and' 0*eventually controlling vortex breakdown would improve maneuverability and safety for highperformance aircraft. (NASA Release 8813)
NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747100 jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) for the space transportation system. A letter contract was signed with Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and eliminate a potential singlepoint failure in the space transportation system. The 231foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747100, which is nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release 8828; JSC Release 88005) During February:
Science magazine published findings from a recent Earthbased radar mapping of the planet Venus, conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) scientists. Newly processed radar pictures of the surface of Venus showed what may be geologically recent volcanic activity and impact cratering, including possible volcanic mountains and broad lava flows and fields like those which make up the Hawaiian Islands. The JPL radar images, with a resolution of less than a mile, were the latest in a series of Earthbased radar scans of Venus conducted at the Goldstone, California, complex of NASA's Deep Space Network. The Magellan spacecraft was expected to make more detailed radar observations of Venus in 1990. (NASA Release 8865; C Trib, May 21/88; )
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
E. Ray Tanner was appointed Director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tanner had been serving as Manager of the Space Station Projects Office, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August 1988. Prior to that he was Deputy Director for Space Systems in the Science and Engineering Directorate. (NASA Release 88175; MSFC Release 88178)
Astronomers at NASA's Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of California at Berkeley uncovered the most distant galaxy yet seen. Called 4C41.17, the newly discovered galaxy is located at an estimated distance of 15 billion light yearsmore than 90 percent of the distance to the visible limits of the universe. The discovery was made by a team of American and European astronomers, using the Very Large Array (VLA) Radio Telescope Facility near Socorro, New Mexico, and was confirmed a galaxy using the 2.1 meter optical telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory. Studying remote galaxies like 4C41.17 was expected to help forge a better understanding of how galaxies have evolved since the time of the Big Bang. This research was supported by NASA, the European Space Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope project, and the Space Telescope Science Institute. (NASA Release 88111; P Inq, Aug 9/88; B Sun, Aug 9/88; )
The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA general counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27, 1985. He began his career at NASA in September 1982, as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8898)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)
Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88120) During August: A Cray YMP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) Facility. The NAS was established as a national facility available to leading U.S. research institutions through a national network. It had longterm support from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and chemistry. Supercomputer systems were complementing and extending aerospace research being done in wind tunnels and highvelocity (4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new YMP central processor would not only solve old problems four times as fast as existing systems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena that could not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers. Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system would be the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as the National AeroSpace Plane and the Space Shuttle. '!0*Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this new supercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989. (ARC Release 8880)
The first direct observation of an atmosphere on Pluto was made by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) astronomers flying aboard NASA ARC's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO). A team of astronomers from MIT, including Edward Dunham, James Elliot, Amanda Bosh, Steve Slivan, and Leslie Young, made the observation during a temporary occultation of a star behind Pluto. The observations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 meters) altitude, approximately 500 miles south of Pago Pago, American Samoa, over the Southern Pacific Ocean. Information about the temperature, pressure, and extent of the atmosphere would be derived from the occultation data, obtained using a solid state video camera attached to KAO's 36 inch (92 cm) telescope. The airborne observations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring shortly after midnight. (ARC Release 8840)
NASA and the ESA announced the selection of scientific investigations to be conducted on two spacecraft as part of a joint NASAESA solar terrestrial research program. More than 130 U.S. scientists were scheduled to participate in the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster missions. Two spacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instruments supplied by both ESA and NASA. The Cluster mission, involving a set of four satellites, was planned for launch on an ESA Ariane launch vehicle in December 1995. The Cluster would investigate the space plasma threedimensional microphysics phenomena in Earth's0*magnetic field environment, using four identical spacecraft in polar orbits. SOHO, planned for launch by NASA on the Shuttle or on an expendable launch vehicle in March 1995, would be placed at the EarthSun La Grangian point and investigate the physical processes that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to the solar wind. The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of the International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a major international program in solar and space physics organized in 1985 by NASA, the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 8848)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project with Germany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescope also maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro1, a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the study of Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS35 in November 1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights for September 1990a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and the first Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS1)0*mission. The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the projected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to study the Sun and its environment remained at the projected
The Pioneer Venus orbiter spacecraft marked 10 years of orbital observations of the clouddraped planet. Ceremonies were held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to celebrate Pioneer's accomplishments. December 9 would also mark 10 years since a companion spacecraft, Pioneer Venus 2, had entered the atmosphere of Venus along with 4 hardimpact probes it had released. Observations by Pioneer revealed a great deal about the atmospheric content of Venus, plate tectonics, volcanic activity, and the magnetic field. Pioneer had also observed five comets, including Halley. Pioneer, whose orbit was deteriorating, was scheduled to cease operating in August 1992 and be destroyed upon entering the lower atmosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 88165)
After 23 years in solar orbit, Pioneer 6, the oldest operating spacecraft, returned to the vicinity of its launch. The craft passed within 1.16 million miles of the Earth, roughly five times the distance between the Earth and its Moon. This distance was the closest Pioneer 6 had ever approached Earth since launch from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida in 1965. With only five lunar distances separating them, Earth's gravitational pull was strong enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, thereby increasing time in orbit for Pioneer 6 by six days (from 311 to 317 days) and 6 million miles. The spacecraft was designed to study the Sun's atmosphere, the heliosphere. After 23 years, two of Pioneer 6's original instruments were still transmitting information on the turbulence of the solar wind to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Three sister probes followed Pioneer 6 into solar orbit. During the period from 1966 to 1970, Pioneers 7, 8, and 9 were launched into coordinated orbits. With Pioneer 6, this spacecraft team formed a network of solar weather stations monitoring the heliosphere, triangulating information back to Earth from the far side of the Sun, and increasing understanding of solar effects on Earth's magnetic field. (SSR 1965 105A; ARC Release 8881)
NASA announced that it would lease to the U.S. Government unassigned space aboard a commercially developed space facility. The leasing agreement would apply for five years beginning at the end of fiscal year 1993. At least 30 percent of the facility would be available for commercial use. The facility would be deployed, checked out, and serviced periodically on orbit by Space Shuttle crews. It would provide a crewtended, shirtsleeve workspace and would also be able to operate in an untended, freeflying mode, providing a microgravity environment for periods of four to six months. NASA would initiate an open competition to be managed by the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 8825)
NASA announced that an international team of researchers, coordinated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, was using satellites to study how the Earth's tectonic plates move in the Caribbean Sea and Central and South America. The experiment, spanning several years, would allow researchers to chart the motions of dozens of land sites in 16 countries using signals from orbiting navigation satellites. Research teams carreied electronic receivers designed to pick up signals from seven NAVSTAR satellites operated by the U.S. Department of Defense, as part of the Global Positioning System (GPS) program. By locating receiver equipment at established survey markers in South America and the Caribbean, and collecting GPS data from up to four GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers calculated the location of receiving sites on the ground and are planned to compare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portions of the southern Caribbean Sea; the Cocos plate, in the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Central America; the Nazca plate, off the west coast of South America; and the South American plate, upon which lies most of the South American continent. The research was funded by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Earth Science and Applications Division. (NASA Release 8830)
NASA's Lewis Research Center and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were awarded the prestigious Collier Trophy at the annual Robert J. Collier Trophy Dinner hosted by the National Aviation Club. Lewis and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were honored for developing technology and testing advanced turboprop propulsion systems that offered dramatic reductions in fuel usage and operating costs for subsonic transport aircraft. (NASA Release 8859)
NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reached agreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the permanently crew tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency would serve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU. Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)a permanently attached, pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The pressurized portion of the JEM would provide a shirtsleeve environment for the Space Station crew to perform research activities. The JEM's exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth observation, communications, advanced technology development and other activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experiment logistics module, which would provide transportation and storage of logistics items, would be transported to the Station by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8870)
NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date of December 1989. The earlier date was made possible following reassessment of a variety of factors, including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the period. (NASA Release 88143)
NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract with Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey, California, would be transferred to existing Launch Support Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell's component overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. The move would complete a consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88156)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
The NASA Administrator appointed Ivan Bekey to be Special Assistant for System Engineering and Planning Integration, Office of Exploration. Bekey would be responsible for overall systems engineering for Office of Exploration studies and formulation of top level architecture. In the previous year, he served as Director of Program Planning for the Office of Policy and Planning. For the preceding six years, he was the Director of Advanced Programs, Office of Space Flight. He was also NASA coordinator for the National Commission on Space. Bekey joined NASA in 1978. (NASA Special Announcement on 066088)
The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
NASA issued the newest update of its mixedfleet manifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launch vehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changes made to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launch windows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from
NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to pay silent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at 11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39B on January 28, 1986. Flags around KSC and at NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half staff while workers stood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challenger flight. Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S. McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit and loudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men and women of the Challenger crew." (UPI, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88;
NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) departed NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for Guam to study the Sun's atmosphere during the total solar eclipse of March 1718. A team of seven scientists aboard KAO was to make a flight through the shadow of the Moon as it moves across the Pacific Ocean. The scientists were interested in the few seconds at the beginning and end of the solar eclipse when the Sun would be almost completely covered by the Moon and when the edge of' 0*the solar disk would begin to reappear from behind the Moon. The Kuiper would intercept the path of the eclipse about 600 miles northwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C141 jet transport aircraft, is fitted with a 36inch diameter telescope and flies at 41,000 to 45,000 feet. Measurements of the solar atmosphere would be made at the farinfrared wavelengths of 30, 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 micrometers, representing the first attempt to record simultaneously these wavelengths from the Sun on such a narrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 8837; ARC Release
NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
A series of powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people. The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizer used aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and other military and civilian boosters. The explosions produced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 footwide crater at the facility site. Seismographs at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of the explosions was investigated. 0*The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solid fuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. A prolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's production activities would also threaten the military's missile production schedule. (UPI, May 5/88; AP, May 5/88; NY Times, May 5/88; W Post, May 5/88; WSJ, May 5/88; USA Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B Sun, May 5/88;
NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of the launch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impact of Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set this launch date is based on over two years of persistence and dedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in the STS26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center on
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
Controllers at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, directed the Voyager 2 spacecraft to fire its hydrazine thrusters for 3 minutes and 29 seconds in order to steer the craft toward a flyby of Neptune on August 28, 1989. The Voyager 2 trajectory would bring it to within 3,000 miles of Neptune's cloudtops. (Voyager 2 Neptune Encounter Press Kit; LA Times, Nov 14/88)
President George Bush announced the selection of Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, a former astronaut and head of the Space Shuttle program, to succeed Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator. The White House also announced that J.R. Thompson, Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, would be appointed NASA Deputy Administrator. Truly, a veteran of two Shuttle flights, was named to head the Shuttle program by Administrator Fletcher following the 1986 Challenger0*accident. Truly was credited with helping to restore safety and reliability to Shuttlerelated activities. (FBISSov89070, Apr 13/89; AP, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 12/89; NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89; WSJ, Apr 13/89; USA Today, Apr 13/89; W Times, Apr
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Thomas J. Lee as Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, effective immediately. Lee0*succeeded James R. Thompson Jr., selected by President George Bush to be NASA Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 89108, Jul 6/89)
Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin Jr., and Michael Collins participated in the first of several planned ceremonies at NASA facilities commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted lunar landing on July 20, 1969. Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins gathered at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, with a crowd of 6,000 NASA employees and their families to commemorate the launching of their Saturn V rocket from KSC on July 16, 1969. The ceremony included a playback of the final three minutes of the Apollo 11 countdown and statements by the former astronauts. Following the ceremony, the astronauts rode in a 20mile motorcade to Cocoa Beach, where they `"attended a luncheon in their honor. (UPI, Jul 16/89; USA Today, Jul (#17/89; B Sun, Jul 17/89)
NASA announced it had awarded Ford Aerospace a $500 million contract to modernize its Mission Control Center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, and build a new control center for future Space Station operations. (NASA Release, Sep 7/89; Reuters, Sep 7/89; NY Times, Sep 7/89; W Post, Sep 7/89)
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched at night from Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS33. Discovery carried a classified Department of Defense payload believed to be a $300 million surveillance satellite. The satellite was deployed from the Shuttle's cargo bay on November 23, and was scheduled to boost itself into a geostationary orbit. Several experiments of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) technology were also expected to be performed. Crew members for STS33 were Air Force Colonel Frederick Gregory (Commander), Air Force Colonel John Blaha (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Navy Captain Manley L. Carter Jr., F. Story Musgrave, and Kathryn C. Thornton. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on November 27. (NASA Release 8975, Nov 15/89; SSR 1989 090 A; AP, Nov 23/89; UPI, Nov 23/89; NY Times, Nov 23/89; W Post, Nov 23/89; WSJ, Nov 23/89; W Times, Nov 23/89; P Inq, Nov 23/89)
A report by the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) entitled "Round Trip to Orbit: Human Space Flight Alternatives" recommended construction of a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter or a Shuttlederived launch vehicle in preparation for the Space Station assembly missions of the late 1990s. Citing estimates of Space Shuttle reliability of 97 to 99 percent, OTA warned that there was an 88 percent likelihood that another Shuttle orbiter would be lost before Space Station construction is completed. The OTA report stated: "Buying more orbiters would increase the resiliency of the Space Shuttle system...[and] its ability to recover rapidly from loss of another orbiter or any other event that delays launches. The Shuttle orbiter fleet is likely to continue to suffer occasional attrition." (AP, Aug 2/89; UPI, Aug 2/89; W Post, Aug
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was successfully launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS34 to0*deploy the $1.4 billion Galileo Jupiter space probe. The Atlantis launch had been delayed by a week because of problems with a computer, a main engine master control device, and, finally, rain. Shortly after reaching orbit, Atlantis released the Galileo probe and the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) from the cargo bay. The IUS subsequently fired Galileo on a trajectory toward Venus, in preparation for a gravity assist maneuver that would swing the spacecraft back toward Earth twice and onward to Jupiter. Galileo was scheduled to reach Jupiter in December 1995, whereupon it would begin orbiting the planet for 22 months of observations of the Jovian system. Approximately five months before reaching Jupiter, Galileo would release a 34inch unpowered descent module that would enter the Jovian upper atmosphere and descend several hundred miles before being destroyed by extreme atmospheric pressure. The AtlantisGalileo mission had sparked protests and a law suit by antinuclear groups concerned over the danger of possible radioactive contamination from the probe's radioisotope thermal generators in the event of a catastrophic accident. In anticipation of possible efforts to disrupt the launch, NASA increased security measures at KSC. In addition to launching Galileo, the STS34 crew would conduct observations of the Earth's ozone layer and perform several onboard medical, biological, and materials processing experiments. The crew included Navy Captain Donald E. Williams (Commander), Navy Commander Michael J. McCulley (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Shannon Lucid, Franklin Changaz, and Ellen S. Baker. The mission ended successfully on October 23 with Atlantis landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA MOR 829348901; NASA PFOR M9898934; NASA STS34 Press Kit, Oct/89; NASA Facts: STS34; Galileo/KSC Release 7989, Sep/89; SSR 1989 084 AD; UPI, Oct 19/89; AP, Oct 19/89; NY Times, Oct 19/89; W Post, Oct 19/89; USA Today, Oct 19/89; WSJ, Oct 19/89; P Inq, Oct 19/89; W Times, Oct 19/89; B Sun, Oct 19/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California announced the discovery of three additional moons of Neptune, bringing the total number of Neptune's known moons to six. The moons, designated 1989 N2, 1989 N3, and 1989 N4, ranged between 60 and 125 miles in diameter and were found to be in normal equatorial orbits in the direction of the planet's rotation. Prior0*to Voyager's observations, only two moons of Neptune had been observed. (NASA Release 89128, Aug 3/89; NY Times, Aug 4/89; W Post, Aug 4/89; LA Times, Aug 4/89;
NASA scientists reported that a group of eight newly fertilized chicken embryos carried aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS28 had failed to hatch upon returning to Earth, raising questions about the viability of animal reproduction in zero gravity. A group of 16 eggs fertilized nine days before launch were all successfully hatched. Of a third group of eight eggs scheduled to hatch Saturday, only a few embryos remained viable. Discovery astronaut James Bagian speculated that the results may indicate that gravity plays a previously unknown critical role during the process of cell differentiation. Bagian suggested that, should the experiment demonstrate a relationship between gravity and embryogenesis, the results would have "great0*implications" for future longduration space missions. (UPI, Mar 29/89; W Post, Mar 30/89; P Inq, Mar 30/89; NY Times, Mar 31/89)
The Japanese Science and Technology Agency announced a 10year plan to develop an untended space plane and a series of robots capable of assembling and repairing satellites in space. The Agency also said that Japan would begin preliminary research into a crew tended space shuttle. (UPI, Jun 28/89; W Times, Jun 30/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that Voyager 2 photographs taken during the August encounter with Neptune had revealed the presence of an active volcano or geyser on Neptune's moon, Triton. The photographs revealed a dark plume nearly 5 miles high and 90 miles in length emanating from the surface of Triton. Triton became only the third object in the solar system known to have active eruptions from its surface. (NASA Release 89156, Oct 2/89; Voyager Bulletin/Mission Status Report No. 95, Oct 2/89; AP, Oct 3/89; UPI, Oct 3/89; NY Times, Oct 3/89; USA Today, Oct 3/89; P Inq, Oct 3/89; C Trib, Oct 3/89)
An ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle carrying a communications satellite and an orbital observatory was successfully launched from the Kourou space center in French Guiana. The payload consisted of a West German TVSAT2 communications satellite and the Hipparcos orbiting star mapper. (SSR 1989 062AD; LA Times, Aug 9/89)
Scientists at NASA's solar system exploration division announced that the Earth had experienced a "close call" in March with a newly discovered halfmilewide asteroid. The asteroid, named 1989FC, passed within 500,000 miles of Earthabout twice the distance to the Moonon March 23. The asteroid was discovered by Henry Holt, an amateur astronomer working on a NASA asteroid hunting project. NASA scientists estimated that if the asteroid were ever to collide with the Earth, the collision would release energy equivalent to 20,000 times that of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima and would leave a crater 10 miles wide and up to a mile deep. (NASA Release 8952, Apr 19/89; UPI, Apr 19/89; AP, Apr 20/89; NY Times, Apr 20/89; USA Today, Apr 20/89; LA Times, Apr 20/89; B Sun, Apr 20/89)
A Space Shuttle main engine shut down prematurely and suffered severe damage during a fullduration test firing at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. NASA engineers said that a high speed liquid oxygen pump "came apart" during the test firing, causing a fire and structural damage to Rocketdyne engine No. 0212. This was the first serious malfunction of a main engine since 1985. (#(MSFC Release 89125, Jun 26/89; UPI, Jun 23/89; NY Times, Jun 28/89; W Times, Jun 28/89)
The Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia was accidentally sprayed with water when an automatic sprinkler system went off unexpectedly inside the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Orbiter Processing Facility No. 2. KSC engineers examined the orbiter for damage and planned an investigation of the incident. (UPI, Sep 24/89; W Times, Sep 25/89; USA Today, Sep 25/89)
Threetime space flight veteran George "Pinky" Nelson announced he would leave NASA on June 30 to accept academic and administrative positions at the University of Washington, Seattle. (NASA Release 8989, Jun 9/89)
Astronomers from the University of California at Berkeley announced the possible discovery of a newborn pulsar at the heart of stellar debris from Supernova 1987a. A pulsar is an extremely dense sphere of neutrons less than a few miles in diameter but with a magnetic field trillions of times more powerful than the Earth's. The object at the heart of Supernova 1987a appeared to be spinning at a rate of 2,000 rotations per second. The observations were made by an international team of scientists working at the Cerro Tololo InterAmerican observatory in Chile. The frequency of the light emitted by the object was found to vary in a regular pattern, suggesting that it was part of a binary system, with a smaller object rotating around a larger twin. The discovery was announced in a circular sent to members of the International Astronomical Union. (UPI, Feb 8/89; NY Times, Feb 9/89; B Sun, Feb 10/89)0*February 10: The Soviet Union launched a cluster of six Cosmos satellites aboard a Cyclone launch vehicle, including an Antarctic observer spacecraft that was placed into nearpolar orbit, the Tass News Agency reported. The Cosmos 2000 satellite was described as a photoreconnaissance research satellite that would photograph unexplored regions of central Antarctica. (SSR 1989AG; UPI, Feb
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Dale L. Compton to be Director of the NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, effective December 20. Compton, who succeeded William F. Ballhaus, had been Acting Director since Ballhaus resigned on July 15. (NASA Release 89182, Dec 11/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that Earthbased radar observations of Saturn's moon Titan had shown that it is not entirely covered by an ocean of liquid ethane. Radar echoes bounced from Titan between June 3 and0*6 showed the planet to have some dry land surfaces. Previous observations by the Voyager 2 space probe had shown that Titan had large oceans of liquid ethane and methane. (W Times, Jun 27/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California announced the discovery of "ring arcs" orbiting Neptune. NASA scientists noted that, unlike the rings surrounding Saturn, Jupiter, and Uranus, Neptune's rings did not appear to completely surround the planet. (NASA Release 89132, Aug 11/89; NY Times, Aug 12/89; W Post, Aug 12/89; P Inq, Aug 12/89; C Trib, Aug 12/89; B Sun, Aug 12/89; WSJ, Aug 14/89)
NASA rolled out a fullscale mockup of the proposed ShuttleC, a new heavy lift launch vehicle based on Space Shuttle technology. The 115foot mockup, constructed in a Hangar at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was put on display in an effort to gain support for funding of the $1.5 billion ShuttleC development program in the fiscal year 1991 Federal budget. The ShuttleC would be an untended launch vehicle that would fly "piggyback" on the standard Shuttle SRM and external tank assembly and would have a greater payload capacity than the current Shuttles. ShuttleC could substitute for the crewtended0*Shuttles in the launching of components for Space Station Freedom. AP, Apr 18/89; LA Times, Apr 19;/89)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the Voyager 2 space probe had discovered a giant weather system on Neptune approximately 6,200 miles wide and comparable to Jupiter's Great Red Spot. Voyager 2 made the discovery while at a distance of 58.98 million miles from Neptune, currently the most distant planet from the Sun. Voyager 2 was scheduled to perform an extremely close flyby of Neptune on August 24, when it would approach to within 3,000 miles of the planet's cloud tops. This would be the fourth and final planetary flyby by Voyager 2, which was launched in 1977 and had flown by Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus. (Voyager Bulletin: Mission Status Report No. 91, Aug 17/89; AP, June 16/89; W Post, Jun 21/89)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, on mission STS30, whose main objective was to deploy the $550 million Magellan Venus radar mapper. Magellan, the first United States interplanetary mission to' 0*be launched in 11 years, was deployed from the cargo bay of Atlantis 6 hours after launch and was subsequently propelled toward the Sun and Venus by a solid fuel inertial upper stage (IUS). Following the IUS firing, ground controllers confirmed that the spacecraft was operating normally and was on a proper course toward Venus. Upon arriving at Venus in August 1990, the 7,700pound Magellan would enter Venusian orbit for several months of extensive radar mapping of the planet's cloud shrouded surface. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on May 8. (NASA MOR, C6008930, E1998930; NASA PFOR, M9898930; SSR 1989 033AB; UPI, May 5/89; NY Times, May 5/89;W Post, May 5/89; WSJ, May 5/89; P Inq, May 5/89; B Sun, May 5/89; W Times, May 5/89; USA Today, May
Challenging earlier reports that a mysterious object at the heart of the remnants of Supernova 1987A is a rapidly spinning pulsar, scientists at Columbia University announced that the observed object was more likely to be a vibrating neutron star. The debate over the nature of the object began in February when astronomers at the University of California at Berkeley theorized0*that they were observing an extremely dense pulsar rotating at 2,000 rotations per second. The Berkeley announcement prompted astronomers at Columbia University to argue that the observed bursts of radiation were more likely to emanate from a less dense neutron star that is vibrating at the observed frequency. The Columbia astronomers argued that the vibration theory not only explained the recent observations but also was consistent with previous hypotheses on how neutron stars develop. (W Post, Mar
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on mission STS29, the main objective to deploy the final Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS4). Discovery carried a crew of five on a 5day mission. Six hours into the mission, the 2.5 ton $100 million TDRS4 was successfully deployed into low Earth orbit where it subsequently boosted itself into a 22,300 mile geosynchronous orbit. Discovery also carried biological experiments that to conduct studies of the embryonic development of chickens and bone healing in rats in a microgravity environment. The STS28 crew would also photograph and film environmentally damaged areas throughout the world for later scientific analysis. Discovery's launch had been delayed a month because of cracks found in the main engine turbopumps. Replacement occurred on the launch pad. During the mission, a hydrogen tank supplying the Shuttle's fuel cells was temporarily shut down because of erratic pressure readings. The problem, which caused a temporary electricity shortage aboard the Shuttle, was resolved the following day, allowing Discovery to stay in orbit for five days as planned. Discovery successfully landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on March 19. (NASA MOR/Flight Operation Report, M9898829; SSR 1989 021A; AP, Mar 1319/89; UPI, Mar 1319/89; NY Times, Mar 1420/89; WSJ, Mar 1420/89; W Post, Mar 1420/89; W Times, Mar 1420/89; USA Today, Mar 1420/89; P Inq, Mar 1420/89; B Sun, Mar 1420/89)
A NASA ER2 high altitude aircraft flew the first of a dozen scientific missions over the arctic circle to document the depletion of the Earth's atmospheric ozone layer around the North Pole. The project, a joint U.S.European effort, involved over 150 scientists engaged in research on ozone depletion caused by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other manmade chemicals. (AP, Jan 3/89; USA Today, Jan 4/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) confirmed that the Voyager 2 space probe had discovered a third moon orbiting Neptune. The moon, temporarily designated 1989 N1, was estimated to be between 125 and 400 miles in diameter and to be in a nearcircular orbit 57,600 miles above Neptune's equator. Additionally, JPL announced that a pair of dark atmospheric bands had been discovered around Neptune's south pole. The scientists compared the 2,700 milewide belts to jet streams on Earth and to the belts seen around Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus. The photograph showing the south pole bands also revealed evidence of comparable bands around Neptune's north pole. Voyager 2 was scheduled to fly to within 3,000 miles of Neptune on August 24. `"(NASA Release 89110, Jul 7/89; JPL Voyager Status Report, Jul (#7/89; AP, Jul 5/89; W Post, Jul 6/89; UPI, Jul 7/89;NY Times, Jul 8/89; W Post, Jul 8/89; LA Times, Jul 8/89; C Trib, Jul 8/89; P Inq, Jul 8/89)
The director of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC), William F. Ballhaus Jr., resigned, citing "inadequate compensation for senior Federal executives and vague new postgovernment employment regulations" as reasons for his departure. Ballhaus had been a NASA engineer and manager for 18 years and was serving his second term as ARC director. (NASA Release 89111, Jul 7/89; AP, Jul 7/89)
While heading toward a close approach of Neptune, the Voyager 2 space probe discovered the first complete ring around the planet. Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, had previously observed several ring arcs. The discovery of the complete ring around Neptune had been expected0*based on observations of rings on the other three large outer planets during previous Voyager planetary encounters. (NASA Release 89132, Aug 11/89; NY Times, Aug 23/89; W Post, Aug 23/89; WSJ, Aug 23/89; B Sun, Aug 23/89; UPI, Aug 23/89)
The Space Shuttle Columbia was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS28 to deploy a classified Department of Defense payload. This was the first launch of the Columbia orbiter in the three and a half years since the explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger. Various media sources reported that Columbia had deployed an advanced military reconnaissance satellite and performed tests of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) hardware. Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on Sunday, August 13. (SSR 1989 061A; NASA PFOR, 9898928; NASA MOR, E1998928; UPI, Aug 8/89; AP, Aug 8/89; NY Times, Aug 9/89; W Post, Aug 9/89; W Times, Aug 9/89; USA Today, Aug 9/89; LA Times, Aug 9/89; C Trib, Aug 9/89; P Inq, Aug 9/89; B Sun, Aug 9/89)
During a visit by Soviet journalists to the Plesetsk Space Center, the Soviet government revealed that a launch pad explosion of a Vostok rocket had killed 50 people in 1980. The Soviet government also revealed that a Cosmos rocket had also exploded on the launch pad in 1973, killing nine technicians and soldiers. (FBISSov89185, Sep 26/89; NY Times, Sep 28/89; W Times, Sep 28/89; P Inq, Sep 28/89)
NASA announced the selection of three contractors to research possible propulsion systems for the proposed Advance Launch System (ALS). NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Aerojet General Corporation, Sacramento, California; Pratt and Whitney Division of United0*Technologies Corporation, West Palm Beach, Florida; and Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California, to research ALS designs. The systems definition contract totaled $20 million. The ALS would be a nextgeneration launch system capable of transporting 150,000pound payloads into low Earth orbit. (Def News, Jul 17/89)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in their Small Business Innovation Research Program. The awards were worth $13 million and part of an ongoing effort to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of the small business sector, and increase the commercialization of federally funded research. (NASA Release 9021)
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call for proposals for design of a Satellite Servicer System flight demonstrator to show the ability to maintain satellites in polar and high inclination orbits. The onorbit flight demonstration would exercise rendezvous and docking, as well as orbital replacement unit exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 9012)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
A Delta rocket was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully carrying an International Maritime Satellite Organization communications satellite into orbit. The satellite was intended to expand international telephone and facsimile services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. (W Post, Oct 31/90) During October: Photographs sent back from the Magellan spacecraft since September 15 were ten times sharper than any seen before. The images "revealed a whole new planet" and "almost everywhere you look on Venus you see volcanic features," said scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. (CSM, Oct 25/90)
NASA selected ST Systems Corporation for negotiation to a 5year, $37 million contract for operation and analysis support for Goddard's National Space Science Data Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. NASA also awarded CBI Services, Inc. a $28.2 million contract for work on Ames Research Center's 12foot pressure wind tunnel. (NASA Release C90dd; C 90ee)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
A NASA official announced that Mark Showalter, at the Ames Research Center in California, had discovered another moon orbiting Jupiter. He found it while doing analysis of images taken in 19801981 by Voyager 2. The smallest of the planet's known satellites was dubbed 1981S13. (B Sun, Jul 25/90; W Post, Jul 25/90; NASA Release 90103)
Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope for the first time had observed a faint object, a quasar billions of light years from Earth. Officials hoped that study of the image, known to astronomers as UM675, would give clues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe was born. (W Times, Nov 5/90)
landing postponed for a day because of fog. The flight set a precedent both because of duration, 11 days, and because the aircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result of the captured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a few minor problems involving a leaky dehumidifier, a smoke detector0*that went off unexplainably, a malfunction in one of the three Inertial Measurement Units (critical for reentry, but the Shuttle can land with only one functioning unit), and a small engine used by the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that fired for no reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the Shuttle cargo bay and was scheduled to be flown to Kennedy Space Center in Florida atop a modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week. During reentry, two NASA experiments measured the aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics of the orbiter. One of the experiments, a Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing experiment, involved an infrared camera used to collect imagery from the left wing, an area that reached 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, a higher than usual temperature, on the STS28 flight. The second experiment involved the Shuttle Entry Air Data System, housed in Columbia's nose cap to gather "air data" to determine the orbiter's aerodynamic flight characteristics.(NY Times, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90; W Post, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90;C Trib, Jan 13/90;CSM, Jan 16/90; NASA Release 908)
Telescopes for NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft were delivered to the Goddard Space Flight Center for integration into a payload module scheduled for launch in August0*1991. The science payload was designed, built, and tested at the University of California, Berkeley, to focus on the study of an unexplored portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called the extreme ultraviolet, between the Xray and ultraviolet wavelengths. (NASA Release 9034)
NASA engineers revealed that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope were even more difficult to correct than first expected. The most vexing problem was a 20minute vibration from the solar panels every 90 minutes as the craft passed from night to day. The onboard computer's attempt to compensate for the vibration only made the problem worse. Another problem was the telescope's frequent inability to lock onto the stars that it was commanded to seek. In addition, the reaction of the spacecraft to radiation over the South Atlantic, where the Van Allen belt dips closer than usual to the Earth, was more acute than expected; numerous data were lost and false computer signals were given. It was hoped that all three problems could be remedied via modifications to the telescope's computer. (NY Times, Jun 15/90; P Inq, Jun 15/90; B Sun, Jun 15/90)
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiations leading to a $172 million contract for payload mission integration. Under the contract, the company would provide management, personnel, equipment, services, supplies, facilities, and materials for Shuttle/Spacelab missions. Spacelab, carried in the Shuttle's cargo bay, converted the Shuttle into a versatile onorbit research center. (NASA Release
Physicians at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, announced in November that they had instituted a new treatment, promethazine, for space motion sickness. Since NASA's return to flight in September 1988, the medication had helped decrease the malady. (NASA Release 90155)
The first scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view of the heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of a supernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in a distant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole. Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been offandon. The navigation problem had been0*narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus would be delayed two or three weeks. (NY Times, Aug 30/90; W Times, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90117; 90118) During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing and directing untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, and spacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire from the Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and be involved with daytoday processing of Space Shuttle vehicles. (NASA Release 90116; 90119)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
Ames Research Center in California awarded a costplusawardfee $210.8 million contract for software support. Under the contract Sterling Federal Systems, Inc. would provide computational support for problem applications and systems programming, systems design and engineering, software management and maintenance, and modification of existing software. (NASA Release C90y)
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
Charles Pellerin, director of astrophysics for NASA, announced that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope mirrors could easily be fixed in a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for mid1993. The mission would require replacing the telescope's widefield planetary camera with one designed to correct the flawed mirrors. (P Inq, Aug 17/90; W Times, Aug 17/90)
Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, devised a way to salvage the Japanese lunar mission that successfully orbited a probe around the Moon but did not send data back because of a failed transmitter. The mother ship that launched the probe was in an elliptical orbit around the Earth and could achieve lunar orbit by taking advantage of the "fuzzy boundary." The "fuzzy boundary" is an area about 1 million miles from Earth where gravitational forces emanating from our planet and the Sun cancel each other out. The limited supply of fuel carried by the spacecraft was not sufficient to allow it to reach a lunar orbit by conventional means. Success with the plan, they determined, would mean an enormous fuel savings should lunar bases be built in the future. (LA Times, July 16/90)
NASA announced the selection of 84 proposals for Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Aiming to stimulate technological innovation from small business, the contracts were allowed to reach $500,000 over a twoyear period. (NASA Release 90152) '%0*November 27: The sixmember Hubble Optical Systems Board of Investigation, formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena, California, released its final report, cumulating a 5month study. The report stated that both NASA and the PerkinElmer Corporation, then known as Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirror that prevented the Hubble Space Telescope from distinguishing very faint objects. Lower management at the Corporation discounted any information that conflicted with certified procedures for testing the mirror with newly designed equipment. Upper management at PerkinElmer and at NASA, the report went on, were left unaware of potential problems the mirror might have had in 1981. Dr. Allen and Leonard Fisk, NASA's Chief Scientist, agreed that NASA management operated under different procedures then and would have caught the problem in 1990. (NY Times, Nov 28/90; W Post, Nov 28/90) During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation held their first "Technology 2000" conference in Washington, D.C., to encourage marketing of space technology. Among the innovations showcased were an implant device for releasing insulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument called the "Video Harp"; a system to allow the hearing impaired to locate loud noises such as sirens; a digital audio signal processing system for fuller, more realistic sound called the "Convolvotron"; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System; and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with stepbystep instructions to a student. Hightech gear only a few years away, said USA Today, included a spaceage washer and dryer, refrigerator, and gloves. USA Today, Nov 29/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
The Department of Defense and NASA announced the appointment of contractors to continue research and development on the National AeroSpace Plane. General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, United Technologies (Pratt & Whitney), and Rockwell International planned to jointly pursue hypersonic technologies. (NASA Release 9071)0*May 31: The Apollo 204 Capsule, which caught fire on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida, and claimed the lives of three astronauts on January 27, 1967, remains at Langley Research Center in Virginia, where it has been stored since shortly after the accident. The capsule was slated to be entombed with the illfated Space Shuttle Challenger in an abandoned missile silo at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release 9076)
NASA's Langley Research Center at Langley Field, Hampton, Virginia, and Honeywell's Space System Group, successfully concluded a joint flight research project that involved study of Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites for improved automated landing in spacecraft and aircraft. Fifteen GPS satellites were in orbit at the time of the test, and the group hoped to add nine more by 1993. Meanwhile, NASA and the Technical and Administrative Services Corporation signed a 2year agreement for the exchange of information associated with closed environment systems related to food production both on Earth and in space. The hydroponic technology sharing involved no exchange of funds. (NASA Release 90155, 90148)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, Exploration and Technology, announced an organizational change at the AmesDryden Flight Research Center, Mountain View, California, designed to reinforce and strengthen national flight research capabilities at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF), Edwards, California. Kenneth J. Szalai was chosen as the Ames Deputy Director, effective December 3, 1990. He was, however, located at Dryden and directed research and operations. Szalai previously served as Chief of the Research Engineering Division at Dryden. (NASA Release 90149)
Officials announced that an advisory committee created by Vice President Dan Quayle and the National Space Council was set up to examine how to manage future efforts in space. The committee, made up of two former congressmen, a former astronaut, and several top industry executives, was to report to the National Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that he had urged the committee's creation because of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, grounding of the Shuttle fleet, and design flaws in the proposed Space Station. (NY Times, Aug 3/90)
NASA's Langley Research Center selected Ball Corporation for a $90 million contract to develop an atmospheric instrument for the proposed Earth Observing System. The instrument, Spectroscopy of the Atmosphere Using Far Infrared Emission, would be designed to study middleatmosphere ozone distribution. (NASA Release, C90i)
NASA announced the selection of 280 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts in their'"0*1990 Small Business Innovation Research program (SBIR). SBIR had aimed at stimulating technological innovation in small business for the past 8 years; the Phase I contracts normally would not exceed $50,000. (NASA Release 90144)
NASA tested two of its experimental aircraft at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. One of the aircraft, an F16XL, used an experimental wing surface for improving airflow at supersonic speeds. The second aircraft, an X29, demonstrated an increase for highangleofattack, the angle of an aircraft relative to its actual flight path. (NASA Release 9052; 9059)
Engineers at NASA ran tests of the Hubble Space Telescope to determine if vibrations were interfering with precise pointing at specific stars. The problem had been discovered two days earlier when sensors locked on to a "guide star" to orient the0*spacecraft. Engineers noticed a slight wobble, one sixhundredth of a degree up and down every minute, that interfered with both fine pointing mechanisms and star observations. (NY Times, May
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
NASA scientists Michael J. Prather and Robert T. Watson warned that current levels of ozone depletion could cause public health problems and threaten plant life regardless of what steps were taken to reduce it. Their study predicted that the salient depletion over the Arctic could drift southward, similar to the damaged ozone over Antarctica that periodically drifts over New Zealand and Australia. (P Inq, Apr 20/90)
NASA scientists reported that despite its flaws, the Hubble Space Telescope was sending back some clear pictures, better than any a ground telescope could produce. The latest photographs of Jupiter and Pluto were better than any ever taken, but until the telescope's "near sightedness" was corrected images of distant, faint objects would continue to be unclear. (W Post, Oct 5/90; NY Times, Oct 5/90)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
NASA scientists warned that examination of data from the ozone hole over the South Pole showed record depletion. They added that ozone levels throughout the Southern Hemisphere were as low as they had ever been. The ozone hole has been monitored since 1979 with the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the GoddardManaged NIMBUS7 spacecraft. (C Trib, Oct 12/90; NASA Release 90137)
The Galileo spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on October 18, 1989, looped 10,000 miles above the planet Venus in what NASA engineers termed a "gravity assisted maneuver" that increased its speed by almost 5,000 mph for its trek to Jupiter. After taking 16 pictures of Venusian cloud and wind patterns while searching for lightning, the craft was scheduled to take more pictures of the planet during its return journey. The second set of photographs, which were to be coupled with sensors, were to detect dust, infrared and visible light, and electrically charged particles. Scientists determined that the spacecraft would be within range of the Earth and able to send back data, in October, using its small antenna. It was expected to reach Jupiter in December 1995. (P Inq, Feb 12/90; B Sun, Feb 11/90; NY Times, Feb 11/90)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a fiveyear, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90aa)
For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that, said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12day visit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90)
Engineers located two leaks in the Space Shuttle's fuel line that they determined could easily be fixed and stated that flights would resume soon. The problems, said William Lenoir, NASA's flight director, did not appear to be a result of any design flaw; he added that eight of the nine scheduled missions would likely be flown this year. In the meantime, investigators from a sixmember board of investigation created by NASA July 2 were seeking to find what had gone wrong with the Hubble Space Telescope. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who headed the board, promised a congressional committee that they would pinpoint the problem and fix responsibility. The investigation, he said, would be "very embarrassing to someone or some group." (W Post, Jul 14/90; NY Times, Jul 14/90)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory began testing its prototype for the Planetary Rover Navigation Test Bed Vehicle, a selfnavigating vehicle, about the size of a small car, for use in planned outposts on the Moon and Mars. (Daily News, Mar 13/90)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a $42.6 million contract to Rockwell International for continued Space Shuttle systems engineering and integration services. The contract called for Shuttle launch and flight support, test verification, operations integration, flight evaluation, engineering analysis, and data systems operations, as well as special studies. (NASA Release C90z)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science and Technology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during a meeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environment monitoring (realtime solar wind data), Space Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle. Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for building and utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in xray and infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph, reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, and satellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90106)
Technical assistant Edwin Sherry, from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, explained a minor problem that the Spacecraft Magellan had developed three days earlier and a little more than halfway into its journey to map Venus. A computer chip failure, caused either by electrical corrosion or an electrically charged particle spewed out by the sun, necessitated frequent commands from ground crews to keep Magellan moving in the right direction. The craft's guidance system normally focused on two stars to ascertain and adjust its heading. Sherry explained that some difficulties with the vast array of electronics during flight were expected and that the mission was in no danger. Scientists hoped to send a new program aloft that would allow the ship's computer to bypass the damaged chip. (AP, Jan 4/90) (#'0*.815@8<H? (#'0*.815@8<H?
Scientists and engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, began extensive tests on its recently developed untended planetary rover. An unproven technology was needed for a vehicle on a distant planet controlled by ground crews on Earth inasmuch as roundtrip communication would be anywhere from 8 minutes to 40 minutes. Computer Aided Remote Driving allowed vehicle planning and identification of a 10sofmeterslongobstaclefree path, with a threedimensional display from stereo cameras aboard the vehicle. SemiAutonomous Navigation allowed an operator to determine a nominal extended route tens of kilometers long. (NASA Release 9085)
The Ames Research Center in California awarded a fiveyear, $32.8 million contract to Silicon Graphics for a work station to be used in the Ames Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation Processing System Network. The work station would allow users to analyze and visualize their work in computational fluid dynamics and other largescale scientific simulation and modeling applications.0*(NASA Release C90w)
Rockwell Space Operations was selected by NASA for a $814 million, 10year station operation support contract. The contract would provide support for mission, flight crew, and facility operations for the Space Station and other flight programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Mar 7/90)
NASA scientists reported to the American Astronomical Society preliminary information obtained from the Cosmic Background Explorer spacecraft, launched on November 18, 1989, aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, the Differential Microwave Radiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment0*supported the Big Bang theory, but at the same time minimized the belief that other releases of energy had subsequently occurred. Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft performed with unprecedented precision. This precision was predicted to increase over the spacecraft's estimated two more years of data gathering. (NASA Release 905; P Inq, Jan 15/90)
Surprised NASA scientists released a photograph taken
The Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, awarded Rockwell International Corporation a fiveyear extension on the contract for systems integration. The $1.36 billion contract extensions were for flight and ground systems engineering maintenance and safety analysis, including configuration of the hardware required for each orbiter flight and Shuttle mission support from countdown to landing. (NASA Release C90A; C90B; WSJ, Jan 12/90)
The Air Force decided in September to convert the Space Launch Complex6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for Space Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in 1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study of cosmic Xrays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited several international scientists. The pictures sent back represented a neutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASA Release 90133)
The Langley Research Center in Virginia selected Mason and Hanger Services, Inc. for negotiation of a 5year, $97.9 million contract to support all aspects of supply, transportation and equipment management; general and specialized administrative services; different aspects of the security program; and support of the scientific and technical information program. The Television Development Division of NASA Headquarters awarded the Imaging Systems Laboratory of Florida Atlantic University a one to fiveyear contract with a potential value of $3 million for research and development in advanced video systems for space and terrestrial applications. (NASA Release C90cc; 90131A) ' 0*
NASA canceled a contract with TRW Corporation for the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, aka Space Tug, a spacecraft intended to lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and a proposed Xray telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for the cancellation was recent budget pressure facing NASA. (WSJ, `"Jun 8/90; W Times, Jun 8/90; Sp News, Jun 1117/90; NASA Release
Ground controllers adjusted commands on the Hubble Space Telescope for focusing on stars. Although other problems existed wobble from solar panels on the telescope and vibration as it went through spacethe first pictures were taken and sent to Earth on this day. (NY Times, May 21/90; W Times, May 21/90; W `"Post, May 21/90)
Liftoff of the Space Shuttle Columbia was scrubbed for the third time, after a fuel leak was discovered. It was reportedly not in the same area as the leak that halted the mission last May. The second delay for liftoff occurred during the last week of August because of communication problems with the Xray telescope in Columbia's cargo bay. NASA engineers believed the problem lay in the fuel pumps feeding the Shuttle's three main engines and began replacing them the next day. Agency officials said that the flight would be delayed at least 11 days.0*W Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; W Post, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; NY Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)
NASA considered a proposal for a major repair of the Hubble Space Telescope that would include the reinstating of full observation abilities. In addition to replacing the telescope's main camera in 1993, as already planned, astronauts would also replace another device with corrective optics for light that reached other important scientific instruments. The plan called for repairing or replacing the craft's solar panels, as well, because their vibrations had interfered with many sensitive observations. (NY Times, Oct 27/90)
NASA unveiled its latest research laboratory at Ames Research Center in California. The Human Performance Research Laboratory was designed for study of prolonged space travel. Ground was also broken at the dedication for the new $8.6 million Automated Sciences Research Facility, designed to provide research and technology development in automation and artificial intelligence. (NASA Release 9053)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
NASA scientists regained contact with Magellan after a 14hour loss. The spacecraft went into a safe mode, in which it shut down many of its systems and pointed its solar panels toward the Sun because of navigation problems it falsely interpreted. The ship's computer memory was sent back to Earth so scientists could determine the problem in Magellan's program. Scientists were pleased, however, with the first set of pictures taken during Magellan's test run over the planet. They, however, cautioned that Magellan's mission to begin regular mapping by `"August 29 would likely be delayed. (W Times, Aug 20/90; P Inq, (#Aug 19/90; W Post, Aug 18/90; NY Times, Aug 18/90; LA Times, Aug
NASA said that the Hubble Space Telescope, which had been plagued with problems, was discovered to have a flawed mirror, causing the $1.5 billion instrument to be "near sighted." The mirrors, which were ground into the wrong shape, rendered useless the telescope's most important scientific instrument, a widefield planetary camera designed to explore the farthest reaches of the universe. Engineers said that instruments scheduled to be attached to the telescope in 1993, 1996, and 1997 could compensate for the flaw and added that these flight schedules might be advanced. Tests were not done on the effectiveness of the mirrors before the telescope was launched because engineers felt that the checks were cost prohibitive. (P Inq, Jun 28/90; NY Times, June 28/90; W Post, Jun 28/90)
NASA launched a Delta rocket carrying a West German observatory into a 360milehigh orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The observatory consisted of an Xray telescope and a widefield camera for detecting extreme ultraviolet light; scientists hoped the observatory would yield information about forces associated with the center of our galaxy, intergalactic gasses, quasars, black holes, hot stars, and objects on the edge of the universe. The observatory was dubbed Rosat, after the German Scientist Wilhelm Roentgen who discovered Xrays in 1895, and promised to be 100 times more sensitive than even the Einstein Xray Observatory launched in 1978. It was originally scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in 1987. (LA Times, Jun 2/90; NY Times, Jun 2/90; B Sun, Jun 2/90; P Inq, Jun 2/90)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, awarded Jackson and Tull of Washington, D.C. a $19 million contract to support the Applied Engineering Division in automation and robotics and thermal and data systems. The firm was selected under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act; the potential for the contract over a fiveyear period was $63 million. (NASA Release C90q)
Victor L. Peterson was named Deputy Director of the Ames Research Center in California. Since joining NASA in 1956, Petersen held several positions at the center. (NASA Release 9036)
Jerry Grey, Director of Science and Technology Policy for the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, recommended that weapons designed for the Strategic Defense Initiative be developed to locate and destroy any asteroids that threaten Earth, views endorsed by Vice President Dan Quayle. Grey noted that 1,500 asteroids cross the Earth's orbit every year, that the location of only 100 of them is known, and that the impact of even a relatively small asteroid could have a devastating effect. (P Inq, May 15/90; C Trib, May 17/90)
NASA successfully tested its selfrepairing flight control system on an F15 aircraft at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The system detected damaged flight control components, such as ailerons, rudders, and elevators, and adjusted undamaged flight surfaces to compensate so the pilot could maintain good aircraft response. (NASA Release 9043)
Columbia; "astro" astronomy telescopes. Jul 9: Atlantis; classified military cargo. Aug 29: Columbia; a Spacelab life sciences module. Oct 5: Discovery; the Ulysses probe. Nov 1: Atlantis; Gamma Ray Observatory. Dec 12: Columbia; a materials science laboratory. A military mission carrying a variety of infrared sensors for the Strategic Defense Initiative was reassigned for 1992. NASA planned for 64 Space Shuttle flights and 30 expendable launch vehicle missions through September 1995. (UPI, Jan 29/90; W Times, Jan 30/90; NY Times, Feb 4/90; NASA Release 9015)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of Investigation created by NASA met for the first time in Washington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for the telescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allen said, "The board now has a good base of information from which to0*proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)
Boeing Space Operations, Inc. was awarded a $35.9 million costplusawardfee contract for program assurance engineering support at Ames Research Center in California. Under the contract, Boeing would provide reliability and quality assurance, system safety engineering, test engineering, management, institutional safety, and health and environmental0*services. (NASA Release C90o)
NASA reported on the completed computerized medical reference system, a project engendered by computer and medical experts at the University of Florida and the Kennedy Space Center in Florida in 1979 and known as the Clinical Practice Library of Medicine (CPLM). The system contains nearly all of the text and graphics of seven commonly used medical reference books that are considered essential for practicing medicine. Being lightweight as well as offering high speed access to references, the CPLM has great potential for both space travel and Earth uses alike. (NASA Release: 9030a)
Members of NASA's Project Viking, the group that put the first two spaceships on Mars 15 years previously, gathered at the Langley Research Center to commemorate that event on July 20, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, Jul 23/91)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
NASA announced the selection of MK-Ferguson Corporation, Cleveland for a contract to provide engineering, construction, and maintenance services to NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C91-mm)
The New York Times cited a report by Jean O. Dickey, a geodesist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and Raymond Hide, a geophysicist at Oxford, published in the journal Science. They analyzed the rotation of the earth, which is fitfully and almost imperceptibly slowing. More accurate measurements than in the past were possible by bouncing laser signals off quartz reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts. (NY Times, Aug 9/91)
According to AP, the National Research Council endorsed NASA's planned Earth Observation System, which it called "the largest single component of the most ambitious scientific enterprise ever undertaken." The Council stated it had some concern over the program's management, however, and urged the earth science and space research community to keep a close eye on the program. (AP, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 13/91)
According to Florida Today, the Atlantis astronauts were scheduled to arrive at Kennedy Space Center in a few days, to begin preparations and a practice countdown for the Space Shuttle flight. (Fla Today, Oct 28/91; UPI, Oct 31/91)
An article in Florida Today referred to former NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's proposal that some 100 top Shuttle program managers around the country be moved to Kennedy Space Center under a consolidation plan NASA was considering. The recommendations were to be discussed at a December 9-10 meeting with NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (Fla Today, Nov 15/91)
Final approval was given for the construction of a new visitors' center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The Manned Space Flight Education Foundation helped raise funds for the $60 million structure. (AP, Apr 12/91)
A proposal that $211 million be spent on the chance that gravity waves could be exploited to fathom black holes and other cosmic enigmas divided scientists and faced Congress with a quandary. Involved was possible Federal funding of two proposed gravity wave observatories, a joint project of the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. American supporters of the project, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), admitted there was no guarantee of success but believed its scientific potential was gigantic if it succeeded. (NY Times, Apr 30/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the six moons of Neptune discovered by Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 were given names by the International Astronomical Union's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. In addition, Saturn's newest moon, Pan, was discovered by Mark Showalter, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (P Inq, Sep 28/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
Parade Magazine contained a feature article on Barbara Morgan, who following the death of Christa McAuliffe in the Challenger disaster, was her designated successor as NASA's teacher in space. NASA Administrator Richard Truly was quoted as saying that after NASA's annual review of the subject, it was determined that it was not yet appropriate to send another teacher on the Shuttle although it was only a matter of time. Morgan stated she recognized the risks of space flight but was nevertheless eager to go ahead with a flight mission. (Parade, Jul 14/91)
Cort Durocher, executive director of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Washington and a former combat pilot and space engineer, wrote in the Houston Chronicle that while working to minimize risks, space exploration involves occasional failures and possible loss of life. (H Chron, Mar 25/91)
Florida Today described the opening on September 3 at the Kennedy Space Center of a third garage for NASA's four-Orbiter Space Shuttle fleet. The hangar was outfitted with equipment intended for the Air Force's mothballed Shuttle launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, saving NASA about $40 million. (Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
While commending Jay Apt's and Jerry Ross's work in freeing the jammed antenna of the Gamma Ray Observatory during their Atlantis mission, an editorial commentator advocated a rethinking of spaceflight goals and greater realism. (CSM, Apr 17/91)
NASA selected Ball Corporation of Muncie, Indiana, to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. (C Trin, Apr 18/91)
William B. Lenoir said NASA's manned space flight division must cut expenses by 3 percent each year in the next five years to save $1 billion. The last alternative would be to reduce the number of space flights but that would be "a couple of years away." Later media comments indicated that NASA's budgetary discipline and the slimming down of the Space Station plans appeared to be paying off for NASA in relation to Congress. (AP, Oct 5/91; AvWk, Oct 21/91; W Post, Oct 28/91)
An article citing Technology Review, referred to the system developed by NASA's Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resources Information Services to fight fires by enabling firefighters to "see" through the fire. (San Francisco Examiner, Aug 14/91)
The Antelope Valley Daily News reported that NASA might be flying one of the Advanced Tactical Fighters, namely the F-23 prototype, about which it was negotiating with Northrop Corporation. The aircraft would be used for aeronautics research at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Jul 7/91)
The Soviet Union used the name of Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space 30 years ago, to boost its emerging commercial space program. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at an opening ceremony in Moscow said Soviet space science and technology were open to international cooperation and called for joint space research with the United States, European countries, China, India, Japan, and others. (AP, Apr 11/91)
NASA Associate Administrator Spence Armstrong met with Marshall Space Flight Center officials on December 4. He said NASA's programs put it in a good position to continue to attract top engineering talents. NASA would need to attract engineers from several previously underrepresented groups, including blacks, women, the disabled, and other minorities. (Htsvl Tms, Dec 5/91)
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had successfully tested a 17.5-foot-long solid rocket motor on September 26. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an Air Force-funded research center in El Segundo, California, was to begin in the fall to study the effect of rocket launches on the Earth's fragile ozone shield. Aerospace Corporation planned to investigate the role of solid rocket fuel combustion in the destruction of the zone. These studies would supplement studies of ozone depletion done by NASA and would likely influence the types of fuels to be used in the National Launch System, a new generation of rockets scheduled for use after the year 2000. (LA Times, Jul 25/91)
Robert Gibson, an astronaut removed from command of a Shuttle mission for violating flight-safety rules, unofficially has set a new altitude record of 27,000 feet in a single-engine Cassutt Formula 1 "midget" racing plane. (UPI, Feb 1/91; LA Times, Feb 3/91)
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed environmental challenges facing scientists worldwide. Commenting on greenhouse gases, it stated that the international program of Canada, the European Space Agency, Japan, and the United States would help fill knowledge gaps. Within this framework, NASA's Mission to Planet Earth formed a major part. This included the need to analyze the hydrological cycle over the oceans, represented in part by the use of a spectrometer supplied by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The lower atmosphere also needed study as pointed out by Jack Fishman of the NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. Such study would include investigation of the "self-cleaning ability" represented by the hydroxyl radical. (CSM, Apr 25/91)
A number of NASA scientists participated in the International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids held in San Juan Capistrano, California, and jointly sponsored by NASA and The Planetary Society. At congressional request, a NASA committee headed by David Morrison, space science chief at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, was to recommend how to improve the search for asteroids. Another committee was to advise how best to divert threatening asteroids. At the end of the conference July 3, a statement advocated construction of several sophisticated new telescopes to find all significant asteroids and learn if any were on a collision course with Earth. (AP, Jul 1/91; AP, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; P Inq, Jul 6/91; Oakland Tribune, Jul 8/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, announced a contract award to
The media reported that NASA engineers had debated whether to remove additional sensors in Columbia that might be cracked. NASA planned to create a new investigative team to review the process of flaw detection. (NY Times, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Times, May 24/91; USA Today, May 24/91; AP, May 24/91; UPI, May 24/91)
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
Whereas NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York plans to announce that 1990 was the hottest year ever recorded, NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, says 1990 was only the fourth hottest year since 1979. The difference is accounted for by the fact that Goddard uses ground-based thermometers to record local heat while Marshall uses satellites, which broadly measure atmospheric temperature world-wide. In addition to the global temperature analysis, the World Resources Institute released two related studies. One was by Richard Heim of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Global Climate Laboratory. (WSJ, Jan 8/91; W Post, Jan 10/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; LA Times, Jan 10/91; CSM, Jan 16/91; NY Times Magazine, Feb 3/91)
NASA announced that the application of its sensor technology led to the development by a Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia team, headed by Allan J. Zuckerwar, of a portable fetal heart monitor. The marketing of this monitor was to be part of the NASA program to transfer the agency's space age technology to the private sector. (NASA Release 91-90)
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce as Deputy Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. He had served as Director of Aerospace Technology at Lewis since 1984. (NASA Release 91-65)
Gerald Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center at a press conference spoke of the findings of the Gamma Ray Observatory to date. He said that an instrument called the Burst and Transient Source Experiment had detected 117 gamma ray bursts since launching. Thse bursts were randomly scattered, not from the center of the Milky Way Galaxy as previously thought. (AP, Sep 23/91; P Inq, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; W Post, Sep 24/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
The media discussed the forthcoming launch of Atlantis and the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) it will set in orbit. Gamma rays have the highest of all forms of radiation and are born deep inside atomic nuclei. GRO was to canvass the entire sky over a two-year period, scanning the whole sky during the first year and concentrating on the most intriguing objects the second year. GRO was to be controlled by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists from Germany's Max Planck Institute, which supplied GRO's imaging telescope, were to assist. GRO's Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer Experiment was to be the main instrument for examining the material enveloping supernovas to look for gamma rays. University of Washington astronomer George Lake believed GRO would find in the dark matter, strange particles called "wimps" (weakly interacting massive particles) in a Milky Way object called Geminga. The Soviet spacecraft Granat, carrying a French gamma-ray detector, found an object that accretes surrounding matter, generating antimatter that in turn creates gamma rays. (P Inq, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; UPI, Apr 1/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; UPI, Apr 2/91; CSM, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; USA Today, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; AP, Apr 3/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; P Inq, Apr 5/91)
Florida Today reported that Forrest McCartney, who had headed Kennedy Space Center since 1986 would be retiring in about a year. Subsequently, the media reported that McCartney had been asked to step aside early by top NASA managers. (Fla Today, Oct 23/91; UPI, Oct 25/91; AP, Oct 26/91; W Times, Oct 27/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91)
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)
The Government Accounting Office issued a study criticizing NASA's system of testing spacecraft before launching. It called the system poorly organized with testing practices varying from one center to another because NASA lacked uniform policies. The study dealt with the Hubble Space Telescope and the weather satellites, as well as Space Shuttles. (AP, Sep 23/91; UPI, Sep 23/91; LA Times, Sep 23/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; WSJ, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
The Discovery astronauts conducted final experiments, celebrated the 30th anniversary of U.S. space flight on May 5, and prepared to return to Earth. (P Inq, May 6/91; W Times, May 6/91; USA Today, May 6/91; B Sun, May 6/91; C Trin, May 6/91; AP, May 6/91; UPI, May 6/91)
Eugene Kranz, Director of the Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) at Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the establishment of a Space Station Mission Operation Project Office within MOD. The new office, headed by Charles R. Lewis, was to have responsibility for the development and implementation of Space Station Freedom flight operations. (NASA Release 91-35)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
George Rhee, an astronomer at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, in an article in Nature, discussed the observed rate at which space is expanding in all directions, known as the Hubble constant. Rhee stated that new measurement had produced the relatively low value of 50 kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light-years) for the Hubble constant, agreeing with the estimate of Allan R. Sandage of the Carnegie Institution's observatories in Pasadena, California. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
Former astronaut Michael Collins in his new book, Mission to Mars, said that he believed homosexuals and lesbians should be barred from space exploration because they would be likely to create interpersonal problems. NASA never considered sexual orientation in hiring. (AP, Apr 9/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, Apr 9/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center announced the award to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, of a modification to the Space Station Freedom Schedule A contract. Schedule A provided hardware components for the Space Station and the modification will encompass the Integration, Test, and Verification Environment and Ada Compiler. (NASA Release C91-pp)
The Christian Science Monitor commended NASA for naming the orbiting Gamma Ray Observatory the Arthur Holly Compton Gamma Ray Observatory because of the late Nobel Prize laureate's studies of the subject. Moreover, the renaming focused attention on one of NASA's "outstandingly successful missions." (CSM, Oct 9/91)
The Soviet Union observed Cosmonaut Day, marking the thirtieth anniversary of the space flight of Yuri Gagarin. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91)
The British journal Nature carried an article by Rodney A. Viereck and Edmond Murad of Phillips Laboratory, a space research center at Hanscom Air Force Base, Bedford, Massachusetts. Their findings indicated that the probable reason for the eerie orange glow of the Shuttles was caused by oxygen in the upper atmosphere striking nitric oxide on the Shuttle's skin, forming excited nitrogen dioxide, which radiates light when it moves off the surface. (NY Times, Nov 12/91; Xinhua, Nov 12/91)
NASA was considering repairs costing at least $50 million to the Hubble Space Telescope. In addition to the telescope proper, the question was whether to compensate for flaws in three other instruments: two spectrographs and the faint-object camera. Such repairs would involve Costar (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement) and cost $30 million to $40 million, while the telescope repair cost would be $14 million. To test the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water tank at Marshall Space Flight Center would determine whether the work could be accomplished in the estimated 16 hours required. Despite the need for such repairs, Edward Weller (Wiler?), NASA program scientist for the observatory, stressed the achievements the Hubble telescope had made in revealing the universe. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; B Sun, Apr 23/91; Birmingham News, Apr 23/91; AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91)
The press cited concern over "millions of pieces of trash zooming around in space" and the fear that they might hit the Hubbell Space Telescope or some orbiting astronauts. The concern caused work on new debris-monitoring devices and a system to warn astronauts of impending collisions with space junk so they could take evasive action. The U.S. Space Command's space surveillance network already kept track of about 6,700 pieces of larger litter at least four inches in diameter that might damage a Space Station. (AP, May 10/91; W Times, May 24/91)
John Guest, a geologist from University College, London, was working at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory on data from the Magellan spacecraft's mission to Venus. Evidence of volcanic action exists although Magellan's mapping mission, begun September 15, 1990, thus far reveal no volcano erupting. (AP, Feb 14/91)
Bruce Bunin, manager of Advanced Commercial Programs at Douglas Aircraft Company, stated that McDonnell Douglas Corporation had won a contract for up to $8 million from NASA's Langley Research Center to conduct system studies on the next-generation commercial supersonic transport. The five-year contract was part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program aimed at resolving environmental and economic issues and developing technology for a High Speed Civil Transport (HSCT). The HSCT team was to study atmospheric effects, noise and sonic boom reduction, advanced materials and lightweight structures, supersonic laminar flow control, engine cycles, and airline economics. (PR Newswire, Mar 11/91)
The media discussed plans for NASA's next Shuttle flight, that of Discovery in September to deploy a satellite to study the ozone layer in Earth's upper atmosphere. Discovery was moved to the launch pad, and various systems were connected to prepare for a practice countdown. (UPI, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91)
Scuba divers exercising on an underwater treadmill at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, are helping gather data to be used in NASA's spacesuit design. (NASA Release 91-11)
NASA announced the selection of nine scientists as team members in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Microwave Observing Project. The SETI project has two elements: Targeted Search and Sky Survey. The Targeted Search was to use the largest available antennas and search over a 1 to 3 gigahertz (GHz) frequency range, looking for patterns that could indicate an artificially generated signal. The search would conduct the most sensitive search yet conducted of nearby (less than 80 lightyears distant) solar-type stars. The Sky Survey would use the 34-meter antennas of NASA's Deep Space Network sites to scan the whole sky over a 1 to 10 GHz frequency range. The survey could detect signals from the vicinity of distant sunlike stars or from areas beyond the solar-type stars. SETI observations were to begin on Columbus Day 1992, with the Sky Survey deployed at Goldstone, California, and the Targeted Search mounted at the National Science Foundation's Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico.
Dr. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that Magellan to date had mapped more than 58 percent of Venus, including Aphrodite Terra, the largest of the highland regions. Various hypotheses exist regarding the formation of the different "continents" on Venus, and the mapping should clarify the situation. (NASA Release 91-31)
NASA announced that its Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resource Information Services, Inc., both of Mountain View, California, would jointly develop a system to allow firefighters to merge elevation and vegetation data with live pictures of forest fires. This would enable firefighters quickly to "see" through a smoky forest fire and plan their strategy. The three-year, $600,000 project called for NASA to expand existing remote sensing technology and for Terra-Mar to develop portable computer work stations and advanced software. (NASA Release 91-56)
Encore Computer Corporation filed an agency protest of a $191 million award by NASA Johnson Space Center to IBM Corporation for a mainframe requirements contract. NASA officials were to meet with Encore representatives over the disagreement, which involved pricing information submitted. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
The Washington Post discussed the success of NASA engineers in fixing the computer software "bug" that caused spacecraft Magellan, after its arrival at Venus, to lose contact with Earth. Magellan mission director James Scott of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California confirmed that the problem was solved and possible similar flaws in other space programs were being eliminated. (W Post, Aug 18/91)
Gerald Fishman, a NASA astrophysicist at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced at a conference of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle that the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) carried on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory was detecting gamma-ray bursts with greater sensitivity than previously. (NASA Release 91-81; UPI, May 28/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that Advanced Computer Systems, Inc. of Fairfax, Virginia, would provide administrative automated data processing services for GSFC's Information Management Division. The contract would take effect April 1, 1991, and would consist of a one-year basic period and four one-year priced options for a total of $58.8 million. (NASA Release C91-d)
UPI reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had detected gas clouds that appear to be from the universe's early day much nearer Earth than previously thought possible. NASA also released pictures taken by Hubble of an unusual jet spouting from a massive, unstable star called Eta Carinae, which upset existing ideas about how the star spewed out matter. (UPI, May 17/91)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, mounted atop NASA's Boeing 747 Shuttle carrier, began its two-day flight back to Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (AP, Dec 7/91; W Times, Dec 8/91)
Lennard Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator, announced that the two largest mirrors for NASA's Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility have been successfully tested in the new X-ray Calibration Facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-145)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of H. Lee Beach Jr. as Deputy Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-198)
According to AP, the Shuttle Columbia left California on a piggyback jet ride to its home at Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (AP, Jun 19/91)
NASA announced that researchers at its Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, had developed a laser-based system for measuring winds above launch sites. The system called CLAWS, for Coherent Launch Site Atmospheric Wind Sounder, was created by the Spacecraft Controls Branch, Flight Systems Directorate, and Lockheed. CLAWS was used in the September 12 launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and might eventually replace weather balloons as a means of gathering data aloft. (NASA Release 91-206)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, awarded a $145 million contract to Loral Infrared and Imaging Systems, Lexington, Massachusetts to design and build the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS). This instrument would fly on NASA's first Earth Observation System (EOS) satellite flights in 1998. AIRS would be a global thermometer in space to study the effects of increased greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. The main goal of EOS-A satellites is to study the effects of potential global warming through long-term observations. AIRS would operate continuously for five years. (NASA Release 91-61; WSJ, Apr 23/91)
The media reported an article in the journal Science, indicating that despite reports of global warming and African drought, the Sahara desert shrank markedly since 1984, following a substantial expansion over the preceding four years. Two NASA scientists, Compton J. Tucker and William W. Newcomb, at NASA's Laboratory for Terrestrial Physics in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Tech University's International Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Land Studies, conducted the research. Satellite measurements of vegetation on the ground were used to calculate the extent of the desert. (AP, Jul 18/91; NASA Release 91-114; W Post, Jul 21/91; P Inq, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91)
NASA announced that the next Shuttle launch, scheduled for late February, would be delayed until early March in order to replace three thrusters used to steer the ship in orbit. During the eight-day flight, the 44 thrusters would be used to maneuver the ship into unusual positions. The ship's re-entry engines also would be fired so a satellite temporarily placed in orbit could observe the rocket exhaust plumes. The aim was better identification of the plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. NASA also displayed the Gamma Ray Observatory scheduled to be carried into orbit in early April. (P Inq, Jan 30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Today, Jan 30/91; AP, Jan 30/91; NY Times, Jan 31/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA researchers produced various vegetables in their imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The experiment, designed to prepare for Space Station existence, could not, however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Times, Aug 18/91)
William Paciesas, research professor of Physics at the University of Alabama, Huntsville, is co-investigator of an experiment on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory to be carried by Space Shuttle Atlantis in April. The Burst and Transient Source Experiment was to study the origins of gamma ray bursts. Gamma rays are at the upper end of the energy spectrum, carrying more energy at higher frequency than visible light, ultraviolet light, or x-rays. (Hntsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
Space Shuttle Endeavour arrived at Kennedy Space Center. Considerable work remained to be done on the Shuttle, including the installation of the three main engines. (AP, May 7/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the selection of TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California, for one Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer/Earth Probe Spacecraft (TOMS/EP). The contract was to provide for the design, development, fabrication, assembly, test, integration, launch, and post-launch support of the aircraft. (NASA Release C91-t)
A column by Robert C. Cowen cited variances in figures for global warming among NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and the University of Alabama at Huntsville from those of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, the Climate Research Unit of East Anglia in England, and the Soviet Union's Hydrometerorological Scientific Research Center. According to the British and the Goddard Institute, 1990 was the warmest year on record globally but according to the Marshall Center, using different data, the hottest years in descending order were 1987, 1988, 1983, and 1990. (CSM, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91)
UPI reported that new Space Shuttle Endeavour was delayed an additional day in its trip from the factory in California to Kennedy Space Center in Florida because of stormy weather. (UPI, May 6/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced its selection of Fairchild Space, Germantown, Maryland, for a contract to provide engineering support services for the Space Technology Division. (NASA Release C91-w)
The media reported a study contained in the British journal Nature, written by Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California, Christopher P. McKay, who also worked at Ames, and James F. Kasting, associate professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State University. The authors concluded it would be relatively easy to alter Mars' atmosphere to make it suitable for plants. Making the planet fit for people, however, would take about 100,000 years. (P Inq, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; C Trin, Aug 8/91; LA Times, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced plans to create a new Office of Space Flight Development. This would allow the existing Office of Space Flight to concentrate on the safety and efficiency of space flight. (NASA Release 91-148)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
NASA announced that Dudley McConnell, Associate Director for Applications for NASA's Earth Science and Applications Division, died of an apparent heart attack. (NASA Obituary; Fla Today, Oct 29/91; W Post, Oct 31/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
According to the press, two members of the House subcommittee that oversees NASA spending, Chairman Bob Traxler, Democrat of Michigan, and ranking minority member Bill Green, Republican of New York, asked NASA Administrator Richard Truly why NASA did not buy a Mir Space Station or other technology from the Soviet Union. NASA replied that the U.S. aerospace industry would not like it. (AP, Oct 25/91; B Sun, Oct 26/91; LA Times, Oct 27/91)
Kenneth Szalai, recently named director of NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Base, stated that NASA was putting a new emphasis on aeronautics. The facility's number one project involved the F-18 high-angle-of-attack program to help design more maneuverable aircraft. Similar work was underway on the X-29 as well as modifications on the F-15 jet fighter and testing of Space Shuttle landing gear systems. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 7/91)
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)
NASA announced that as a result of the huge outpouring of volcanic material from Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, a research team of NASA atmospheric scientists was being sent to the West Indian island of Barbados to gather data to help evaluate the global atmospheric effects of this event. Several NASA scientists subsequently commented on Pinatubo's plume and its spreading. (NASA Release 91-103; W Post, Jul 8/91)
NASA further announced the selection of two additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These were the Center for the Commercial Development of Space in Satellite and Hybrid Communication Networks, University of Maryland Systems Research Center, College Park, and the Space Communications Technology Center, Florida Atlantic University Research Corporation, Boca Raton. In an unrelated action, NASA and Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, agreed to discontinue the Center for Space Processing of Engineering Materials because of decline in research by metals producers. (NASA Release 91-166; B Sun, Oct 10/91)
NASA's Soft X-ray Telescope aboard the Japanese Solar-A spacecraft launched from Japan's Kagoshima Space Center on August 30, made its first X-ray images of the sun. The purpose of the mission was to produce pictures of the genesis and life of solar flares to enable scientists to learn more about them. (W Times, Oct 3/91)
Jerry Ross and Jay Apt fixed a stuck satellite antenna in NASA's first unscheduled repair in space, showing the value of the human element in space flight. Thereafter they remained outside for three more hours to test equipment. A further spacewalk was scheduled before return to Earth. (USA Today, Apr 8/91; B Sun, Apr 8/91; AP, Apr 8/91; UPI, Apr 8/91; C Trin, Apr 8/91; CSM, Apr 9/91; W Post, Apr 9/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 9/91; Birmingham News, Apr 12/91)
Wayne Littles, head of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center office charged with designing a heavy-lift launch vehicle for military and NASA purposes, commented on work underway. Still in the early stages, the heaviest lift models would carry at least 200,000 to 250,000 pounds. New advanced solid rocket boosters were planned as well as work on developing an unmanned version of the Shuttle, called Shuttle C. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 11/91)
NASA Project Scientist Steve Saunders stated that Magellan scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were studying the surface features on Venus caused by wind. Soviet landers and the US Pioneer probes measured wind speeds near Venus at two to four miles per hour, or about the speed needed to move sand grains. The Magellan images indicated wind streaks. Project Manager Tony Spear said that a new strategy to protect Magellan from the heat of direct sunlight has successfully cooled the spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-63)
NASA announced that the X-29, an unusual research aircraft built to investigate the feasibility of a forward-swept wing design, made its last flight in its high angle of attack research program on September 30 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 91-159; Antelope Valley Press, Oct 4/91)
The local newspaper carried an article on an area resident, Dale Reed, who said his "lifting-body concept"--an aircraft shape that eliminated the need for wings, influenced the design of the Space Shuttle. He built scale models of his idea and convinced his boss, Paul Bikle, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, to try it on a glider. Reed was a NASA engineer for 32 years and subsequently worked as senior engineer for PRC, Inc., a NASA contractor. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Sep 13/91)
The California Institute of Technology and the University of California, with funding from the W.M. Keck Foundation, were preparing to build a new $93.3 million Keck II telescope in 1992 on top of Hawaii's Mauna Kea volcano, adjacent to the Keck I being completed. Foundation chairman Howard B. Keck announced that the foundation would pay $74.6 million for the second telescope. Edward C. Stone, director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said scientists were sure NASA would get Congressional approval to finance the remainder. The linked telescopes, according to Stone, "can explore the origin of the visible universe by peering back to the first 1 billion to 2 billion years after the Big Bang, when we believe that galaxies began to form out of the residue of the Big Bang." (C Trin, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 27/91; NY Times, Apr 27/91; LA Times, Apr 27/91; W Post, Apr 27/91; CSM, Apr 29/91)
William J. O'Neil, manager of the $1.4 billion Galileo project at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said Galileo fired its thrusters to put it on a course to take it close to the asteroid Gaspra on October 29. (AP, Oct 10/91; W Times, Oct 10/91; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
Robert Brown and Paul A. Vanden Bout, astronomers at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Charlottesville, Virginia, using the 12-meter telescope on Kitt Peak, Arizona, in July discovered carbon monoxide in a strange object previously found by researchers in Ursa Major. A huge gas cloud, at the fringe of the universe, it might be linked to a galaxy in formation. (P Inq, Nov 21/91; LA Times, Nov 25/91)
The media reported NASA's announcement that henceforth the Kennedy Space Center in Florida would be a prime Shuttle landing site beginning with Atlantis's mission in July. However, because of Florida's temperamental weather, Shuttles were expected to return to California 60 percent of the time, according to Robert L. Crippen, director of the Space Shuttle program. (AP, Jun 20/91; UPI, Jun 20/91; NYT, Jun 21/91; B Sun, Jun 21/91; LA Times, Jun 21/91)
The Department of Energy requested $30 million to create a new space exploration program relating to civilian space activities. The new request brought the Energy Department's 1992 budget request for space exploration to $142 million, compared with NASA's $94 million. Some experts and officials saw the Energy Department's role in space as desirable, both to prevent NASA's monopoly and because the Department maintained active technology development programs whereas NASA allowed its technology research and development to wither as it struggled with existing programs. (W Post, Apr 30/91)
Extensive media coverage preceded the scheduled launching of Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12. The countdown was planned to begin on September 9, but the discovery of a leak in the orbital steering system might delay the mission. The flight was to be the first in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program and was to place into orbit the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The UARS was to carry 10 scientific instruments, of which four would study the ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 8/91; W Post, Sep 8/91; NY Times, Sep 8/91; P Inq, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 9/91; W Times, Sep 9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B Sun, Sep 10/91; NY Times, Sep 10/91; P Inq, Sep 10/91; W Times, Sep 10/91; LA Times, Sep 10/91; AP, Sep 10/91; UPI, Sep 10/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
The Huntsville Times indicated that NASA and consumers in general had much in common, namely a situation of being caught in a recession when careful budgeting was necessary. Nonetheless, many NASA programs, such as Magellan's probe of Venus, and the Hubble Space Telescope, were continuing their good work. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 17/91)
The Huntsville Times published a history of NASA in connection with its Marshall Space Flight Center and the Army Ballistic Missile Agency Development Operations Division in Huntsville. Reference was made to the early days of the Redstone Arsenal as well as to statistics of employment and various Shuttle launches.  (Htsvl Tms, Jun 9/91)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
The Baltimore Sun reported that NASA engineers were trying to fix an intermittent power failure in the Hubble Space Telescope affecting one of the two ultraviolet detectors housed in the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph. As a result, some 30 percent of research planned for the spectrograph must be postponed. (B Sun, Sep 4/91; LA Times, Sep 9/91)
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
The National Research Council in its report The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, after two years of study recommended that more modest instruments than the Hubble Space Telescope and only a few large observatories be developed. The next instrument, the $617 million Gamma Ray Observatory, was to be launched in April 1991. During the 1990s, of more than 50 proposals made, the report endorsed only four: the $1.3 billion Space Infrared Telescope Facility; an $80 million infrared-optimized telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii; the $115 million Millimeter Array, a group of telescopes to cover star-forming regions and galaxies; and a $55 million optical telescope to operate in the Southern Hemisphere. The report recommended several more modest programs including the $230 million Stratospheric Observatory for Far-Infrared Astronomy; the $250 million Astrometric Interferometry Mission to map positions of celestial bodies more precisely; the $15 million Large Earth-based Solar Telescope; and a $70 million spacecraft dedicated to the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopy Explorer satellite and increasing to five the Explorer satellites to be launched on rockets. (UPI, Mar 19/91; W Post, Mar 20/91; W Times, Mar 20/91; NY Times, Mar 20/91; LA Times, Mar 20/91; B Sun, Mar 24/91)
Marshall Space Flight Center Director Jack Lee told the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce that the news media were to blame for NASA's bad image during the preceding year. In discussing Marshall's economic impact on the area, Lee cited increases in its budget, which had risen from $1.8 billion in 1983 to a requested $3.6 billion in fiscal 1992. Of this amount, an estimated $1.08 billion would be spent in Alabama. Moreover, Marshall civil service and contractor employees represented about 12 percent of the total Huntsville population. (Hntsv Tms, Mar 26/91)
A study by the University of Southern California found that space exploration was viewed as "frivolous" by the average American. These results were disclosed at the 7th annual National Space Symposium. A space journal commented that NASA needed to find new ways of communicating its message more effectively. (Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
News editor Budd McLaughlin of the Huntsville News denied the blame placed on the media by Jack Lee, director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, for NASA's poor public image. (Huntsville News, Apr 1/91)
NASA's goal was to deploy two Space Shuttle missions during April: Atlantis on April 5 and Discovery on April 25. The last two-launching month was January 1986. In addition to launching the Gamma Ray Observatory, the Atlantis flight would feature a spacewalk by Jerry Ross and Jap Apt. (NY Times, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; LA Times, Apr 4/91; B Sun, Apr 5/91;  W Post, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91)
NASA scientist Thomas J. Miller said NASA would establish a Nuclear Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center in early 1991 to develop nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. The Defense and Energy departments would join in this project; the NASA FY 1991 budget included about $1 million for nuclear propulsion development. Such propulsion could significantly reduce the time required from Earth to the moon or Mars. (AvWk, Jan 7/91)
NASA announced that scientists and engineers at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, successfully tested the mini-rover Rocky III in the Avawatz Mountains south of Death Valley. The mini-rover, weighing 52 pounds, was designed to be used on Mars. (NASA Release 91-153; Bus Wk, Sep 9/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, has selected Hughes/Santa Barbara Research Center, Goleta, California as its contractor for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir (MODIS-N) instrument for the Earth Observing System (EOS) program. EOS is central to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Program. MODIS-N is the key research instrument to fly on a series of EOS unmanned polar spacecraft. Over a 15-year period, it would measure terrestrial, oceanographic, and atmospheric parameters to assess environmental changes. (NASA Release C91-1)
The media reported on the "spectacular" nature for some viewers but confusing for some telescopes of the total solar eclipse. Drake Deming of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt said his team was up most of the night but succeeded in time in solving a problem with one of their instruments. (AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced that the second mission of the Pegasus air-launched space booster was scheduled for July 17. Pegasus was to be launched from below the wing of a NASA B-52 aircraft based at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Pegasus was to carry seven small Defense Department satellites for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and put them into low Earth orbit. (NASA Release N91-49)
NASA announced that investigations of the sun's fiery outer atmosphere would intensify when the Ulysses spacecraft passed behind the sun on August 21. Edward J. Smith, Project Scientist for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that at conjunction (when the spacecraft and Earth are on opposite sides of the sun), radio waves transmitted from the spacecraft would travel through and become distorted by the innermost region of the corona. (NASA Release 91-131)
The Orlando Sentinel Star published two special reports on NASA and Space Shuttles. The first was a review of the first ten years of space flight: the dreams in contrast with the reality of costs and delays experienced. The conclusion was that "The price of a rushed design on a shoestring budget has meant, for the Shuttle, unreliability." The second article dealt with NASA's plans for the next decade with reference to such items as the Personnel Launch System, a small capsule or space plane on top of an expendable booster rocket to carry astronauts and some cargo to a Space Station; the Advanced Manned Launch System, a reusable vehicle combined with a reusable booster, capable of carrying more persons and cargo; and the National Aerospace Plane (NASP), which would burn a "slush" mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen. Most research funds to date went into the development of the NASP. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the work of its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the arcjet thruster technology had been selected for station keeping use on AT&T's Telstar 4 communications satellites. Arcjet systems offer a significant improvement in propellant use over chemical and other electrically augmented thrusters, thus increasing the satellite's on-orbit lifetime or payload mass. (NASA Release 91-40)
Queen Elizabeth visited Johnson Space Center in Houston. (AP, May 22/91; W Times, May 23/91; LA Times, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
The New York Times reported that Edward C. Aldridge Jr., president of McDonnell Douglas Electronic Systems, who served on the National Space Council that made recommendations on NASA's programs, was to become president and chief executive of Aerospace, a federally financed research and development center in El Segundo, California. (NY Times, Dec 19/91)
A feature article in the New York Times discussed the impact of space rockets on the ozone layer. Reportedly, NASA estimated that each Shuttle flight injected some 75 tons of chlorine into the stratosphere. Dr. Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute in New York City, calculated that the lifting of nine Shuttles and six Titan 4s every year would add 0.3 percent to stratospheric chlorine, which in turn would destroy much less than 1 percent of the ozone there. This made the Shuttle a large source of pollution but small by comparison to any other industry such as refrigeration or solvents. (NY Times, May 14/91)
NASA announced that its Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) was maneuvered to point at its first scientific target of opportunity, the sun, on June 7. Controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, repositioned the observatory to gather data from two X-class solar flares. All four GRO instrument teams reported receiving good data on solar activity as a result. (NASA Release 91-91)
The Huntsville Times quoted the General Accounting Office as saying that contrary to earlier concerns, a survey revealed that potential retirements of skilled NASA scientists and engineers would not be a problem. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 1/91)
The media discussed Forrest McCartney's being asked by NASA to step aside as head of the Kennedy Space Center so that he could be replaced by Robert Crippen. McCartney said he would have liked to stay on another year, but this was not possible. (W Post, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 2/91; UPI, Nov 2/91; NY Times, Nov 3/91; SP News, Nov 4-10/91; O Sen Star, Nov 9/91)
NASA announced that the first mirror for its Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) space observatory was successfully completed at Hughes Danbury Optical System, Danbury, Connecticut, and shipped on June 12 to Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, for assembly. The AXAF observatory was to consist of six nested pairs of mirrors to obtain high resolution x-ray images of the universe. (NASA Release 91-95)
A tiny crack was found on one of the substitute Shuttle hinges sent from Endeavour to spaceship Discovery. Dr. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said the crack was too small to be a cause for concern. (NY Times, Mar 15/91; W Times, Mar 15/91; USA Today, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91
NASA's Kennedy Space Center asked for proposals for a follow-on system to its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). The system was to be used to manage data relating to payloads for Space Shuttles and ultimately for the Space Station. The new system was to include a relational data base management subsystem, a project management subsystem, a technical documentation subsystem, and a page printing subsystem and covers a 10-year period. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
The Aerospace Industries Association said on December 11 that the U.S. aerospace industry would post record sales of $140 billion in 1991, but that employment during the year dropped 8 percent to 1.16 million workers. (LA Times, Dec 12/91)
The United Nations (U.N.) reported that the world's ozone layer, particularly over the Antarctic, was thinner than ever and the "hole" over the Antarctic was increasing. However, U.N. scientist Ruman Bojkov said the U.S. Space Shuttle Challenger had not significantly contributed to the situation. Readings were taken by NASA satellites and ground-based spectrometers and the data analyzed by international scientists convened by the U.N. Environment Program and the World Meteorological Organization. Subsequently Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly said "The problem is more serious than we believed." (UPI, Oct 22/91; P Inq, Oct 23/91; W Post, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; WSJ, Oct 23/91; CSM, Oct 23/91; W Times, Oct 23/91; B Sun, Oct 23/91; LA Times, Oct 23/91)
The Magellan spacecraft temporarily lost contact with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, when its antenna was misdirected toward Earth. Contact was restored, and only 0.3 percent of the mission's scheduled surface mapping was lost. (C Trin, May 14/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)
NASA announced that on February 21 test personnel at its John C. Stennis Space Center, Mississippi, had conducted a 1.5 second ignition test on a new turbopump developed by Pratt and Whitney for the Space Shuttle Main Engine. The company test program, underway since 1986, includes a partnership with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. The pumps use newer design technology and materials. Stennis Space Center is NASA's facility for testing all Space Shuttle Main Engines that power the orbiter during its first 8 1/2 minutes of flight. (NASA Release 91-36)
Tom McGlynn, a Computer Sciences Corporation software scientist for the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) Science Support Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, described four data analysis systems developed for GRO. The GRO launched by Atlantis carried four instruments designed to study overlapping portions of gamma rays, the highest energy radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
An article about the colorful sunsets along the California coast referred to the effects of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. According to Francisco Valero, chief of atmospherics research at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, Pinatubo probably spewed some 16 million tons of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, causing the spectacular sunsets. However, the aftereffects were that the cloud of sulfuric acid droplets could further accelerate the depletion of the ozone layer. (P Inq, Aug 3/91)
A space journal article discussed the likelihood of NASA's taking over Moffett Field in California in order to keep the Ames Research Center, which it shares with the Navy, going. Reportedly, NASA was considering such a move if the Defense Department closed the naval air station. The result would be operating a 1,000 acre airfield with two runways more than 8,000 feet long, the largest airfield complex operated by NASA. (AvWk, Jun 24/91)
Nature quoted scientists at NASA's Atmospheric Sciences Division in Hampton, Virginia, as reporting that forest fires--previously thought to be a major source of nitrous oxide--actually produce only about 7 percent of the amount in the atmosphere. The importance of the source of nitrous oxide relates to its action in the destruction of Earth's ozone layer. (W Post, Feb 25/91)
NASA's launch of the UARS satellite to study the ozone layer was covered extensively by the media. The launch was slightly delayed by communications hitches between ground and the satellite and communications difficulties continued after the launch. Later reports, however, indicated controllers had succeeded in getting the faulty data receiver to work. On September 16 the Discovery temporarily had to move to a lower orbit to avoid possible collision with an old Soviet rocket. (NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91; P Inq, Sep 15/91; W Post, Sep 15/91; AP, Sep 15/91; UPI, Sep 15/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 16/91; USA Today, Sep 16/91; W Post, Sep 16/91; W Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91; P Inq, Sep 17/91)
NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced that it had selected Johnson Controls World Services, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, for a JSC plant maintenance and operation support contract. (NASA Release C91-q)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of an extension to the United Technologies Corporation's Hamilton Standard Division's Extravehicular Mobility Unit hardware contract. (NASA Release C91-rr)
An editorial criticized expenditures by Congress and the administration on Mission to Planet Earth with its environmental concerns, as opposed to spending larger sums on space exploration. (W Times, Mar 28/91)
The New York Times cited the recent issue of Nature with articles by NASA scientists and others on the possibility of using advanced technologies to make Mars's environment more terrestrial and thus hospitable to humans. A May issue of Life magazine was also cited as evidence of growing scientific interest in the potential habitability of Mars. Nevertheless, serious obstacles remained, in addition to the tremendous costs that would be involved. (NYT, Oct 1/91)
In an article in the Science section, Time discussed the theory that a giant comet that struck the earth was responsible for killing off dinosaurs. In this connection, the findings of a team of scientists led by Charles Duller at NASA's Ames Research Center were mentioned. The team discovered from satellite photos of Yucatan the semicircle that might indicate a huge buried crater of an asteroid. (Time, Jul 1/91)
Atlantis returned to Kennedy Space Center from MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa. (AP, Apr 18/91)
The Washington Post, quoting Edward Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble Space Telescope scientist, said that a computer programming error caused the Hubble to shut itself down temporarily on December 9. The problem was not considered serious and should result in losing only two days of scientific observations. NASA announced on December 12 that the Hubble resumed science data collection as of that morning and returned safely from its standby condition or safe mode, a capability built into all NASA spacecraft. In connection with the Hubble, the Baltimore Sun reported a problem with its spectrograph, which NASA believed it solved by leaving the power supply units for both ultraviolet detectors on all the time. (W Post, Dec 11/91; UPI, Dec 11/91; AP, Dec 11/91; W Times, Dec 12/91; NASA Release 91-204; C Trin, Dec 12/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; B Sun, Dec 13/91)
The Environmental Quality Permit Board for the state of Mississippi in Jackson approved an air emissions and waste water discharge plan of NASA, needed to test-fire rocket motors at the John C. Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis. Water quality certification remained to be granted. The Board had one opposing vote from the head of the Department of Wild Life because of NASA's plans to fill in 69 acres of wetlands and clear 150 to 200 acres. The official considered this plan contrary to the president's policy that there be no net loss of wetlands. (Poplarville Democrat, Jan 3/91)
NASA announced the selection of Taft Broadcasting Company of Houston for a contract providing television support services for the Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-x)
NASA announced that the last of three SR-71 aircraft, loaned to NASA by the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to arrive at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, in late July. The Antelope Valley Press earlier reported the successful check flight of the Blackbird on July 10, prior to delivery to the NASA facility. The "Blackbirds" were to be used for high-speed, high altitude research in such areas as aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, and thermal protection materials. (NASA Release 91-111; Antelope Valley Press, Jul 11/91)
RMS Technologies, Inc., Marlton, Pennsylvania, announced it had received a contract from NASA to provide operational support for workstations, other computers, and peripheral equipment at NASA's Lewis Research Center. (P Inq, Jul 24/91)
UPI reported that NASA managers reviewed plans to resume routine Shuttle landings at the Kennedy Space Center. The unpredictability of Florida's coastal weather was at issue but it was felt that improvements NASA made in the Shuttle fleet were such that routine landings could now occur. (UPI, Jun 19/91)
A group advising the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that a 10-year delay in taking action to curb global warming would mean little further increase in the level of warming predicted by the end of the 21st century. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Xingjian Jiang authored a study indicating this. Meanwhile, William K. Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, echoed this stance by saying "It's better to get it right than to act too precipitously." Scientists disagreed on the subject, and Senator Al Gore strongly opposed the Bush Administration's position. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, for a $140 million support service contract for center operations. (NASA Release C91-n)
NASA spokeswoman Vera Hirschberg said former American University president Richard Berenzen was working for Booz-Allen and Hamilton in investigating the societal benefits of the Space Exploration Initiative on behalf of NASA. (AP, Mar 11/91)
NASA announced that its John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, had awarded EG&G Florida, Inc., a one-year extension of its contract for base operations services. (NASA Release C91-qq)
Bob MacMillan, public information manager for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said scientists had ordered the Magellan spacecraft to reduce its mapping of Venus and stay in the shade to prevent recording equipment from overheating. (AP, Aug 28/91)
NASA announced that as part of its Planetary Astronomy Program of the Office of Space Science and Applications, a team of radar astronomers had identified a near-Earth metal asteroid for the first time. Their discovery, observed from the giant Arecibo radar/radio telescope in Puerto Rico, was published in Science magazine. The object, called 1986 DA, was observed and analyzed by a team under Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The asteroid contains mostly iron but also 8 percent nickel as well as some platinum-group metals and gold. (NASA Release 91-89; NY Times, Jun 11/91)
NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, had selected H and H Consolidated, Inc. of Hampton, Virginia, for an operation/maintenance and Alteration contract of facilities and equipment services. (NASA Release C91-jj)
NASA engineers worried over data indicating that the critical 16-foot main antenna of Galileo, essential for the Jupiter probe, may have failed to unfold properly. Such a failure would limit the speed of transmitting data from Jupiter to Earth and reduce the number of photographs that could be sent. Galileo was unique among spacecraft launched to date in that it has a "dual spin" design with the antenna being located on the spinning section. Efforts were underway to see how the situation could be remedied. (LA Times, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 15/91; NY Times, Apr 17/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91; W Times, Apr 18/91; USA Today, Apr 18/91)
Later in the 1990s, NASA will launch the Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle (STEP) to compare the inertial and gravitational mass of two objects suspended in orbit. The launch relates to an international effort to study gravity and proposals for locating the National Science Foundation's $211 million Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory. (W Post, Mar 17/91)
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore announced that for financial reasons it was ending its participation in the Magellan Telescope project in Las Campanas, Chile as of June 30. It cited an inability to raise the $15 million, which was its project share. The role of the Astronomy Department at Johns Hopkins was enhanced through its space participation. The Hopkins Ultaviolet Telescope was successfully flown aboard the Space Shuttle and Johns Hopkins contains on campus the Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA's center for astronomy programs with the Hubble Space Telescope. (B Sun, Apr 3/91)
The Chicago Tribune carried an article dealing with the boon that the blurred vision of the Hubble Space Telescope was proving to researchers. Some dozen teams of scientists took Hubble data and using their computer enhancement programs produced clearer images. In the process they have raised their own profiles in a sometimes obscure research field. (C Trin, Dec 15/91)
NASA announced that in conjunction with the Federal Aviation Administration it would sponsor an international government/industry workshop on aircraft icing. The workshop is to be held at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, which has the Lewis Icing Research Tunnel, the world's largest refrigerated icing tunnel. (NASA Note to Editors N91-75)
Nature magazine contained an article by its associate editor David Lindley that was extremely laudatory of the findings of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its flaws. He referred specifically to data obtained from the two spectrometers, designed to operate primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths to which the Earth's atmosphere is opaque. (Nature, Jun 6/91)
The Washington Times reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center near Houston had 842 pounds of moon rocks brought back by 12 moonwalkers on six Apollo flights between 1969 and 1972. The rocks are loaned to scientific groups for study. Each nation in the world also has a small piece of moon rock, sent at President Nixon's instruction in the early 1970s. (W Times, May 24/91)
Douglas Birch authored a feature article on the Hubble telescope, its findings and its limitations because of the flawed main mirror. Reportedly, the Hubble repair mission is to occur in November or December 1993. Astronomers were also concerned about the telescope's age in terms of its effectiveness. Much of Birch's article centered on an interview with Douglas Duncan, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Institute on the campus of Johns Hopkins University, who used the Hubble telescope spectrograph data extensively. (B Sun Magazine, Oct 20/91)
Joel S. Levine, a senior research scientist in the Atmospheric Sciences Division of NASA's Langley Research Center, commented on NASA's role in researching the contribution of fires to the "greenhouse effect." He indicated that the oil well fires in Kuwait could be the largest single contributor to this effect. However, forest fires and agricultural burning actually provided more carbon dioxide. NASA scientists studying the problem use satellite findings in their analyses. (Daily Press, Mar 10/91)
Bill Moyers, a member of a national panel of experts involved in Project Censored, a compendium of the most underreported stories of 1990, dealt with NASA and the ozone. Soviet scientists first raised environmental questions about the solid rocket fuel used by the Space Shuttles. They said it left 250 tons of hydrochloric acid eating up the ozone layer after every launch. The Earth Island Journal and the San Francisco Chronicle reported the story. On the program, environmental activist Helen Caldicott spoke of chlorine molecules that chomp up ozone molecules. (P Inq, Feb 25/91)
A British woman, Helen Sharman, was tentatively selected for the next international space flight with two Soviet cosmonauts to the Mir Space Station. (UPI, Apr 23/91)
In an article written for the Houston Post, Republican Congressman Jack Fields strongly advocated Senate support of NASA's Space Station. Referring to various uses of the Space Station program in the fields of medicine, industrial production, and basic science, he stressed the United States commitment to space exploration. (H Post, Jun 20/91)
NASA announced the selection of seven Historically Black Colleges and Universities to receive Core Research Center grants to develop further their research capability and research infrastructure. The institutions were: Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta; Fisk University, Nashville; Florida A&M University, Tallahassee; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia; Howard University, Washington, D.C.; North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro; and Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-193)
NASA cleared Space Shuttle Atlantis for launch on April 5 and said the mission would include the first US walk in space in five and one half years. The five-member crew was to deploy the 17-ton Gamma Ray Observatory. (AP, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; P Inq, Mar 28/91; USA Today, Mar 28/91; W Times, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 31/91)
NASA announced a recent agreement between its Office of Commercial Programs and the University of Alabama, Huntsville (UAH), that would provide additional flight research opportunities on the Space Shuttle for NASA's 17 Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). In support of this, Instrumentation Technology Associates, Inc., Exton, Pennsylvania, signed a commercial agreement with UAH to provide the university's Consortium for Materials Development in Space CCDS, with flight hardware that would be flown on five Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 91-203)
NASA announced that undergraduate engineering students at Mississippi State University, Starkville, had won the competition to build a 50-foot mockup of the X-30/National Aero-Space Plane. (NASA Release 91-182; Fla Today, Nov 10/91)
NASA's Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Experiments Program Manager Dean Olmstead expressed NASA's pleasure that the U.S. Army had joined NASA to conduct various ACTS experiments. ACTS forms the center of NASA's satellite communications research and development efforts. (PR Newswire, Aug 20/91)
UPI reported that ground had been broken for the $70 million Space Center Houston being built just outside Johnson Space Center. The center is to be an "experience center" providing visitors with a sense of daily Space Station life. (UPI, May 28/91)
The Baltimore Sun quoted Anne Thompson, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center with reference to the interconnectedness of the atmosphere's mounting problems: global warming, ozone depletion, and smog. As examples she pointed out that some hydroxyl-enhancing gases contributed to acid rain; others contributed to the greenhouse effect, while at the same time, hydroxyl played a vital role in stemming depletion of the Earth's ozone layer. (B Sun, Nov 9/91)
ST Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, announced its selection by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center to provide support for the High Energy X-Ray Telescope Sounding Rocket Program. (PR Newswire, Jul 9/91)
Forrest McCartney, director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, said NASA might have to close one of its two Shuttle launch pads to save money. (P Inq, Oct 22/91)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, feared it might be necessary to send a communications satellite to Jupiter to relay Galileo's discoveries to earth. It would take three years for such a satellite to reach Jupiter, assuming funding were available. However, the engineers still hoped to resolve the problem of the failure of Galileo's high-gain antenna to open properly. Six nearly identical antennas were used on NASA's primary communications satellites without encountering problems. (LA Times, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 28/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; NY Times, Apr 30/91)
NASA announced the selection of PacificCorp Capital, Inc., Reston, Virginia, for a contract for Institutional Automatic Data Processing (IADP). IADP was to support the Johnson Space Center, Houston, and the White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico. (NASA Release C91-p)
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) ordered an independent engineering review of NASA's plans for the Earth Observing System to study global climate change. An Administration official said OMB wanted an assessment of the advisability of large, complex satellites and of the specific sensors and launch plans. (AvWk, Feb 18/91)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, NASA's Advisory Council met following the House of Representatives vote to discuss plans for the Space Station and how to put the "A" for aeronautics back into NASA. Edward Starke Jr., chairman of the ad hoc committee on the High Speed Research Program reported on plans for a new supersonic jet to be used by the commercial aviation industry. (Htsvl Tms, Jun 8/91)
NASA announced the selection of 70 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. The high technology firms were located in 21 states. (NASA Release 91-210)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company announced it has teamed up with Japanese architectural and engineering firm Shimizu Corporation to develop space exploration technologies for the proposed U.S. lunar/Mars initiative. Each company was to fund its own research, which included applying solar energy on the lunar surface to process materials into useful resources such as oxygen and creating closed system that would recycle most of the products needed for a lunar base or long-term expedition to Mars. (WSJ, Jul 12/91; LA Times, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced that the spacecraft Galileo would execute a trajectory correction maneuver on March 20 to help aim it for the first-ever flyby of an asteroid next October. To perform the maneuver, Galileo would fire its small thrusters on and off during a three and one half hour period, thus changing its speed about five miles per hour. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, manages the Galileo project. (NASA Release 91-43)
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)
Per Gloersen, a senior scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was quoted by the media as reporting in the British publication Nature findings concerning the shrinking of the polar ice cover. Global warming might be the cause, but Gloersen said 30 years of records would be needed for a definite conclusion. (UPI, Jul 3/91; B Sun, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; W Post, Jul 8/91)
Stormy weather prevented Space Shuttle Atlantis from landing at Kennedy Space Center so it landed instead at MacDill Air Force Base; the flight would resume when the weather cleared. (AP, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91)
A local newspaper described the flight of the ER-2 (Earth Resources) giant high-flying spy plane that flew over the San Joaquin-Sacramento Valley. In 4 1/2 hours, the plane of the NASA-Ames Research Center captured more than 7 million acres on film. The photographs were to be a resource for the best use of water supplies in California.  (Bakersfield Californian, Sep 7/91)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had made a supplemental agreement to the contract with McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California. The modification included the changes made in Space Station Freedom Program review activities. (NASA Release 91-124)
Robert Brown and Riccardo Giacconi of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore wrote an article favoring NASA's shift toward a more balanced program of small, intermediate, and large missions. The reason was that important research goals must be pursued with appropriate tools, including large spacecraft. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope, which was proving so valuable, needed a larger spacecraft as was to be the case with the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility under development. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
A space journal editorial advocated that the Space Station be judged by Congress on its own merits and that space exploration was also a social need, medically, environmentally, and agriculturally. NASA did what Congress requested and the committee needed to explain its failure to approve the revised Space Station plans. (AvWk, May 27/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that based on a recent policy review, NASA's Space Flight Participant Program would be kept in abeyance until 1992. NASA previously had indicated that when the program resumed, first priority would be given to a teacher in space in fulfillment of space education plans. (NASA Release 91-50; UPI, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91)
An editorial in a space publication stressed the need for space flight to gain some Congressional advocates and for NASA's new launcher plan to be salvaged before it was too late. (SP News, Apr 22-28/91)
According to the Washington Post, new findings of astronomers tended to indicate that the universe was both smaller and younger than previously thought. The result, if the Hubble Space Telescope should be able to provide accurate readings on the matter, might prove that the calculations of the Hubble constant (regarding the age and size of the universe) needed to be revised. (W Post, Sep 30/91)
Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator, of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, testified before the House Science Subcommittee that the redesign of Space Station Freedom had limited the scope of the laboratory, eliminating experiments in astronomy, physics, and earth sciences. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA announced its award of a $191 million, five-year contract to Krug Life Sciences, Houston, for medical operations and research support services. The work, covering the period March 1, 1991 through February 29, 1996, was to be done at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-f)
The Los Angeles Times covered the fifth annual Conference on Small Satellites, held at Utah State University. Most of the scientists and engineers attending favored NASA using smaller satellites for specific goals rather than larger spacecraft, which they believed to be NASA's trend. (LA Times, Sep 2/91)
According to the Washington Post, the Hubble Space Telescope discovered evidence that dying stars can rejuvenate themselves when they collide with each other. The violent collision enables them to be reborn as a younger, brighter star. (W Post, Aug 22/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91)
NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft, mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar, had discovered the longest channel known in the solar system, 4,200 miles long. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, said it was not known what formed the channel. (NASA Release 91-141; LA Times, Aug 30/91; UPI, Aug 30/91)
Lewis Schiff, program coordinator for NASA's High Alpha Technology Program, a cooperative research program at NASA's Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers, announced that tests were underway on an F/A-18 fighter aircraft in the world's largest wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California. (NASA Release 91-92; LA Times, Jun 24/91)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch on September 12, would deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) 350 miles above Earth. The UARS is to study humankind's effect on the planet's atmosphere and its shielding ozone layer and is the first major flight element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 91-136)
NASA stated that Endeavour would not be convoyed through Lancaster as previous Shuttles were, but instead would fly via a 747 jet to Houston's Johnson Space Center. There a dedication ceremony would be held before Endeavour was flown to Florida to prepare for its mission. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 28/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, announced the appointment of former NASA deputy director J.R. Thompson Jr. as executive vice president. He was to manage the new Orbital office in Huntsville, Alabama, near Marshall Space Flight Center. (AP, Nov 12/91; W Post, Nov 13/91; W Times, Nov 13/91; Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 14/91)
Magellan project manager Tony Spear at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the spacecraft had completed its objective for the primary phase of the Venus mission more than one month before the end of the first 243-day mapping cycle. Magellan mapped 70 percent of the planet by April 3, and would have mapped 84 percent by May 15. The mission was to be extended to allow Magellan to map the remaining 14 percent, including the south pole. Toward the latter part of its mission it will also acquire gravity data. Magellan's findings, as described in Science magazine, indicated Venus was volcanic and geologically active. (NASA Release 91-49; AP, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; AP, Apr 5/91; NASA Release 91-53)
NASA announced that at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, at Edwards, California, simulator research showed that multi-engine aircraft with specially programmed flight control systems could touch down safely using only the engines to turn and land. (NASA Release 91-85)
Ellen Stofan, a Magellan scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said the planet Venus may be venting interior heat through giant hot spots called coronae, a form of volcanism. She indicated that Magellan data had revealed many exciting new aspects of coronae. (NASA Release 91-48)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, awarded a $112 million contract to General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc. in San Diego, California, for launch services connected with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). SOHO is part of a cooperative effort among NASA, the European Space Agency, and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science to conduct an examination of the sun and various solar phenomena through launches in 1992 through 1995. (NASA Release C91-m)
NASA announced that its latest target in efforts to understand the global climate and predict future patterns are the cirrus clouds. In mid-November, atmospheric scientists from NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, to lead were researchers to Coffeyville, Kanasas, where ground, airborne, and satellite measurement platforms were to conduct intensive cirrus cloud investigation for 25 days. (NASA Release 91-187)
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) chief scientist William Kinard of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, revealed that 200 experimenters in nine countries were analyzing the data gathered by the LDEF satellite that Space Shuttle Columbia rescued in 1990. The plan was to retrieve LDEF after 11 months, but delays and loss of Challenger stranded LDEF for five years and nine months. Nevertheless experiments were conducted and interesting findings were being discovered. (CSM, Feb 8/91)
According to Patrick McCormick of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines might cool global temperatures by a few tenths of a degree for as long as five or 10 years. (W Post, Aug 14/91)
NASA announced that researchers from its Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, would use satellite and airborne instruments to measure the surface elevation of polar glaciers. The program was designed to aid scientists determine ice buildup or melting resulting from global climate change. The program is to occur in Greenland between August 23 and September 16. (NASA Release 91-133)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that thanks to a NASA program to establish a super computer network among black universities, Morgan State University had received a super computer. The university planned to make the super computer the foundation of a new Center for Applied Space Science and Engineering. (B Sun, Jun 7/91)
James W. McCulla, Director of Media Services, NASA, replied to an op-ed article in the Washington Post by Jessica Mathews, vice president of World Resources Institute. Mathews maintained that there was no justification for the U.S. space exploration program now that the Cold War had ended. McCulla replied that learning more about the universe, Earth systems, and life beyond Earth were significant goals.(W Post, Jan 4/91; P Inq, Jan 4/91)
The Hubble Space Telescope proved more useful than expected despite the flaw in its mirror. The congressional appropriation of an additional $30 million in NASA's 1991 budget allowed some repairs to be made from the ground using computer processing and radio control. NASA plans additional repairs by astronauts in 1993, attaching new mirrors to the outside of the telescope. (W Times, Apr 11/91)
AP quoted Guy Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, as stating that his research indicated the eruption of Mount Pinatubo could lead to reduced levels of protective ozone over North America and Europe in the winter of 1991-92 and the summer of 1992, possibly increasing the risk of skin cancer. Richard Stolarski, ozone researcher at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said the projections were plausible but based on ozone depletion from El Chichon, a Mexican volcano that erupted in 1982, the thought there would be less ozone depletion than predicted. (LA Times, Jul 20/91; P Inq, Jul 20/91)
Space Shuttle Columbia, according to AP, began its trip from an assembly building at Kennedy Space Center to the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, a four-mile journey. (AP, May 2/91)
According to AP, antennas on six major spacecraft had malfunctioned during the preceding 17 months, threatening the crucial flow of information from missions. Accordingly engineers conducted extra reviews of antennas on Atlantis. Henry Hoffman, guidance and control chief at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said part of the problem was that antennas were increasingly large and complex, requiring folding for launch and problems arose when they were extended or unfolded. (AP, Aug 4/91)
NASA announced that the Antarctic ozone levels had reached the lowest values ever observed on October 6 (110, plus or minus 6), according to preliminary data from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-168; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
University of Colorado astronomer Jack Brandt talked of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its fuzzy focusing. Discoveries included proof that Pluto has a moon and dramatic photographs of a star spewing hot gases during its birth in the Orion constellation. (W Times, Feb 14/91)
An article on the Hubble Space Telescope commented that despite its flawed main mirror, the teamwork of the Hubble operational team combined with elaborate computer processing had enabled a rich scientific harvest. (CSM, Feb 20/91)
NASA announced the opening of the new Biocomputation Center at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The center, under Muriel Ross, had the task of studying the neural network to understand how nerves are organized and function. (NASA Release 91-129)
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
NASA announced that NASA 816, a modified Convair F-106B, had been retired after more than 30 years of flight research. It was to be moved to the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton. (NASA Release 91-73)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)
Engineers began a practice countdown for Space Shuttle Columbia, and the four-man, three woman crew prepared to begin dress rehearsal for a planned May 24 launching. The purpose of the nine-day 11th flight of Columbia was the Spacelab Life Sciences mission, the first spacelab dedicated to life sciences research. The crew were to perform experiments to evaluate the adaptation of humans to space flight as well as to conduct some experiments on animals in a gravity-free environment. The planned experiments were to be conducted in the Spacelab module. (NASA General Release 91-69; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; UPI, May 13/91; AP, May 13/91; B Sun, May 14/91; W Times, May 14/91; USA Today, May 14/91)
Lowell Hawkinson, chairman of the Gensym Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, which created the G2 system, announced that Biosphere II, would be initiated in March. Biosphere II is an environment controlled by the advanced computer program G2 and designed for eight scientists to seal themselves inside for two years. NASA had been using G2 on its Shuttle flights to control certain functions since October 1989. According to Tony Heindel, a light controller at Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, G2 monitors 16,000 data points per second, gathering such information as temperature, voltages, availability of jet thrusters, and condition of on-board computers and instruments. (NY Times, Feb 10/91)
NASA postponed the landing of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of high winds at Edwards Air Force Base in California and bad weather at the alternate landing site of Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (P Inq, Apr 11/91; B Sun, Apr 11/91; W Post, Apr 11/91; W Times, Apr 11/91; NY Times, Apr 11/91; USA Today, Apr 11/91; AP, Apr 11/91; UPI, Apr 11/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center was testing a beta version of Com's newest OSI routing software. The software was comparable to that known as Open Shortest Path First, which allows intermediate systems to talk to each other and figure out the best way to send information on the network from point A to point B. (Government Computer News, Apr 1/91)
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)
Scientists of NASA's Magellan Project, together with the US Geological Survey, invited the public to propose names of notable women for the many impact craters and large volcanic vents being discovered on Venus. Names sent to Magellan offices at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory were to be compiled for the Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature, a committee of the International Astronomical Union (IAU). The IAU, which makes the final approval, meets only every three years and thus new names cannot be considered until 1994. (NASA Release 91-38; W Times, Mar 22/91; C Trin, Mar 27/91)
According to AP, the Hubble Space Telescope presents astrophysicists with a mystery: the existence of hydrogen clouds in space that should have dissipated billions of years ago. According to Ed Weiler, NASA's space telescope program manager, this was Hubble's most significant finding to date. (AP, Oct 23/91)
NASA announced that a soccer ball-shaped carbon molecule might be the perfect propellant for a spacecraft engine that produced thrust by expelling charged atoms or molecules. Stephanie D. Leifer, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, and Winston A. Saunders of the California Institute of Technology proposed to use the molecule Carbon 60 as a fuel in ion engines. (NASA Release 91-197)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
NASA announced the award to members of three Space Shuttle crews of the Vladimir M. Komarov Diploma by the National Aeronautic Association for their "outstanding achievements in the field of exploration of outer space. The awards were from the Council of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale. The crews receiving the awards were the January 1990 STS-32 mission, which retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility; the December 1990 STS-35 mission, which carried the ASTRO-1 astrophysics observatory; and the October 1990 mission STS-41, which deployed the joint NASA/European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft to study the sun. (NASA Release 91-202 Revised; Fla Today, Dec 15/91)
The Los Angeles Times reported that in order to minimize the impact on California's economy of job losses in the aerospace industry, Governor Pete Wilson sent letters to Congress supporting the B-2 bomber and NASA's Space Station project. (LA Times, Sep 1/91)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) sponsored a workshop of scientists, environmentalists, regulators, and aerospace industry representatives the summer of 1991. As a result, a report was issued on October 17, concluding that rockets blasting into space generate pollutants that deplete stratospheric ozone, increase acid rain, contribute to global warming, and reduce air quality. Jerry Grey, science and technology policy director for the AIAA, said all nations that launch rocket-powered vehicles should contribute to an international effort to reduce the problems. The United States used more solid rockets than any other nation. For example, NASA estimated that each Space Shuttle flight deposited about 75 tons of chlorine into the ozone layer. Subsequently, Reuters interviewed Steve Newmann, chief environmental engineer in NASA's Office of Space Flight. He admitted NASA played a minor role in depleting the ozone layer it was studying but said NASA was working to make its next generation of space vehicles more environmentally friendly. (NY Times, Oct 18/91; B Sun, Oct 28/91)
NASA announced some of the results of its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), built by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. The LDEF was in a space environment from April 1984 to January 1990, with various materials samples and experiments on board. The 57 science and technology experiments gathered data on space radiation, atomic oxygen, meteoroids, contamination, space debris, space systems, and life sciences. Implications of LDEF results were being used in the design of lunar bases and Mars-bound aircraft. (NASA Release 91-113)
An article critical of NASA for emphasizing space at the expense of the domestic aviation industry appeared in the Los Angeles Times. An example cited was Boeing's need to use a wind tunnel research facility operated by the Royal Aerospace Establishment in Britain to test its new top-secret 777 passenger jet because NASA had shut its decrepit wind tunnel in Sunnyvale, south of San Francisco. The aeronautics community reportedly felt neglected because only 6 percent of NASA's budget was allocated to aeronautics. As a result, there was little government support for research and development in U.S. general aviation, which has suffered in relation to government support given by other countries to their aviation industries. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
The Test Technique Demonstrator program at Langley Research Center, Langley, Virginia, provided hypersonic data on airframe/engine integration applicable to design of the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The program involves an industry consortium, which includes North American Aviation division of Rockwell International, General Dynamics, and McDonnell Douglas for airframe design, and Pratt and Whitney and Rocketdyne for the propulsion system. C. Larry Edwards, manager, NASP Aerodynamics Technology Program, said the hypersonic testing phase should be completed by 1992. (AvWk, Mar 25/91)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected RMS Technologies, Inc., of Landover, Maryland, for a contract for the computing, communication, and network mission needs of the center. (NASA Release C91-y)
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly gave an interview to Space News about NASA's role in promoting space education and the agency's future plans. One of the difficulties is attracting greater numbers of women and minorities. He discussed NASA's plan to establish a new office of human resources and the need for more people schooled in Earth sciences.  In an editorial in the same issue, the publication commended NASA for its attention to education in high-technology fields and efforts to recruit women and minorities. It also pointed out the number of laid off workers in the aerospace industry as a result of the sharp downturn in the defense industry as potential employees in the space field. (Space News, Feb 4-10/91)
NASA announced the development by its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, of a new, more accurate, airborne radar system for topographic mapping of the Earth's surface. The instrument, called TOPSAR for topographic synthetic aperture radar, would be about three times more accurate than existing topographic mappers and had many commercial and scientific uses, according to Howard Zebker of the Pasadena laboratory. (NASA Release 91-205)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, began analyzing the photos of Venus produced by the Magellan Spacecraft. JPL operates Magellan for NASA. The pictures show a tortured landscape featuring extreme volcanism, particularly surface bulges 30 to 140 miles wide called "arachnoids." (LA Times, Feb 4/91)
Scientists from several US government and university laboratories reported finding the rare atmospheric isotope Beryllium-7 present on the surface of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF). Dr. Gerald J. Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, commented on the significance as twofold: to date the isotope is known as produced at much lower altitudes than the LDEF was orbiting; and only one atmospheric gas, atomic oxygen, is previously known as interacting with orbiting spacecraft. The LDEF was returned from space by Space Shuttle Columbia in January 1990 after nearly six years in Earth orbit and was still being analyzed. The LDEF program was managed by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-30)
Four Israeli high school students paid a two-week visit to the United States after winning an astrophysics contest in Israel. The competition was sponsored by the National Museum of Science, Planning, and Technology in Haifa to encourage Israeli youth to focus on technology and the sciences.  The students visited Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and NASA's headquarters. (Washington Jewish Week, Apr 11/91)
NASA announced the selection of 39 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). SBIR seeks to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small business in meeting federal research and development needs, and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. The awards included 36 small, high technology firms located in 17 states and were valued at about $19 million. (NASA Release 91-15; Huntsville Times, Jan 29/91)
A space policy analyst for a major aerospace company in California questioned the lack of activity concerning the Strategic Environmental Research Program (SERP). Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat from Georgia, sponsored the program in 1990 to bring vital data and skills from the Defense and Energy departments to bear on problems of environmental research and global warming. The proposal was to select some classified defense satellite data with potential usefulness in global change research, declassify them, and make them available to researchers in global warming. Congress authorized $200 million for SERP in the 1991 Defense Authorization Act, but nothing further was heard. (SP News, Mar 25/91)
NASA announced the selection of 301 research proposals (from 2,583 received) for immediate contract negotiation in NASA's 1991 Small Business Innovation Research Program. While meeting federal research and development needs, the program aims to stimulate technological innovation. (NASA Release 91-184)
According to the Cleveland Plain Dealer, the Ohio EPA ordered an investigation and cleanup of contamination at NASA's Lewis Research Center. NASA officials stated voluntary cleanup efforts were underway and Peter W. McCallum, NASA's chief of environmental safety said most of the sites had been cleaned up or soon would be; he was confident no contamination was leaving NASA's property. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Jul 3/91)
Several media articles dealt with attempts to rescue spacecraft Galileo's mission. The Los Angeles Times described Galileo's flight, which was functioning perfectly toward Jupiter, apart from its malfunctioning antenna. Engineers sought both by heating and cooling the craft to unstick the antenna. The New York Times reported in detail on efforts by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, operated by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, to free the antenna, thus salvaging the mission. If efforts failed, Galileo would be unable to communicate discoveries to scientists because the craft's small antennas could not transmit recorded pictures until returning to the vicinity of Earth. The third attempt to fix the antenna was pronounced a failure on August 20. Other possible courses of action were discussed. (LA Times, Aug 9/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; W Post, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91;  NY Times, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; UPI, Aug 21/91; AP, Aug 28/91)
NASA announced it would be a major participant in the multi-agency High Performance Computing and Communication (HPCC) to begin in FY 1992. NASA had the lead role in coordinating interagency software and algorithm research and development. In this connection, NASA would buy advanced test beds from industry and use test beds developed by the Department of Defense to evaluate and build initial applications. NASA would also develop software to solve major computational challenges involved with robotic design and control. NASA centers would be equipped with the latest network communications to support the National Research and Education Network and NASA would expand the HPCC research program of NASA-funded research institutes and through NASA grants to universities.
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Paris Observatory, using data from the Voyager 1 spacecraft, for the first time had described an anti-greenhouse effect on a solar system body. In an article in Science magazine, they also described the temperature structure and energy balance on Titan, Saturn's largest moon. (NASA Release 91-143)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for the contract to design, develop, and operate a science support center for the space-based Advanced x-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). AXAF was scheduled to be launched in 1998 as the third of NASA's Earth-orbiting Great Observatories. The center is to serve the international scientific community with an observation program for the x-ray telescope and the data it collects. (NASA release 91-46)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director John M. Klineberg announced that Peter T. Burr had been named Deputy Director of the center. Burr had served as Director of Flights Projects at Goddard since August 1989. (NASA Release 91-28)
An editorial in Florida Today referred to NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's comment about NASA giving serious consideration to consolidating Shuttle operations at Kennedy Space Center. He estimated this would cut Shuttle costs 25 percent. Such a move would also result in consolidating Shuttle management, as recommended in the Advisory Committee report. (Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
The Cleveland Plain Dealer reported that NASA's Lewis Research Center on December 13 refused to sign cleanup orders for nine sites within the Brook Park complex that were contaminated with hazardous materials. NASA officials indicated they wished to continue talks with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and that signing the orders would mean waiving their right to appeal. Moreover, they complained the agreement did not limit the sum the Ohio EPA could charge for overseeing the cleanup. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Dec 14/91)
NASA announced that on July 15 at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, NASA's F/A-18 High-Alpha Research Vehicle maneuvered in flight for the first time using a specially designed thrust vectoring system. Such research flights were to continue over the next two years and were designed to make future jet fighters safer. (NASA Release 91-123)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
NASA announced that contrary to a news report that appeared, NASA was not planning a mission to visit the Hubble Space Telescope any earlier than late 1993. The science community had discussed this possibility because of some observed erratic behavior of the Hubble in one of the maneuvering gyros. Alternative servicing strategies were being evaluated. The announcement contradicted a Washington Post article. (NASA Release 91-121; W Post, Jul 31/91; AP, Jul 31/91; UPI, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91; P Inq, Aug 1/91; USA Today, Aug 1/91)
NASA announced its selection of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC), Fairfax, Virginia, for a contract to provide ocean color data. These data were to support research performed by the Laboratory of Hydrospheric Processes, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The contract would run for about 7.5 years, of which 2.5 years would be development time and five years of data production. The mission's scientific objective was to measure changes in ocean color that indicate where concentrations of phytoplankton and chlorophyll lie on the surface of the ocean. For global change research, measuring concentrations of phytoplankton are essential in understanding the role of oceans in the global carbon cycle. The phytoplankton's photosynthesis stores vast amounts of carbon and understanding better how oceans store and release carbon will help understand global climate.
NASA announced the selection of Lawrence J. DeLucas of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and Eugene H. Trinh of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to fly as payload specialists on the first U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission, scheduled for June 1992. (NASA Release 91-66)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected the team of General Electric Corporation, Cincinnati, and United Technologies Pratt and Whitney Divsion, West Palm Beach, Florida, for a contract for propulsion materials to be used on a 21st century High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C91-z)
NASA announced the appointment of Leonard S. Nicholson as Director, Space Shuttle program, replacing Robert L. Crippen who is to be Director, Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 91-208; AP, Dec 16/91; W Times, Dec 17/91; USA Today, Dec 17/91; Fla Today, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91)
According to UPI, an extraordinarily sharp picture of Jupiter taken by the Hubble Space Telescope showed the planet's turbulent atmosphere and the telescope's capabilities. (UPI, May 6/91)
NASA announced it would hold the first Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) Post-Retrieval Symposium June 2-8, 1991, in Kissimmee, Florida. LDEF exposed 57 science and technology experiments to the space environment for almost six years until Shuttle Columbia returned it to Earth in January 1990. The conference was planned to examine the results of LDEF and the effects of a long-term space environment on materials and systems. (NASA Release N91-38)
Gerald Fishman, principal investigator of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, said so far the experiment on the Gamma Ray Observatory was working as planned. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 23/91)
The Chicago Tribune reported that Northwestern University scientists had discovered a process called sputtering that can coat hardened steel with titanium nitride films a few microns thick and double its hardness. The computer-controlled system was built for Northwestern's Basic Industrial Research Laboratory (BIRL) in a project that also involved funds from NASA and the Department of Energy. (C Trin, Jul 28/91)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, announced that it had selected BAMSI, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a $140 million preventive and remedial maintenance and services contract. (NASA Release C91-u)
The Huntsville Times reported that volunteers in a water taste test at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center had difficulty or were unable to distinguish recycled from regular water. The recycled water came from perspiration collected in a test chamber, and in which the salts, oils, and microorganisms were subsequently removed. The recycling process was designed to be used on the Space Station to minimize need for additional water. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 10/91; W Times, Jul 19/91)
David Webb of the White House National Commission on Space, speaking at a U.S. Space Foundation National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, said that the commission in 1985 had recommended increased NASA spending for research and development. However, Admiral John Poindexter, then National Security Adviser, opposed it, with the result that no action was taken. (Washington Technology, May 2/91)
A U.N.-sponsored study, the committee for which was co-chaired by Robert Watson, a NASA scientist, provided the first evidence of a summertime thinning of the Earth's protective ozone layer over parts of the Northern Hemisphere, including the United States. The findings were based on both ground and satellite data, according to Watson in a briefing. Evidence showed 3 percent of the summertime ozone layer and 6 percent of the wintertime ozone layer were lost over the middle-latitude regions during the 1980s; similar results were expected for the 1990s.
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported a NASA announcement on November 8 that its $10 million effort to determine whether a hole in the Earth's protective ozone layer was developing over the North Pole, was delayed by mechanical problems in both the project's aircraft. Mike Kurylo, manager of NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Program, said the DC-8 jet had a crack in its landing gear and the high-altitude ER-2 aircraft was grounded for a problem with its wings. In addressing the same subject, the New York Times quoted the project's chief scientist as saying three ER-2 planes would be used to survey the ozone layer at high altitudes. (B Sun, Nov 9/91; NY Times, Nov 10/91)
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute announced the cosponsorship of a conference on Advanced Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Technologies at the Cleveland Convention Center September 4-6. The conference is to be part of the Lewis Center's 50th anniversary celebration. (NASA Release 91-140)
Edward Stone, new director of the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which manages planetary missions for NASA, commented on present and future plans. He stated Magellan was sending back pictures of Venus; Galileo, on its way to explore Jupiter and its moons, would view the asteroid Gaspra in October; and Mars Observer was being prepared for a September 1992 launch. He spoke of the preliminary unmanned research necessary before any exploration of Mars could be undertaken. (CSM, Apr 15/91)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
According to the Washington Post, for the fourth time since April, NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena were trying to free the antenna on the robot explorer Galileo. The scientists deduced that three of the 18 ribs of the antenna were stuck in the closed position. Being unable to deliver direct force, they sought to "shake" the structure by alternately heating and cooling it. On December 14-15, NASA tried again to free the jammed antenna without success. (W Post, Dec 15/91; UPI, Dec 16/91; W Post, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91; USA Today, Dec 18/91)
An interview featured Lawrence Ross, Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, a 30-year-old facility with 3,000 civil servants. Priorities at Lewis include research in propulsion, electric power generation, and advanced communications. Ross answered various questions about the Space Station, solar dynamic power systems, nuclear propulsion research, the continuing need for maintenance funds, and the role of Lewis in the National Aerospace Plane program. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center's Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), an instrument aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory, had detected "the most distant and by far, the most luminous gamma-ray source ever seen." The EGRET team, led by Carl Fichtel, reported to the International Astronomical Union, Cambridge, Massachusetts, that a source of intense gamma radiation was detected between June 15 and June 28. The source was identified as the variable Quasar 3C279, located in the constellation Virgo. (NASA Release 91-117; W Post, Jul 29/91)
The media reported that because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The right tire was severely damaged on landing, but the new stronger brakes worked well. In addition, twice as much fiberglass thermal tile filler would have to be replaced than was customary after a flight. The astronauts accomplished 32 of 33 planned primary observations, 18 of 21 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments. (P Inq, May 7/91; W Post, May 7/91; NY Times, May 7/91; USA Today, May 7/91; B Sun, May 7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI, May 9/91)
NASA announced that a developmental Space Shuttle main engine sustained extensive internal damage while it was undergoing ground testing July 24 at NASA's Stennis Space Center, near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi. The engine differed from engines used in Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 91-118)
NASA rolled the Shuttle Atlantis to a launch pad at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for a scheduled April 6 liftoff. (W Post, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
NASA announced that its research plane F-16XL demonstrated laminar airflow over a significant part of its wing while flying at supersonic speeds. This could increase flight efficiency and reduce fuel consumption. The experiment occurred in a series of 28 flights at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. In this connection, the New York Times wrote about wind shear problems faced by aircraft, leading to airline disasters, and NASA's work on three predictive systems made by Lockheed Corporation, Rockwell International, and Turbulence Prediction Systems. (NASA Release 91-188; Daily Press, Newport News, Nov 20/91; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 21/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, awarded Metric Constructors, Inc., of Tampa, a $56,215,000 contract to build the Space Station Processing Facility. The 457,000-square-foot facility was to contain preflight and processing points for Space Station Freedom as well as 63,000 square feet of dedicated payload processing space. (NASA Release C91-h)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly spoke on the opening day of the Space Exploration '91 convention in Houston, sponsored by the NASA Alumni League. He said that recent successes by unmanned missions were paving the way for future space initiatives. He also stressed the need for belt tightening over the next several years. (H Post, Oct 30/91; H Chron, Oct 30/91)
The Baltimore Sun published an article quoting Richard Stolarski, research scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, concerning ozone depletion. He stated that the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic failed to shrink as was hoped. He wondered whether the same might occur over the North Pole and indicated the need to understand the limits under which ozone depletion occurred. Subsequently, NASA announced the findings of its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, which indicated the ozone depletion in Antarctica was almost as severe as the record year of 1987. (B Sun, Oct 5/91; NASA Release 91-165; AP, Oct 9/91; UPI, Oct 9/91; NY Times, Oct 10/91; USA Today, Oct 10/91; CSM, Oct 10/91; W Post, Oct 11/91)
NASA and the Defense Department were expected to present the National Space Council with a proposal to build a new, heavy unmanned booster for the late 1990s. It would be based on a Space Shuttle external tank equipped with oxygen/hydrogen engines, using strap-on solid rocket motors. Jack Lee, director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, told the US Space Foundation Symposium in Colorado Springs that the belief was that the new device could achieve a payload cost to orbit as low as $500-$1,000 per pound. (AvWk, Apr 15/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
The same publication discussed the way in which Michael Griffin, described as "NASA's new moon/Mars czar," was shaking up NASA's space exploration initiative. Reportedly, Griffin wanted to move fast on launching a "relatively inexpensive, high-visibility space mission," such as sending an unmanned spacecraft to scout for a permanent base on the moon. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
A discussion of the robot explorer Magellan's probe of Venus during its 16 months and more than 3,000 orbits, mapping more than 90 percent of the surface, appeared in the Washington Post. Lead scientist Stephen Saunders of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, which manages the mission, was quoted as saying that scientists were looking for "active plate tectonics" such as occur on earth, such as "continental drift." To date, no such discoveries occurred. (W Post, Oct 21/91)
NASA scientists connected with the Hubble Space Telescope correction project were quoted with reference to the amount of work to be done. The Hubble science team, subject to top-level NASA approval, was to build a second generation Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WFPC) with only four instead of eight of the powerful electronic light detectors known as charge-coupled devices (CCDs). The proposed change took account of tight money and time pressures but meant that the photographic operation might take 10 to 20 percent longer, according to Ed Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble scientist. The extent of repairs to be made would be decided by the end of 1991 but probably would involve Shuttle astronauts making three or four spacewalks of at least six hours each. (W Post, Oct 20/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91)
The Washington Post featured the space biology team at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, which has created a stir with a government-patented invention that allows large quantities of many types of human cells to be grown by removing the force of gravity. NASA's Rotating Wall Bioreactor had great potential for improving patient treatment and may grow still more cells when used in space. In this connection, NASA announced that the rotating wall vessel developed at the Johnson Space Center's Biotechnology Program, would be tested in space during the Atlantis flight. (W Post, Nov 18/91; NASA Release 91-195)
NASA announced a number of contract arrangements. A contract extension was awarded to Vitro Corporation of Silver Spring, Maryland, to continue safety and support services at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. NASA further selected Nichols Research Corporation, Huntsville, Alabama, and BDM International, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to compete for a support contract for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. In addition, NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, contracted with Johnson Controls, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida to provide maintenance and operational services at Johnson. (NASA Releases C91-dd, C91ee, C91ff)
NASA issued a summary fact sheet on its earth science research programs. Past NASA satellite missions used various remote-sensing instruments to study parts of the Earth system. The Coastal Zone Color Scanner on Nimbus-7 observed the biological productivity of the oceans. The Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), on the same satellite, returned 12 years of data on global ozone levels and helped identify the Antarctic "ozone hole." In the 1990s, NASA was to study the interaction of all environmental factors air, water, land, and biological life, that make up the Earth system--to help decision makers understand global environmental trends and protect the planet.
Officials of the European Space Agency and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that scientific teams concerned with the Ulysses mission to the poles of the sun were preparing for physics investigations during Ulysses's forthcoming encounter with Jupiter. Ulysses was expected to reach Jupiter and its satellites on February 8, 1992, and make a two-week sweep past the planet. (NASA Release 91-82)
Astronomers Joss Bland-Hawthorn of Rice University, Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland, and R. Brent Tully of the University of Hawaii, using the telescope atop Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii have found a huge object. It might be a "supermassive black hole," but if so it would be more than 100 million times larger than the largest black hole thought to exist. It might also be a dead or dormant quasar. Astronomers hoped that the Gamma Ray Observatory of Atlantis would help to resolve the mystery. (NY Times, Apr 9/91; AP, Apr 9/91; P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Post, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 15/91)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had completed one year of operation on April 25. Joseph H. Rothenberg, Associate Director of Flight Projects for Hubble Space Telescope at Goddard, summarized the Hubble's achievements. These included the taking of various images and presentation of data from observations at key scientific meetings. Scientists planned to compensate for the spherical aberration by modifying the telescope's replacement instruments. These included the placement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II in 1993 and further servicing plans during astronaut space walks. (NASA Release - Hubble Space Telescope; LA Times, Apr 29/91)
Florida Today published figures of Kennedy Space Center spending for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1991. The center spent $1.42 billion in Florida, an increase of 3.6 percent over the previous year. Of that amount, $1.03 billion  went for on-site contractors. (Fla Today, Oct 30/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston announced the award of a contract to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, modifying the Space Station Freedom Program Integration Support (Schedule B) contract. Schedule B involved the integration of Space Station components. (NASA Release C91-nn)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
NASA announced the renaming of the Gamma Ray Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, by Space Shuttle Atlantis, in honor of American physicist Arthur Holly Compton. (NASA Release 91-151)
The Sunnyvale, California City Council approved a position paper prepared by the Moffett Field Committee, composed of representatives of NASA's Ames Research Center, and several neighboring city councils and chambers of commerce. The paper proposed that if Congress approved closing the Moffett Field Naval Air Station, NASA operate the field instead to ensure that research and transport activities continue. (San Jose Mercury News, Apr 17/91; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 18/91)
NASA technology developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, designed sensors to monitor potentially damaging heat build-up in electronic circuits. Such technology was to be used in connection with the huge television Jumbotron screen for the Superbowl game on January 27. NASA's Technology Utilization program is cited as an example of the applications that can be made from NASA findings. (NASA Release 91-10)
The Antelope Valley Press quoted John Young, special assistant for engineering, operations, and safety at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston as saying that for NASA to land Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center instead of Edwards Air Force Base in California posed an increased risk. Although the Florida landing saved NASA the cost of ferrying a Shuttle back from California and the five to seven days involved, Florida weather was more problematic. Furthermore, Edwards had more runway alternatives whereas Kennedy had only one. John E. Pike, space policy analyst for the Federation of American Scientists said NASA should wait on Florida landings till all Shuttles were equipped with drag chutes to slow them down. (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 9/91)
Thirteen European countries--Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland--met to discuss European Space Agency plans that were threatened by Germany's lack of funds. The German research budget was short $930 million because of an economic slowdown and the huge costs of German unification. The space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into space and according to Germany's ZDF television network, was assured of funds. The question of funds for other projects, for which Germany and France were major funders, remained unclear. (AP, Nov 18/91; Science and Technology, Nov 25/91)
William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said NASA hoped to cut the operating cost of its Space Shuttle program by 15 percent over a five-year period. It planned to do this by eliminating a layer of management and merging the offices of the Program Directorate in Washington, Level I, with the Program Office located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Level II. The reorganization plan as yet lacked final approval. (W Times, Dec 13/91; Fla Today, Dec 13/91)
An editorial in a space journal advocated that NASA wind down its program for the construction of the National Aerospace Plane, the X-30, for which it has no funds, rather than wait until 1993 to decide. Instead the journal advocated NASA's focusing on "research and development that would continue its already impressive advances in materials and propulsion technology." (SP News, Dec 2-8/91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled the most detailed images of Mars ever taken. Scientists said the telescope made possible a long-term program to monitor seasonal climate and surface changes on Mars that previously had been impossible. According to the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore, the images revealed Martian features as small as 31 miles across. (W Post, Mar 18/91; UPI, Mar 18/91; CSM, Mar 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer carried an article about the new issue of Science magazine and its reports on the likely creation of hole in the Arctic ozone. The article quoted Robert Watson, head of NASA's atmospheric ozone program, as saying that Earth's ozone layer was declining as much as 8 percent each decade; scientists previously thought it was only 2 to 4 percent. Also NASA research found that losses occurred in the spring as well as winter, raising concern that ultraviolet radiation might threaten crops, forests, and ecological processes. (P Inq, May 31/91)
NASA program scientist Edward Weiler said in a telephone interview with UPI that an emergency Shuttle mission to replace faulty gyroscopes and solar panels aboard the Hubble Space Telescope was not needed before a flight already set for 1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NASA engineers were perfecting computer control software that would stabilize the telescope if all its gyroscopes were to fail, until a Shuttle repair mission were mounted. (UPI, Aug 23/91)
NASA engineers studied a tiny crack on the hinge mechanism of Shuttle Atlantis but planned to go ahead with a launch in April. Atlantis was scheduled to ferry into orbit the Gamma Ray Observatory, a Hubble Space Telescope-class astronomical instrument built to study extremely high energy radiation from deep space. (NASA Release, "STS-37 Mission Advisory"; UPI, Mar 6/91)
William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, announced that NASA was sending Space Shuttle Discovery from the launch pad back to the hangar to repair cracked door hinges. Shuttle director Robert Crippen said Discovery should be ready to fly in late April or early May. (AP, Feb 28/91; P Inq, Mar 1/91; NY Times. Mar 1/91; WSJ, Mar 1/91; W Times, Mar 1/91; USA Today, Mar 1/91; W Post, Mar 1/91; UPI, Mar 1/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald expressed the concern of some NASA staff over the number of flight waivers NASA had issued. NASA issues such waivers on certain critical items rather than change the Shuttle design, which would be very costly. Statistics indicate that the number of waivers approved since the Challenger accident more than tripled. According to Frank Pizzano, head of the reliability and maintainability engineering division at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the increase results from stricter standards for waivers but many weaknesses were eliminated in the Shuttle redesign after the Challenger accident. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 8/91)
According to UPI, the new Shuttle Endeavour's maiden voyage in April 1992 faced a significant delay because of numerous problems discovered after it was delivered to the Kennedy Space Center. Among other reasons for the delay were the parts cannibalized from Endeavour to avoid major launch delays of other orbiters. As the Shuttle was inspected, more than 1,400 problem reports were filed regarding work needed. (UPI, Oct 19/91)
An article pointed out that space exploration was not a short-term mission. Therefore, given the age of several existing Space Shuttles, Congress should plan ahead and appropriate funds for additional Shuttles for the 21st century. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 7/91)
NASA issued a release indicating that as a result of Apollo data findings NASA scientists and other researchers had a revised theory of the origin of life on earth. Life may have begun more than once and been wiped out several times by rare, planet-melting superimpacts on the Earth. Evidence of such early solar system impacts is well-preserved on the moon. (NASA Release 91-87; UPI, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 6/91)
The Daily Press recounted the dedication on October 10 of the 100-ton Variable Density Wind Tunnel as a National Historic Landmark. The ceremony occurred at NASA's Langley Research Center. The wind tunnel was responsible for more efficient wing designs of aircraft and established NASA's predecessor, the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics as a technologically competent organization. (Daily Press, Oct 11/91)
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)
Joseph Stickle, chief engineer at NASA's Langley Research Center, was quoted in connection with NASA's role in promoting small planes. He said that the annual convention of the Experimental Aircraft Association, held in Oshkosh, Wisconsin, was a place where NASA featured its innovations that would make small planes safer, such as a spin-resistant design, lightning-protection technology, or airfoils. (WSJ, Dec 12/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Paul H. Holloway as Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-171)
The media reported on NASA's plans to install corrective lenses on the Hubble Space Telescope in order to correct the faulty lens and at the same time to make other repairs. Details remained to be announced. (AP, Jul 2/91; NY Times, Jul 3/91; W Times, Jul 3/91)
Former NASA Administrator Richard Truly said that he would assume a new job as director of the Georgia Tech Research Institute, a branch of the Georgia Institute of Technology. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), an international team of astronomers took a major step in redetermining the expansion rate of the universe. This rate, known as the Hubble Constant, is one of two critical numbers needed for making a precise determination of the size and age of the universe. The Constant is an estimate of the rate at which the universe is expanding and is expressed in kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light years). The results were reported by Drs. F. Duccio Macchetto, Nino Panagia and Abhijit Saha of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland; Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Institute of Washington; and Gustav Tammann of the University of Basel, Switzerland, at the internationl workshop "Science with the Hubble Space Telescope," held in Sardinia, Italy, June 29 through July 9, 1992. (NASA Release 92-97)
According to a report in Aviation Week & Space Technology, wind tunnel facilities at Russia's Sibnia research and development center were being made available to Western companies. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
A panel of experts at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science said that computers now perform some medical functions better than doctors and that machines are going to get even smarter in the future. Terrell Ward Bynum of Southern Connecticut State University said that NASA and the Department of Defense were working on a "smart" battlefield stretcher, which as envisioned, could provide expert diagnostic capabilities and would be able to dispense drugs or even jolt the heart back into normal rhythmn. (AP, Feb 7/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
Geologists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at Louisiana State University announced that they had discovered several previously unknown earthquake faults in California's northeastern Mojave Desert by analyzing remote sensing images at optical, infrared, and radar wavelengths. At a meeting of the Geological Society of America in Cincinnati, JPL's Dr. John Ford outlined how spaceborne imaging technology has helped scientists find these newly observed faults. (NASA Release 92-186; AP Oct 27/92)
At a press conference of the 179th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Atlanta, astronomers reported that recent ultraviolet observations with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) suggest that what were thought to be randomly distributed, nearby primordial clouds of hydrogen may actually be associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 92-4)
Reacting to the recent failed attempt at tethered space flight by the crew of Shuttle Atlantis, Astronaut Jeffrey Hoffman, the payload commander, said NASA needed to improve the way equipment was tested on the ground before flight. "When we're doing fundamentally new things, we've really got to pay close attention to how we're doing the testing on the ground or else we're going to continue to get surprised," Hoffman said. (APn, Aug 14/92)
It was reported that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was studying aurorae on the giant planet Jupiter. The HST made observations of Jupiter over a four-day period when ESA/NASA Ulysses spacecraft swung by the giant planet. While passing Jupiter, Ulysses made measurements of Jupiter's powerful magnetic field and the flow of subatomic particles along magnetic field lines. Simultaneously, HST was looking at aurorae, one visual manifestation of these electrical fireworks. These joint observations provided a unique opportunity to combine ultraviolet images and spectra with information on particles and fields. By studying the activity of Jupiter's aurorae, astronomers hoped to learn more about the dynamics of Jupiter's immense magnetic field, the structure of the giant planet's upper atmosphere, the effects of aurora on the chemistry of the polar regions on Jupiter, and Jupiter's interaction with the moon Io via a magnetic "flux tube." (NASA Release 92-22)
A group of NASA scientists sampling the air over southern Africa found massive pollution usually associated with the industrial centers of the Northern Hemisphere. Most of the pollution is caused by peasant farmers burning huge tracts of scrub brush to clear their land for planting. The group arrived in southern Africa in early October after studying a virtually identical problem in Brazil. Together, the pollution from the two regions was thought to be changing the atmosphere throughout the Southern Hemisphere. Some 180 scientists from 13 countries were involved in what was considered the most detailed atmospheric study ever made of the South Atlantic. (AP, Oct 12/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope announced that they had spotted the gathering of swirling stars that is believed to be the gravitational signature of a black hole in a galaxy called M32. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories in Tucson, Arizona, and a scientist using the Hubble, said that based upon what he has seen so far, "I would be surprised if M32 turns out not to be a black hole." Concurrently the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory discovered 11 objects in space that constitute "a new class of objects--the gamma ray quasar." The new gamma ray quasars, some as far as 10 billion light-years away, are probably similar to the thousands of other quasars detected in recent years, but the nature of quasars is still debated. (AP, Apr 9/92; B Sun, Apr 9/92; LA Times, Apr 9/92; W Times, Apr 9/92; U Post, Apr 13/92; USA Today, Apr 9/92; CSM, Apr 14/92; NASA Release 92-46 and 92-47; NASA Note N92-28)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
Virginia Governor L. Douglas Wilder was scheduled to dedicate on Sunday April 5, the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton, Virginia. The $30 million facility, which was to serve as the new official visitor center for the NASA Langley Research Center, has a 300-seat IMAX theater and was to feature exhibits on the Viking Orbiter and Viking Lander, as well as numerous exhibits on the history of flight and space exploration. (W Post, Apr 1/92)
Officials at NASA's John F. Kennedy Space Center in Florida said that the agency had selected I-Net, Inc., of Bethesda, Maryland, for negotiation of a contract to provide engineering support services to the center's Engineering Development Directorate. The contract was to  run for five years and have an estimated value in excess of $100 million. (NASA Release C92-12)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
A 50-foot-long X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) mockup rolled out of its hanger in ceremonies at Mississippi State University, Starkville. Forty-five students in Mississippi State's engineering program worked for five months to construct the 5,000-pound mockup at the University's Raspet Flight Research Laboratory. Throughout the project, they had access to NASP program officials, who advised them on technical aspects of the X-30's design. The program was directed by Dr. George Bennett. (NASA Release 92-86)
An experimental aircraft known as the X-31 had flown maneuvers at a 70-degree angle of attack, the Pentagon announced.  All of the plane's experimental flights were flown at the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. (AP, Sept 28/92)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena was added to the federal Superfund list of the nation's most dangerous dump sites because toxic solvents used 40 years ago during research on liquid rocket propellants had leaked into ground water. (LA Times, Oct 14/92; AP, Oct 14/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA announced that extended observations by the Hubble Space Telescope indicated that Jupiter's moon Io has a smaller atmosphere than previously thought, with very dense regions possibly over volcanoes and surface frost. The observations also showed that despite continual volcanic activity, Io's surface has remained largely unchanged since first photographed by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. (NASA Release 92-163)
Space Shuttle Discovery, which flew in space nine days in January, returned home after 14 days on the ground in California and a cross-country piggyback trip on a Boeing 747. The Shuttle left for the Kennedy Space Center, stopping overnight at Biggs Army Air Field in El Paso, Texas and at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. (AP, Feb 16/92)
Large landslides have been identified on Venus by Magellan Project scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. They are similar to landslides that have been known for some time to occur on Earth and Mars, a project spokesman said. (NASA Release 92-75)
NASA chief Daniel S. Goldin promised a bolder, "new" NASA that would control costs on its scientific missions in space and support the research and development efforts of domestic aircraft makers. Goldin's promise came at a NASA town meeting at California State University, Dominguez Hills campus, where several hundred people showed up for an opportunity to question Goldin about overpriced components, underfunded programs, and a lack of direction in the nation's space program. It was the fourth town meeting Goldin had hosted around the country since taking over as NASA's chief administrator in April. (LA Times, Dec 9/92)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jeremiah W. Pearson, III, announced that Thomas Utsman, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight, will become the Program Director for the Space Shuttle. He will direct long-range Shuttle planning, Space Shuttle continuous improvement activities and overseeing efforts to reduce Shuttle operations costs while maintaining safety. (NASA Release 92-83)
Walter Jaffe of the Leiden Observatory in the Netherlands said that the Hubble Space Telescope had captured the most detailed view yet of an immense caldron of heat, violence, and energy surrounding what might be called a "black hole," a celestial object 10 million times more massive than the sun. Astronomers said the photograph provided powerful support for the theory of "black holes" by showing several of the features predicted to surround them. The galaxy belongs to the Virgo Cluster of galaxies about 45 million light-years from Earth. (W Times, Nov 20/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; W Post, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 20/92;)
Flights of the X-31 Enhanced Fighter Maneuverability demonstrator aircraft resumed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The X-31s were being flown at Ames to show the value of thrust vectoring (directing engine exhaust flow) coupled with an advanced flight control system for close-in air combat at very high angles-of-attack. (NASA Release 92-52)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
Leaders of the world's space nations attending the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C., last week said that they lacked the money to go it alone in space, yet the will to cooperate internationally seemed also to be lacking. Two views about space exploration emerged among scientists. An optimistic view held that space exploration methods could worthwhile projects at affordable prices. The pessimistic view held that space cost too much, lacked public support, and that ideas must be constrained. The congress, the largest gathering of space experts ever convened, attracted more than 5,000 delegates from 70 nations and featured more than 2,700 technical papers. (Space News, Sept 7-13/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers announced the detection of the rare element boron in an ancient star. This element may be "fossil" evidence of energetic events which accompanied the birth of the Milky Way galaxy. An alternative possibility is that this rare element may be even older, dating from the birth of the universe. If that is the case, then the HST findings may force some modifications in theories of the Big Bang. (NASA Release 92-5)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said that the ozone hole over the Antarctic that has formed annually since 1987 had closed up again after setting records for depleting Earth's protective ozone layer. After falling from October 12 to December 5, ozone levels rose above the levels considered to be a "hole" on December 6. The hole formed earlier and lasted longer this year than ever before, the scientists said. (UPI, Dec 10/92)
NASA said that construction had started on a high-flying, light-weight, unpiloted research aircraft called "Perseus" that NASA was to use to measure ozone levels and other atmospheric conditions. NASA viewed Perseus as the first step toward general use of advanced aircraft for many aspects of Earth sciences research such as climate and radiation studies, tropical dynamics, meteorology, and for studies of the stratosphere and troposphere. Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation of Manassas, Virginia, won the $2.25 million contract to design, build, and flight test two Perseus aircraft. Flight tests were slated to begin in late 1992.(NASA Release 92-110)
A team of scientists using two satellites in orbit announced they had solved the puzzle of a mysterious source of high-energy gamma rays, located in the direction of the constellation Gemini and known as Geminga. According to a report in the journal Nature, the gamma rays were flowing from a spinning 300,000 year old  neutron star or pulsar. Scientists do not understand why Geminga favors gamma rays over other wavelengths. Two other bright sources of gamma rays already known to be pulsars, buried within the Crab and Vela supernova remnants, emit radiation in x-ray, radio, and optical wavelenghts. (W Post, May 26/92; P Inq, May 22/92)
NASA researchers said that tests on astronauts aboard a June 5-14, 1991, flight of the Space Shuttle Columbia found their hearts, lungs, immune systems, and nervous systems responded in unexpected ways. Involved were blood pressure, muscle mass, production of key cells, and proper balance and orientation. The results do not suggest any major obstacles to long-term space missions, according to Ronald White, NASA's chief of life sciences. Longer human space flights, however, might depend on developing artificial gravity or other measures to minimize the physical effects of spaceflight. (UPI, Jul 25/92; NY Times, Jul 25/92; W Post, Jul 25/92)
NASA astronomers announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had caught a clear glimpse of more than 300 galaxies clustered four billion light-years away, giving astronomers their first detailed view of galactic structure at a time when the solar system was just beginning. The Hubble images revealed that star-forming galaxies were far more prevalent in the clusters of the younger universe than in modern clusters of galaxies near us today. The findings have important implications for theories of how galaxies have evolved and are continuing to evolve at an apparently rapid rate. The observations also may have uncovered the most distant cluster of galaxies yet seen at a distance of 10 billion light-years, two-thirds of the way back to the presumed origin of the universe. (NASA Release 92-213; NY Times, Dec 2/92; LA Times, Dec 2/92; W Post, Dec 2/92; The Sun, Dec 2/92; USA Today, Dec 2/92; UPI, Dec 2/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
A Senate Appropriations subcommittee recommended spending no additional funds for NASA's advanced solid-rocket motor plant in Mississippi. On July 29, the House of Representatives voted 249 to 159 to eliminate $265 million in research and development funds for the project, leaving only $50 million to close it down. (W Post, Jul 31/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92)
According to NASA scientists, human, plant, and animal cells exposed to the microgravity of space for only a few days show changes in function and structure. Although preliminary, the results of the recent life sciences research on the Space Shuttle suggest alteration in metabolism, immune cell function, cell division, and cell attachment. Scientists also reported dramatic changes from space travel in some of the body's systems. Four principal investigators from the Space Life Sciences-1 mission flown aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in June 1991 reported key finds in the areas of cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and neurovestibular physiology. (NASA Release 92-124)
J.P. Mitchell, Pratt and Whitney's Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) Alternate Turbopump Development project manager, reported that a pair of Pratt and Whitney designed high-pressure turbopumps had been successfully tested at 100 percent rated power on a SSME at NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. (PR Newswire, Jan 23/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin issued a call to restore America's leadership in aeronautics that is threatened by failure to invest adequately in research facilities and advanced technology. Goldin told the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics meeting in Arlington, Virginia, that additional spending had to be directed to high speed research, advanced subsonic and systems integration, critical research facilities, and hypersonic research. Top priority needed to be given to developing a hypersonic commercial plane that could carry 300 passengers at least 6,000 miles nonstop at two-and-one-half times the speed of sound by the year 2005. NASA's budget provided for $1.1 billion for aeronautics, or 7.9 percent, Goldin said, a funding level that had to increase. (NASA Release 92-219; The Sun, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 10/92; H Post, Dec 10/92; AvWk, Dec 14-21/92)
In an effort to inspire students to study mathematics, science and technology, almost 1,000 engineers from NASA planned to visit schools nationwide during the week of February 16-22. NASA's "teachers for a day" will be participating in the National Engineers Week's Discover "E" Program, the largest student outreach effort sponsored by the engineering profession. NASA engineers were to participate in career day activities, teach students, conduct science competitions, participate in teacher workshops, and judge science fairs. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said, "Space exploration and its monumental engineering feats are vital to America's future competitiveness, will strengthen domestic economy, provide jobs for Americans and inspire students to study mathematics and science." (NASA Release 92-24)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
During the Soviet period, Ukrainian scientists and industry were an integral part of the Soviet space program, which employed over 250,000 people. When the breakup of the Soviet Union fragmented its space program, Ukraine gained one of the world's most advanced aerospace industries, capable of producing everything from rockets to satellites. However, without the Soviet Union to pour money into space exploration, Ukraine was looking for new ways to keep its aerospace industry working. (LA Times, Apr 24/92)
The NASA announced that both tape recorders aboard the $617 million Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were malfunctioning, and engineers directed the craft to not use the machines. Compton, a joint project of NASA and the European Space Agency, was built by the space and technology group of TRW under the direction of Daniel Goldin, the man selected by President Bush to become the new NASA administrator. (W Post, Mar 24/92)
Florida Today reported that the Hubble Space Telescope, despite a flawed primary mirror that prevented it from stargazing perfectly, nevertheless had shown astronomers enough of the universe to rattle their theories of creation and the nature of the universe. Circling the Earth every 90 minutes the Hubble has provided new insights into "globular clusters, the black hole, gaseous hydrogen isotopes, and a shell of gas moving from a giant star in another galaxy." (Florida Today, Feb 2/92)
McDonell Douglas Space Systems Company's Kennedy Space Center division was chosen as a finalist for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy, which is given annually to the NASA contractor which makes the greatest achievements in applying Total Quality Management (TQM) principles to their day-to-day operations. The goals of the award are to incorporate more efficient ways of 222doing business throughout NASA and its contractors and to transfer the performance improvement methods of award winners from company to company. "It is clear from your company's application that you have positive steps to advance quality, productivity and the continuous improvement process," NASA safety chief George Rodney told division officials in a recent letter. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
NASA's plan to transfer work modifying Space Shuttles from Palmdale to its Kennedy Space Center in Florida triggered protests from California's congressional delegation and the governor's office. The NASA decision would affect about 500 jobs at Rockwell International's Palmdale facility, where five of the orbiters had been assembled since the 1970s and where the space agency had done major modification work on the Shuttle fleet. (LA Times, Feb 1/92)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
Researchers from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, used laser-ranging instruments aboard the Wallops P-3B (HL) Orion aircraft to measure the Arctic sea ice above the water and the Greenland polar glacier elevations in order to study global climate changes. The data gathered was to be compared to previous studies and used to develop a baseline for future studies. Scientists are interested in developing accurate measurements of sea ice and glaciers because changes in these systems may indicate trends in world climate. Appreciable changes in these ice systems, such as increased melting, could directly affect global climate. (NASA Release 92-38)
NASA's inspector general, Bill Colvin, said that an investigation had been going on for nearly two years as to whether the Perkin-Elmer Corporation of Danbury, Connecticut, maker of the flawed mirrors of the Hubble Space Telescope, withheld data that would have revealed focusing problems before Hubble was sent aloft. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; WSJ, Oct 20/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)
NASA research aircraft were exploring the potential of fiber optic sensors in critical aircraft flight control systems. Because of fiber optic's advantages in flight systems, researchers believe fiber optics will improve flight control, engine performance and safety. The research project is part of the Fiber Optic Control System Integration program managed by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland and jointly funded by NASA and the U.S. Navy's Naval Air Systems Command. The first NASA plane to fly with fiber optic sensors was the F-15 Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control (HIDEC) aircraft at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edward, California. (NASA Release 92-23)
James Edwin Webb, 85, whose work as the chief of America's space agency was instrumental in putting a man on the moon, died March 27 at Georgetown University Hospital. During Mr. Webb's tenure, America's first manned space flight took place as well as the first orbital flight by John Glenn and the first walk in space by Edward White. (W Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 29/92; W Post, Mar 29/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
NASA announced that an array of powerful, interconnected computers would help NASA solve some of the complex problems associated with designing aircraft propulsion systems. The Lewis Advanced Cluster Environment system at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, is a network of 33 IBM RISC/6000 computer stations that can perform up to 1 billion floating point operations per second and has three billion bytes of memory, making it the world's most powerful IBM workstation cluster. (NASA Release 92-195)
NASA scientists tapped into a 300-year-old lead coffin in St. Mary's City, Maryland, in a search for air free of man-made pollutants. Samples of such air was expected to aid in understanding ozone damage in the present-day atmosphere. Tests on this and other coffins also helped NASA scientists evaluate the effectiveness of a tool that examines metal for tiny cracks or corrosion that occur in aircraft or spacecraft. (USA Today, Oct 21/92)
A $25 million, five-year program to expand the ability of helicopter pilots to fly close to the ground, around obstacles and in bad weather, was initiated by NASA and the U.S. Army. Experiments conducted at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would study displays that give pilots information, better guidance and navigation systems and ways to improve helicopter weapons systems. The program's main research tool would be a modified UH-60A Black Hawk helicopter called the Rotorcraft-Aircrew Systems Concepts Airborne Laboratory or "RASCAL." In addition to Ames, flight tests were also to be conducted at Crows Landing, a U.S. Navy facility in California's San Joaquin Valley. (NASA Release 92-28)
Jim Scott, Magellan project manager at the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, expressed regret at NASA's decision to cut short the spacecraft's mission. Since its launching from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on May 4, 1989, the spacecraft had mapped 97 percent of Venus' surface, using radar to peer through the planet's thick clouds and take pictures of the rugged, volcanic landscape. Scientists hoped to continue mapping in more detail during an "extended mission" ending in 1995, but NASA officials decided to avoid adding $80 million to the cost by ending the mission on September 30, 1993. The budget decision meant that engineers would not be able to move Magellan from its elliptical orbit and into a lower circular orbit starting in May 1993. That would have allowed Magellan to remap Venus with three to 10 times more detail than the pcitures it already had taken. (NASA Release, 92-14; W Times, Jan 29/92)
NASA scientists using the Hubble Space Telescope said they had discovered extended disks of dust around 15 newly-formed stars in the Orion Nebula starbirth region 1,500 light-years away. Such disks are a prerequisite for the formation of solar systems like the sun's. Hubble's detailed images confirm more than a century of speculation, conjecture, and theory about the genesis of solar systems. Astronomers said the Hubble data was the strongest evidence yet that planets could exist beyond the solar system and may even be a common occurrence. "We have found a place where it is very possible that there will be planets within the next few million years," said Edward Weiler, program scientist for the space telescope, at a NASA briefing. (NASA Release 92-226; W Times, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec. 17/92; NY Times, Dec 17/92; LA Times, Dec 17/92; CSM Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 17/92; UPI, Dec 17/92; APn, Dec 17/92; Newsweek, Dec 28/92)
NASA scientists, reviewing results of seven months' observations, said that after a record buildup of ozone-damaging chemicals last January, the amounts rapidly dissipated because of sudden warming in February and March. While the tests continued to show a thinning of the ozone layer that protects the earth from ultraviolet rays, the sudden warming prevented any severe ozone depletion over the Arctic region, the scientists said. Nevertheless, they said, the potential for severe ozone destruction over parts of the United States, Canada, and Europe remains a matter of serious concern because of the high concentrations of destructive chlorine that were detected. (W Times, May 1/92; NY Times, May 1/92; W Post, May 1/92; USA Today, May 1/92; LA Times, May 1/92)
Dr. Carl Fichtel, Principal Investigator for the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), announced that NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory found three new gamma-ray quasars, detected more than 200 cosmic gamma ray bursts, and captured the best ever observation of the glow of gamma radiation from the disk of the Milky Way galaxy. The Compton Observatory, built by TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, California, is the second of NASA's "Great Observatories." The first was the Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April 1990. The Compton Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, from the Space Shuttle Atlantis, orbits Earth at an altitude of 268 by 262 miles. (NASA Release 92-6)
A status briefing marking the 20th anniversary of Pioneer 10's launch was scheduled for March 2 at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The briefing was to examine new and past space accomplishments and a spacecraft signal was scheduled to be "piped in" to the briefing from five billion miles away. Also featured in the briefing would be a launch-identical, full-scale replica of Pioneer 10 shown for the first time. (NASA Note N92-16)
NASA scientists released pictures and results from spacecraft Galileo's December 8 flight over the moon's north pole and 189 miles above the southern Atlantic Ocean. The flyby allowed Galileo to practice for Jupiter by studying Earth as if it were an alien planet. The craft detected radio signals that changed frequencies in a repeating, artificial way, indicating intelligent life on Earth. It also detected ice clouds in the stratosphere that help create a hole in the protective ozone layer above Antarctica and found evidence that the moon once was more volcanically active than thought. (AP, Dec 22/92, 23/92; C Trib, Dec 23/92; W Times, Dec 23/92; NY Times, Dec 23/92; UPI, Dec 23/92)
At the American Astronomical Society's semiannual meeting in Atlanta, a team of scientists announced that, using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had made the most precise measurement to date of the percent of heavy hydrogen in space, which better determines the physical conditions present in the theorized Big Bang at the origin of the universe. Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, differs from ordinary hydrogen by having one neutron in addition to one proton in its nucleus. A measurement of the ratio of deuterium to ordinary hydrogen provides a critical test of conditions in the universe at the time of the Big Bang because it is believed that essentially all of the deuterium now present was created at that time. If further research finds no evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," then the new deuterium measurements strengthen the idea that the universe will expand forever. If true, the universe had a brilliant beginning but will have no end. (NASA Release 92-2)
Thorsten L. Gunther, 76, a retired geodesist who worked on Goddard Space Flight Center contract involving earth measurement, died April 25 at Washington Hospital Center of combinations after surgery for an aterial aneurism. A resident of Washington area since 1947, he lived in Bethesday. Gunther was an expert onsatellite geodsy and author of the NASA Directory of Station Locations. (W Post, May 5.92)
NASA delayed the maiden flight of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour from May 4 to May 7 to allow a daylight liftoff. Tom Utsman, acting associate administrator for space flight at NASA, said officials had reviewed the criteria and decided that it would be prudent to delay the flight so detailed photographs and documentation could be made for analysis. A dalylight liftoff also would allow Endeavour's seven-member crew to make a daylight landing back at the Kennedy Space Center in case of an engine failure early in flight. (UPI, Apr 28/92; W Post, Apr 28/92; USA Today, Apr 28/92; NY Times, Apr 28/92)
Dr. Everett Gibson of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, Dr. Haraldur Karlsson, and scientists at the University of Chicago analyzed drops of water extracted from several meteorites believed to have come from Mars and concluded that the oxygen isotopes in the water were extraterrestrial. Photographs returned to Earth from the Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft show features that suggest Mars once may have had a water-rich atmosphere and flowing water on its surface. Through the years, several meteorites have been collected on Earth that scientists have identified as Martian by comparing them to information gleaned by the Viking spacecraft. Six of these meteorites were used in the water extraction procedure. Findings from the work completed by the team may answer some questions about the processes operating in the solar system. (NASA Release 92-35)
The Magellan spacecraft fired its four thrusters to swoop within 113 miles of the surface of Venus for study of the planet's gravity and prominent surface details. Since its deployment in 1989, the Venus probe has used radar to map 99 percent of the planet, exceeding its goal of 70-90 percent. With its mission completed beyond expectations, NASA scientists expected to shut down Magellan in May 1993 as a cost-cutting measure. (NASA Release 92-148; USA Today, Sept 15/92; LA Times, Sept 15/92)
NASA reported that the TOPEX/POSEIDON satellite would be launched aboard an Ariane IV launch vehicle from the Guiana Space Center (CSG) in Kourou, French Guiana. The satellite, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, was to study ocean circulation and its role in regulating the global climate. (NASA Note N92-50)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The proposals were submitted by 65 small, high technology firms located in 16 states. Total value of the 28 awards was $14 million. SBIR objectives are to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally funded research innovations. The SBIR program is managed by NASA's Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., and all individual SBIR projects are managed by nine NASA field centers. (NASA Release 92-27)
Some leading American astronomers complained about the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support for astronomical research in the United States. The absence of dependable funding put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan, the astronomers charged. Federal financing had flagged, they said, just as a steam of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices were ready to be exploited. There were also management problems. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that poor management of America's space and astronomy programs had hobbled efforts to compete with European science. (NY Times, Aug 18/92)
Researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said that they would take part in a Russian biomedical space mission. Ames scientists expected to use monkeys to study the effect of lengthy space travel on bones, eyes, and inner ear receptors. The space mission would involve experiments from several nations and was expected to be launched December 29. (UPI, Dec 14/92)
NASA researchers said they had "flown" a complete three-dimensional high-performance aircraft in a supercomputer for the first time. The research was part of an effort to reduce wind tunnel tests of new aircraft designs. The new supercomputer techniques have promise in aerodynamic studies of fighter aircraft and in other areas where fluid flow is modeled, such as weather prediction, spacecraft entry, artificial heart design, etc. (NASA Release 92-105)
Robotics engineers and scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, planned to demonstrate a new planetary lander and robotic rover at a specially designed test site near the laboratory. "Rocky IV," a prototype of a mini-rover, might be launched to Mars in 1996 as part of the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Pathfinder mission. The 16.5-pound testbed would let NASA researchers study how to integrate planetary lander functions and science instruments under conditions approximately those of a Mars mission. (NASA Release 92-93)
Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland called for immediate congressional action to shift U.S. research and development from military hardware to products that would compete in the "environmental marketplace" of the future. NASA, she said, should develop "the second-generation Concorde...and leapfrog our competitors in a 21st century industry that will generate a $200 billion market of the future." (W Post, Apr 10/92)
A technical consultant to the House Committee on Space, Science and Technology, said that if the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane is built, it would be assembled in Palmdale, California. Scott Crossfield, a former test pilot, said President Bush, Vice President Quayle and the National Space Council were strong supporters of the X-30. Crossfield said it would cost an estimated $5 billion to $12 billion for the pair of X-30s. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 1/92)
A NASA airplane, equipped with delicate instruments, carried three astronomers to 41,000 feet above Hawaii last month to examine indications of a "black hole" at the heart of the Milky Way galaxy. The launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and improvements in ground-based instruments led to several announcements this year of tangible evidence for the existence of "black holes." (LA Times, Sept 21/92)
Lockheed Corporation's Space Operations Company unit won the competition for a $200-million-a-year contract to manage the Kennedy Space Center in Cocoa Beach, Florida. NASA said the contract would run for an initial period of four years, plus three two-year options, for a total potential contract period of 10 years. Its estimated value over the 10-year period was $1.9 billion. (WSJ, Nov 19/92; W Post, Nov 19/92; Fla Today, Nov 19/92)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies said chemicals, particularly sulfurs, spewed into the atmosphere by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines are reflecting 2 percent of sunlight back into space, reducing heat. The impact is global; local temperatures might not be affected. Scientists said early studies of the effects of Pinatubo's eruption indicated volcanoes play a far greater role in climate change than once thought. (USA Today, May 19/92; W Times, May 19/92; W Post, May 19/92; P Inq, May 19/92; B Sun, May 19/92)
Three U.S. scientists, including one from NASA's Ames Research Center, completed the first joint U.S./Russian Antarctic expedition since the breakup of the former Soviet Union. The purpose of the expedition was to investigate the physical, chemical, and biological properties of ice-covered lakes in the Bunger Hills Oasis of East Antarctica. This was the first time U.S. scientists had explored these lakes, which are near a Russian research station. (NASA Release 92-73)
NASA, in conjunction with the nation's two leading aircraft engine makers, reported that it would be developing advanced materials that could make a next-generation supersonic airliner possible by the year 2005. A five year, $88 million partnership with General Electric Aircraft Engines, Cincinnati, and United Technologies, Pratt and Whitney Division, East Hartford, Connecticut, was to center on critical composite materials and processes that U.S. industry would need to design and build a fleet of high-speed civil transports. The planes would fly at more than twice the speed of sound and at much higher altitudes than today's commercial airliners. A cost-effective, environmentally compatible supersonic airliner could cut long-distance trip times in half. For example, a future high-speed civil transport could fly from Los Angeles to Tokyo in 4 1/2 hours instead of the 10 hours taken by present subsonic passenger planes. While NASA, Pratt and Whitney and General Electric will form the core of the team, many other U.S. engine companies, materials suppliers and composite fabricators also will play an integral part. This interaction will provide the base for a future U.S. manufacturing capability in high-temperature composites and will let the involved firms take early advantage of the program's technical results. The composites also will help American manufacturers of subsonic airplanes, power systems and military aircraft. (NASA Relese 92-21)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he would act promptly to implement the recommendations of a Management Review Team for enhanced security at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The team considered Ames high risk for hostile intelligence operations. (NASA Release 92-207; UPI, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 19/92; USA Today, Nov 19/92; W Times, Nov 19/92; P Inq, Nov 19/92; AP, Nov 18/92, 19/92, and 20/92; W. Post, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 22/92; Space News, Nov 23-29/92)
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
NASA continued to prepare for what it called "the most aggressive" space-shuttle mission yet--its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set for December 7, 1993. As conceived, it would require four astronauts working in two-person shifts several days to make the repairs. They would need three or possibly four space walks to complete the work. The main task was to install a new camera and a set of corrective mirrors to compensate for spherical aberration in the main 2.4-meter mirror. These and other repairs would, NASA hoped, restore 90 to 95 percent of Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM, Dec 16/92)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration began evaluating new technology that could substantially improve the efficiency of the nation's air traffic system, including improved on-time arrivals, increased fuel efficiency, and a decreased work load for air traffic controllers, according to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center. (Commercial Aviation News, Sept 22/92)
Facing a tight budget, National Aerospace Plane officials proposed extra steps to slow the program aimed at building two runway-to-orbit research planes. The program's goal was to make the first flight of an x-30 aerospace plane by late 1999. The revised program director Robert Barthelemy presented the revised schedule to top Air Force and NASA officials in a quarterly technical review at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. Congress approved $250 million for the program for the 1992 year after slashing nearly $100 million from the Bush adminstration's $303.8 million request. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Based upon images taken by NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers reported that they had found intriguing evidence that a black hole, weighing over 2.6 billion times the mass of the sun, exists at the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. Galaxy M87 is at the center of a nearby cluster of galaxies in the constellation of Virgo, 52 million light-years distant, and contains more than 100 billion stars. (NASA Release 92-10)
Recent studies showed that the technology spinoffs from National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) research and development had already had a positive impact on U. S. aerospace, automotive, medical, chemical, food processing, and energy industries. The studies predicted that the Gross National Product could expand by about $26 billion over the next 10-15 years as a result of productivity gains fostered by the program and that employment also could increase by an average of 40,000 jobs annually. In particular, the studies showed that NASP research could significantly benefit industries such as aerospace, motor vehicle, and emerging industries such as ceramics and high-speed civil transportation. (AvWk, Jul 27/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
Astronomers reported interesting initial results from a survey of several hundred quasars being studied with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Using Hubble's high resolution images, the "Snapshot Survey" program detected evidence on gravitational lensing at a level of detail not usually found with ground-based telescopes. The findings set new limits on the nature and distribution of material in the universe. The results provided information on objects such as stars and galaxies that can be detected with telescopes as well as non-luminous material or "dark matter." In the past decade, about a dozen examples of probable gravitational lenses had been discovered by ground-based telescopes. According to conventional theoretical models, approximately half of all multiple-image gravitational lenses cannot be identified from ground-based telescopes because the separation between the images would be less than one arc second, which is below the nominal resolution limit for ground-based telescopes. The Hubble Space Telescope routinely provides 0.1 arc second resolution of moderately bright point sources, making it a unique and powerful tool for searching for multiple-image lenses. The HST data may ultimately provide new and unexpected insights into the early universe. While the Snapshot Survey will not offer insights into the competing Big Bang models, results will provide scientists with the denizens of the universe but not how they got there. (NASA Release 92-3)
NASA astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory announced that they had observed what they believed to be a galaxy in the process of forming. They estimated that the galaxy is more than 10 billion light years distant. (W Times, Nov 1/92; NY Times, Nov 3/92; AP, Nov 11/92)
NASA selected the ColeJon Corporation of Cleveland, Ohio, for negotiations leading to award of a support service contract for operations, maintenance and repair of facilities at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio. Estimated value of the contract was approximately $30 million. (NASA Release C92-3)
NASA researchers began a three-week airborne study to increase understanding of microscopic plant productivity in the  equatorial region of the Pacific Ocean. The principal scientific objective was to understand why microscopic plant productivity involving phytoplankton is so limited in the Pacific compared to the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 92-135)
The Kennedy Space Center awarded three indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contracts for its Personal Computer Acquisition contract program. The three winners were to provide a range of personal computers, peripherals, and software packages and would be required to compete against each other for NASA orders throughout the duration of the contract, an arrangement designed to provide NASA with the most up-to-date equipment at the lowest cost. (Federal Computer Week, July 13/92)
NASA announced that it had awarded about $15 million for 124 microgravity research grants to develop the research potential of Space Station Freedom as one of the nation's premiere science and technology assets. The grants represent an increase of 70 percent in the number of investigators sponsored by NASA's microgravity division. The division now sponsors nearly 200 scientific investigators and plans to expand to at least 300 before the agency's planned Space Station becomes operational in the late 1990s. (NASA Release 92-167; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA engineers were preparing to do the first assembly of a large-scale, parabolic antenna in a huge water tank whose buoyancy lets researchers simulate working in the microgravity environment of space. The tests would help establish assembly times for such antennas, evaluate work procedures and task coordination, and check the compatibility of the hardware itself. (NASA Release 92-84)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
NASA awarded research grants to three universities to develop teacher training courses that would enable middle school teachers to incorporate aerospace topics and concepts into their classrooms and to create new and imaginative practices in learning. The Teacher Training Pre-Service Program is a two-year program. The following schools were selected from responses to a solicitation of proposals: Fayetteville State University, Eastern Michigan University, and the University of Alabama. Each was to receive a $83,000 grant and were expected to provide matching, non-Federal funds. (NASA Release 92-50)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope revealed an unusual new optical jet in the nucleus of the elliptical galaxy NGC 3862. NGC 3862, also known as 3C264, is a bright radio source and x-ray source. It is the sixth brightest galaxy in a rich cluster of galaxies known as Abell 1367, located at a distance of about 260 million light-years away in the constellation Leo. (NASA Release 92-61)
American space scientists said the hottest star ever recorded--33 times hotter than the sun--had been photographed in a faraway galaxy by the Hubble Space Telescope. Burning at 360,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the white star at the heart of a glowing red nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy is going out in a "blaze of glory," said Sally Heap, an astrophysicist with NASA. (NY Times, Apr 21/92; AP, Apr 21/92; W Times, Apr 21/92; USA Today, Apr 21/92)
NASA announced that scientists from the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and across the United States would participate in a Russian biomedical space mission later this month. The Cosmos '92 "biosatellite" was to be an unpiloted, recoverable spacecraft that carried plant and animal experiments. Cosmos '92 would become the eighth Russian biosatelite mission in which NASA had participated. (NASA Release 92-223)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
Dr. Mark M. Phillips, acting director of Cerro Tololo, an American operated observatory in Chile, said the New Technology Telescope developed in Europe was capturing images up to six times more revealing than those obtained by comparable American telescopes of conventional design. The new European telescope contained advanced optical elements that automatically correct the distortions caused by gravity and wind as the telescope moves. There was an uneasy feeling among some scientists that the salad days of United States astronomy were drawing to a close and that the new European telescopes would leave American astronomers far behind. (NY Times, Feb 4/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had revealed a chain of luminous knots in the core of the most distant known galaxy--one that existed in the infancy of the universe and is located more than 10 billion light-years from Earth. The new photos, taken with the telescope's wide field and planetary camera, reveal detail ten times better than photographs previously taken with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 92-203; W Times, Nov 14/92)
A space agency spokesman said that NASA had failed again to open the main antenna of its Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft. Engineers had heated the antenna with sunlight over three days in March, then cooled it in shade. They hoped the antenna would expand and then shrink enough to free its jammed parts, said Jim Wilson, a spokesman fot the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (P Inq, Apr 17/92; USA Today, Apr 17/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, speaking at the University of Hartford, Connecticut, said spending on space exploration was an investment in the future, but that the nation's space agency must get more for its money than it had in the past. NASA research has economic benefits for the nation, providing jobs and developing technologies with commercial applications, but just as important is the agency's role in supporting exploration that increases knowledge of the universe and provides hope for a better future, Goldin added. (Hartford Courant, Nov 18/92)
NASA scientists announced that they would use "telepresence" technology in the Antarctic this fall to see if life that existed millions of years ago on Earth could provide clues about organisms that once may have lived on Mars. A team was scheduled to travel to Antarctica in October to study sediment on the bottom of ice-covered Lake Hoare on Ross Island. (NASA Release 92-147)
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)
Hugo Wahlquist, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said that Italian and American scientists would spend nine to 12 months looking for signs of gravity waves--distortions in space and time caused by gigantic black holes--in tape recordings of radio transmissions between Ulysses and stations on Earth. Discovery of gravity waves would provide strong confirmation of Albert Einstein's theory of how the universe works, and could prove the existence of black holes. (W Times, Mar 19/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
A new bearingless rotor system developed by McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Company, Mesa, Arizona, which promised to be a significant advance in helicopter technology, was tested by NASA. The tests, conducted in Ames' Research Center wind tunnel, evaluated the rotor concept and gathered data to help develop computer programs needed to design a new generation of bearingless rotors. The new system, which eliminates hinges and bearings that usually connect the blades to the rotor shaft, is the key to the innovative system. The blades have advanced airfoils and are made of high strength composites. The technology was expected to have many benefits, including easier maintenance and lower fuel use. "The new rotor system would allow for faster, more agile, more cost effective and safer helicopters," said Steve Jacklin, Project Manager for the wind tunnel test at the Ames Research Center. (NASA Release 92-27)
A recent U. S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs oversight subcommittee report said that millions of dollars had been wasted in recent years because of poor auditing and contract management at 39 federally funded research and development centers. The report concluded that standard government accounting and auditing requirements were often "missing or ignored" at the privately owned but publicly funded research centers, which together received contracts worth more than $10 billion last year. Among the laboratories criticized was the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which received $1 billion in
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company received two NASA contracts worth $267 million for work on the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight systems contract, valued at $147 million, includes funds for servicing missions, the first of which was set for December 1993 and was to deliver an optical instrument to correct the telescope's flawed mirror. (WSJ, Sept 2/92)
Lockheed, a principal designer of NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, won $267 million in contracts to maintain, service, and help repair the orbiting observatory. (W Post, Sept 9/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, selected the New Mexico State University, Physical Science Laboratory of Las Cruces, New Mexico, to negotiate a cost contract for the operation and maintenance of scientific balloon facilities and engineering support for the NASA Balloon Program. The total cost for the 5-year program was $65 million. (NASA Release C92-6)
NASA officials said that the Galileo spacecraft and its atmospheric probe had passed the half-way mark on their voyage to Jupiter. The first full test results on November 20 and December 2 since launch three years ago showed that the probe's systems were in good working order. Galileo was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter in early December 1995. A major milestone in space communications was achieved recently when NASA scientists successfully transmitted laser signals to Galileo at a distance of 1.3 million miles. (NASA Releases 92-224 and 92-225; AP, Dec 16/92)
Scientists from the United States and Australia announced completion of the Southern Ocean Waves Experiment. From June 6 through June 18, the scientists observed how ocean winds and waves affect one another off the coast of Australia. Project findings were expected to improve the reliability of ocean wave forecasting and to improve measurements from the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite. This satellite, a joint U.S./French venture, was scheduled for launch in August 1992 and was to study ocean topography and circulation, leading to better understanding of the oceans' role in global climate change. (NASA Release 92-109)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealed a new class of object in the universe--a grouping of gigantic star clusters produced by the collision of galaxies. Images of the core of the peculiar galaxy Arp 220 show that stars are produced at a furious rate from the dust and gas supplied by the interaction of two galaxies. The discovery was made by Dr. Edward Shaya and graduate student Dan Dowling, University of Maryland, and the Wide Field/Planetary Camera Team. (NASA Release 92-80)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
NASA scientists were baffled by a brownish discoloration, representing some kind of growth, on the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) satellite. The LDEF was retrieved by a Space Shuttle in January 1990. Whatever the growth, it had formed in space and despite high ultraviolet radiation and the corrosive power of atomic oxygen. (W Times, Sept 9/92)
NASA scientists began a new attempt to open the stuck antenna on the Galileo space probe by rotating the satellite to point the antenna toward the sun. They hoped the warmth would expand the metal fittings and release the stuck mechanism. If this maneuver fails, they were prepared to turn the antenna's electric motors on and off at rapid intervals to "hammer" the jammed mechanism in a final bid to overpower what they believed were stuck pins and pop open the antenna. (W Post, Dec 26/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; The Sun, Dec 26/92, Dec 30/92, Dec 31/92; USA Today, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; UPI, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; P Inq, Dec 31/92; W Times, Dec 31/92)
Milan J. Krasnican, 68, a retired aerospace engineer with NASA, who was a member of the Project Mercury Space Task Group and a project engineer on the orbiting geophysical observatory spacecraft program at Goddard Space Flight Center, died at Sibley Hospital. A long-term resident of the Washington area, he lived in Bethesda. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Dr. Jon Holtzman, of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, led a team of scientists in discovering new clues to cataclysmic events in the history of the peculiar galaxy NGC 1275, located approximately 200 million light-years from Earth. The scientists discovered about 50 bright objects at the center of the galaxy which appear to be young massive globular star clusters. This discovery was surprising because most globular clusters are among the oldest objects in the universe. (NASA Release 92-9)
NASA-sponsored research into the biological effects of space flight at the University of Wisconsin suggested that astronauts may have to workout in space to protect their bones on long-duration flights. Dr. Arthur Vailas of the university's Biodynamics Laboratory based his conclusions on the metabolic processes in the bones of rats that had experienced days of weightlessness aboard the Space Shuttle. (UPI, Oct 21/92)
Paul Beaver, editor of the military affairs magazine Jane's Defense Weekly, said in an interview that the U. S. Air Force was operating a new generation of secret spy planes capable of reaching eight times the speed of sound. Code-named "Aurora," the plane was believed to operate at night and to incorporate the latest radar-evading technology. Pentagon officials denied that such an aircraft existed or was contemplated. For years, some scientists and aviation fans had speculated that a successor to the famed SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane was under development and testing. (The Sun, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 12/92)
David Wolf, Ray Schwarz, and Tinh Trinh of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) were selected by NASA's General Counsel Office to receive the Inventor of the Year Award for their development and design of a new class of horizontally rotating tissue culture systems--also known as the rotating wall bioreactor--that in some ways simulate microgravity. Bioreactors are cell maintenance devices used for research in growth and culturing cells or tissues and have been recognized as valuable tools for pioneering research in lung tissue, skin growth, intestinal disease, cartilage growth, colon cancer, brain tumor growth, and therapeutics. (NASA Release 92-33)
NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the U. S. Geological Survey in a published paper said that Mars was once very active tectonically and may still be shaken by quakes daily. The scientists said that although the planet is less seismically active than the earth, their studies, based on Viking photos, predict that about two marsquakes of magnitude five or greater occur per year, and about a hundred quakes of magnitude three or greater occur per year. (NASA Release 92-198; LA Times, Nov 6/92; W Times, Nov 7/92; P Inq, Nov 26/92)
China reported that it would send astronauts into space by the year 2000 as the first step toward launching its own Space Station. "Before the year 2000 China will have completed its research into experimental manned spacecraft and carrier rockets," said the State Commission on Science and Technology. (UPI, Apr 7/92; LA Times, Apr 8/92)
Daniel S. Goldin, the newly appointed Administrator NASA said he was a strong supporter of the controversial Space Station Freedom, which was being developed in part at the NASA Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. The Space Station Freedom, whose price had soared from $8 billion to $40 billion, was a frequent target of lawmakers looking to trim NASA's budget. But Goldin said, "I believe that there is a crying need for human interaction in space. If we are to fulfill our role of NASA and to have humans seek their destiny in space, we must understand the interactions of humans in a hostile space environment, the long-term impacts of zero gravity, microgravity, radiation." (News-Herald, Apr 23/92; Plain Dealer, Apr 23/92)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
The Kennedy Space Center, Florida, said it had awarded first-of-a-kind contracts to three firms under NASA's Personal Computer Acquisition Contract program. Throughout the five-year life of the contracts, the three companies would have to compete against each other for NASA orders to supply personal computer hardware and software to Kennedy Space Center and other NASA locations. NASA established this competitive arrangement so that the agency could be assured of a steady supply of high-quality products for the best price. (NASA Release C92-10)
NASA researchers found unexpectedly high productivity of microscopic plants near the equator in the Pacific Ocean during a recent airborne study aimed at increasing understanding of these plants in the region. The plants, called phytoplankton, play an important role in the absorption of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. (NASA Release 92-179)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that the Magellan spacecraft, already threatened with suspension of operations to save money, had developed serious transmitter trouble and for more than a week had been unable to send usable data and pictures for the completion of its mapping survey of the Venusian surface. Magellan's only functioning radio transmitter begun overheating, a repeat of similar trouble more than a year ago. Engineers hoped to devise a solution within a few days. (NY Times, Jul 15/92; NY Times, Jul 18/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
NASA scientists at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco said that a NASA satellite had provided overwhelming evidence that industrial pollutants were responsible for the hole in Earth's protective ozone layer above Antarctica. The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, launched in 1991, also had produced evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole may act as a "sink," sucking in and destroying ozone from much of the Southern Hemisphere. (AP, Dec 10/92)
Associated Press reported that three soldiers had burned to death as hundreds of construction troops rioted at Baiknour Space Center in Kazakhstan after complaining of "inhuman treatment" by their superiors. Baikonur was the main space launch site in the former Soviet Union. (P Inq, Feb 27/92)
NASA reported that a survey of the heavens with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was uncovering remote and unusual galaxies never before resolved by optical telescopes on Earth. HST revealed an unusual variety of shapes and structures in these distant galaxies, which previously had appeared as fuzzy blobs in ground-based sky surveys. The results might lead to much clearer understanding of the formation and evolution of galaxies. The results were presented by Dr. Richard Griffiths of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. (NASA Release 92-98)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
NASA announced that the Space Station Freedom program had initiated a new effort to reduce dramatically the time it would take to integrate small experiments on the Space Station. Called EXPRESS for Expedited Processing of Experiments to Space Station, NASA engineers hoped to reduce the time it takes to get a small payload flown aboard Freedom from up to five years to less than one. (NASA Release 92-191)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Paul F. Holloway, in addition to his responsibilities as Director of Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, would be assigned temporarily to NASA headquarters as a special assistant to the administrator. Goldin also announced the departure of Don G. Bush, assistant administrator for procurement, effective January 11, 1993. (NASA Release 92-292)
Astronomer Duncan Steel of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney warned of a possible collision between the Earth and  Comet Smith-Tuttle in the year 2116. Several years would be needed to track the comet to determine its orbit with accuracy and to decide whether or not a collision is likely. (The Sun, Oct 26/92; W Times, Oct 27/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with representatives from seven Historical Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), the latest recipients of NASA's Research Center grants. The awards were the latest approach to meeting some of NASA's present and future research and workforce needs and in tapping into scientific resources found among under-represented minority students and faculty at qualifying universities. (NASA Release 92-11)
According to some scientists, recent observations by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) have shown exceptionally high levels of chlorine monoxide (CIO) at high northern latitudes, raising the possibility of enhanced ozone depletion over populated areas of the Earth. UARS's Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) detected elevated levels of CIO over large areas of Europe and Asia north of about 50 degrees latitude. Dr. Joe Waters of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that high CIO levels were observed over Scandinavia and Northern Eurasia, including the cities of London, Moscow and Amsterdam. These CIO levels, approximately 1 part billion by volume, are comparable to levels observed within the Antarctic ozone hole. Waters said that sustained levels of CIO could lead to significant ozone destruction over the northern hemisphere and perhaps even lead to an ozone hole over the Arctic. (NASA Release 92-18)
Scientists probing river muck have discovered bacteria that can "eat" the main chemicals threatening the ozone layer, the U.S. Geological Survey reported. The bacteria that break down chlorofluorocarbons, known as CFCs, were found along the Potomac River in Virginia and in pond, marsh, and swamp sediments in Maryland, South Carolina, and Virginia. The CFC-eating bacteria are harmless to humans, but can operate only in the absence of oxygen, according to Derek Lovley, a microbiologist working at the Geololgical Survey in Reston, Virginia. (W Post, May 2/92)
A press briefing was scheduled to be held by a science team for the ATLAS-1 mission on March 23, 1992, at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama. The briefing was to discuss the mission's science activities and was to consist of two panels. (NASA Note N92-18)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
Solar scientists were puzzled by an unexpected "gamma ray afterglow" discovered on the sun by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The glow, a strong emanation of high-energy gamma rays, persisted for more than five hours after a solar flare explosion on June 11, 1991. A similar phenomenon occurred four days later. The scientists also announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had taken the first image of the sun in neutrons, the first picture of any celestial object ever made with neutrons, that is, matter, rather than light. Another scientist reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had found evidence of powerful beams of downward-streaming protons at the onset of a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more than 30 light-years away. Solar flares can produce magnetic storms on Earth that interfere with electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA Releases 92-112 and 92-113; NY Times, Jul 16/92; USA Today, Jul 16/92; The Sun, Jul 16/92; P Inq, Jul 16/92; UPI, Jul 15/92, Jul 17/92; W Post, Jul 20/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Scientists studying the effects of ozone depletion in Earth's atmosphere reported that the frequencies of light passing through a depleted ozone layer may not cause the widespread catastrophic damage to plants scientists previously predicted. They found that the kind of ultraviolet radiation that causes the most damage to alfalfa plants passes straight through the ozone layer, meaning a depleted ozone layer would not increase exposure to the most damaging light. Significant depletions in the ozone layer would certainly send up the cancer rate in humans quite substantially, biophysicist John Sutherland of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, said, but plants are not likely to be the most severely affected by the increased ultraviolet light hitting Earth because of a thinning protective layer. (UPI, Aug 13/92)
Loral Corporation became the first U.S. aerospace company to win government approval to buy advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. The Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Palo Alto, California, to import tiny electric satellite thrusters that are used to position satellites in space. Loral's Russian partners are Fakel Enterprises of Kaliningrad, which makes the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of Moscow. (WSJ, Apr 2/92)
Thomas O. Paine, 70 who was deputy administrator and administrator of NASA from 1968 to 1970, died of cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles.In 1985, President Reagan named him chairman of the National Commission on Space to set goals for future space exploration. He also was a member of Vice President Quayle's Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. After leaving NASA, he returned to GE where he became a vice president and power generation group manager. In 1982 he retired from the Northrop Corporation as its president. (W Post, May 8/92; NY Times, May 7/92)
It was reported that the Kennedy Space Center was about to break gground on a second Space Station project, a new building to service the outpost's propulsion modules. The 3,000 square foot building, to be located behind and south of the operations and checkout buildings in Kennedy Space Center's industrial area, would be the space center's third hazardous processing plant. This one was to be dedicated to servicing a single type of payload: 800-gallon modulles filled with propellant, which would be used to keep the space station positioned properly in orbit. The new buildingg wouldbe able to accomodate testing, cleaning, and servicing of two to four modules simultaneously. The Kennedy Space Center was soliciting bids for construction of the plant, which was to be 70 feet high, 135 feet longg and 65 feet wide. A contract, worth about $11 million, was expected to be awarded in June 1992, with construction beginning in July, said payload projects manager JoAnn Morgan. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study indicated that the ozone shield of the Northern Hemisphere was increasingly vulnerable to depletion by man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson of Harvard University, the study's Mission scientist, and 80 other scientists of the second Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE II) used two NASA aircraft to examine the ozone-related chemistry and air motions of the lower stratosphere from early October 1991 through late March 1992. The extensive measurements, combined with satellite and meteorological data, provide the first detailed picture of the factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer from fall, through winter, and into spring. (NASA Release 92-55; NASA Release 92-56)
Responding to evidence that Earth's protective ozone layer is thinning or disappearing faster than was forecast, environmental officials from 81 countries met in Copenhagen to consider revising the Montreal Protocol on the control of substances that attack ozone. The main point of the meeting, sponsored by the United Nations Environment Program, was to set a timetable for the phaseout of chlorofluorocarbons, halons, and carbon tetrachloride. (The Sun, Nov 22/92;
For the first time, virtually every nation with an interest in space or its practical benefits sent delegates to the World Space Congress. Meeting in Washington, D. C., at the invitation of President George Bush, almost 4,000 representatives began a week of meetings that were expected to usher in a new era of international cooperation in space exploration. The conference was sponsored by the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions, NASA, the U. S. Academy of Sciences, the International Astronautical Federation, and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (The Sun, Aug 31/92;  CSM, Aug 31/92)
NASA announced that it would kick-off a nationwide tour of its full-scale traveling Space Station Freedom model in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. The model, which is housed in two connected tractor trailers, features the U.S. living quarters and the U.S. laboratory module of the international space-based research facility. (NASA Note N92-47)
Newly-released photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope showed that the "Whirpool Galaxy" may have a black hole at its core and that the core of a powerful infrared radiating galaxy called Arp 220 supports vigorous star birth and supernova star explosions. Astronomers suspect that Arp 220 is the product of an earlier collision of two "parent" galaxies. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
The U.S. Air Force said that budget realities had necessitated cuts in plans to have the National Aero-Space Plane reach orbit and fly 25 times the speed of sound. The experimental hypersonic craft's top speed was likely to be cut from Mach 25 to Mach 12 or Mach 15 and its runway-to-space approach might be abandoned in favor of launch from the back of another airplane. Cost was projected to drop from $10 billion to $3 billion. (W Times, Dec 9/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
Scientists reported that the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines last June sent massive amounts of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, which in turn was contributing to erosion of Earth's protective ozone layer and to warming in the tropics. While the depletion could amount to 5 or 10 percent, the researchers expected the effect to be temporary.   Detailed observations of the ozone layer were being made by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite launched last year. (UPI, Aug 27/92)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company was awarded a three-year extension of its existing contract for payload ground operations services, valued at approximately $561.4 million, at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (NASA Release C92-21)
NASA announced plans to consolidate some management functions for the Space Station Freedom program and to create a contractor-led integration team to ensure the successful building and deployment of the international Space Station. The consolidations affected operations in Reston, Virginia, and at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The consolidation came amid charges of cost growth and delays at Johnson Space Center and among the center's team of contractors led by McDonnell Douglas. The problems associated with the $5 billion contract had prompted two audits and one investigation by NASA's inspector general. (NASA Release 92-214; W Post, Dec 2/92; Space News, Dec 7-13/92; AvWk, Dec 7/92)
The National Space Club named the NASA/TRW observatory team that built the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory the winner of the 1992 Nelson P. Jackson Award at an awards ceremony April 10 in Washington, D.C. This award honors the firm responsible for "an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft and space fields." (Business Wire, Apr 15/92)
A spokesman announced that NASA had failed in its latest attempt to fix the jammed main antenna on the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft, but the agency said it would try different repair methods next year. Engineers turned Galileo's main antenna toward the sun to warm it, then cooled it in shade, but the antenna remained stuck. The latest warming and cooling of the antenna was the seventh and final effort to open the antenna by thermally expanding or shrinking what NASA engineers think are stuck pins on three of the antenna's ribs. Despite the loss of the main antenna, NASA scientists expected to complete 70 percent of Galileo's mission by using a small antenna. The small antenna, however, is capable of transmitting only 1 percent as many computer "bits" as the main antenna would have sent. (AP, Jul 8/92)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were investigating the importance of gravity to life on Earth. They also were studying whether intermittent exposure to gravity might help keep future space explorers healthy. Volunteers were confined to their beds for 24-hours a day in the head-down position to induce the physical changes associated with exposure to the microgravity of space. Results of the study indicated that these volunteers could avoid the changes simply by standing quietly for 15 minutes of each hour over a 16-hour period. Standing for two hours a day or walking at three miles per hour were almost as effective, according to Dr. Joan Vernikos, the study's Principal Investigator and Acting Chief of Ames's Life Science Division. (NASA Release 92-67)
In the current issue of the British journal Nature, two scientists, Martin I. Hoffert of New York University and Curt Covey of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, reported new findings, largely developed from geological studies, on how Earth's climate responded to changes in atmospheric heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other influences in the distant past. Using climatic data from two periods in the past, one 20,000 years ago in the midst of the last ice age, and the other in the mid-Cretaceous period 100 million years ago, the two scientists found that if atmospheric carbon dioxide doubles from its present level, the average global climate will become about 4 degrees Fahrenheit warmer. These findings agree with computer models of climatic change. They are also compatible with earlier work by NASA scientists at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, whose climatic studies predicted that a doubling of carbon dioxide would reproduce a warming of about 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit. (NY Times, Dec 15/92)
Jeremiah Pearson, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said NASA planners were studying ways to cut up to 25 percent from the Space Shuttle budget by 1997, a much more extensive reduction than previously projected. The 25 percent cut would produce savings of about $3 billion, Pearson said. Managers at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida were already working to cut 10 percent from the Shuttle's 1994 budget. (Space News, Aug 24-30/92)
Project officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the Magellan spacecraft would use its backup transmitter to resume mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar on January 24, following a week of routine battery recharging. (NASA Release 92-8)
NASA's Cassini mission to Saturn passed a major milestone with the completion of a project-wide critical design review. The review included a comprehensive examination of the mission and spacecraft. (NASA Release 92-222)
NASA reported that an SR-71A "Blackbird" research aircraft will test a key propulsion system for the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The SR-71A would act as a high-speed testbed to prove the concept of burning hydrogen fuel outside the X-30's engine exhaust nozzles as a way to improve overall flight efficiency. If the program operations received approval, the SR-71A would be modified and flown at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The NASP Joint Program Office, Wright-Paterson AFB, Ohio, funded the preliminary design work for the experiment. The NASP program is a joint effort involving NASA, the Department of Defense, and a U.S. industry team. (NASA Release 92-29)
It was reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center plans to award a broad computer services contract later during the year to support the center's host computers, networks, workstations, application software and telecommunications systems. The contract, which analysts estimate will cost up to $180 million, was to include software acquisition, development and maintenance, installation, engineering, integration and costumer services. (Federal Computer Week, Feb 17/92)
In another article in Nature, scientists from NASA and Hughes STX Corporation in Lanham, Maryland, said that the uppermost part of Earth's protective ozone layer was about seven percent thinner in 1989 than it was in 1980. The conclusions were based on observations taken by the Nimbus-7 environmental research satellite launched in 1978 and refined by a calibration device on a Space Shuttle mission in October 1989. The new observations were consistent with previous projections of ozone depletion. (UPI Jul 9/92;
NASA reported that the agency would start supersonic flight tests of a new electronic control system that would improve the performance, reliability, and safety of high-speed military aircraft, future commercial supersonic transports, and the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane. A NASA F-15 research aircraft was to begin supersonic testing at the Performance Seeking Control in April 1992 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 92-44, Apr 1/92)
In his annual speech to the Aerospace Industries Association, President Donald Fuqua predicted another year of declining production and more layoffs. "The long-term outlook for the aerospace industry is for a continued decline in overall sales volume for the rest of the decade," Mr. Fuqua told industry officials in Washington, D. C. (The Sun, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 16/92)
NASA unveiled its high-flying, unpiloted atmospheric research aircraft called "Perseus" at Manassas, Virginia. Perseus-A is the first aircraft designed specifically for atmospheric science. It will carry up to 110 pounds of instruments to a maximum altitude of 82,000 feet and is expected to begin flying scientific missions in 1994. Perseus-A was built for NASA by Aurora Flight Services Corporation in Manassas at a cost of $1.5 million. Company engineers expected Perseus to break the world altitude record for unmanned aircraft and the record for altitude in horizonal flight by an airplane. (NASA Release 92-227; W Post, Dec 19/92, Dec 28/92)
NASA issued its strongest warning yet about the quickening deterioration of the ozone layer over large, populated areas in northern latitudes. Experts warned that thinning ozone will let in more harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun and lead to more skin cancer and cancer deaths. An ozone layer hole could appear as early March 1992 if certain meteorological and chemical conditions occur, said the scientists. Even if the hole does not appear right away, the chances are "very high" that it will occur over the next decade, said James Anderson, a Harvard University chemistry professor who is involved in the project. (WSJ, Feb 4/92; P Inq, Feb 4/92; NY Times, Feb 4/92; USA Today, Feb 4/92; W Post, Feb 4/92; W Times, Feb 4/92; LA Times, Feb 4/92; B Sun, Feb 4/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
Shuttle managers said budget-cutting goals recently mandated by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin could mean the loss of as many as 800 jobs on top of the 300 to 400 being phased out during the new fiscal year at the Kennedy Space Center. The cuts were part of Goldin's pledge to run a leaner, more efficient space agency. (O Sen Star, Sept 30/92)
Two American scientists presented a new theory on the evolution of Earth's continents and on early mass extinctions of life. Michael Rampino of New York University and Verne Oberbeck, a geologist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, discussed evidence that suggests that a huge asteroid struck Earth 250 million years ago, helping break up a super land mass called Gondwanaland and contributing to Earth's worst mass extinction of life forms. The new theory, presented during the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, was met by disbelief and skepticism, even by scientists who believe there is overwhelming evidence that another later asteroid impact wiped out the dinosaurs and other species by disrupting Earth's climate 65 million years ago. (P Inq, Dec 10/92; The Sun, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 20/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin appeared ready to abandon the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane program with its goal of constructing and flying a single-stage-to-orbit air-breathing vehicle in favor of a hypersonic research effort. The latter, the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility effort, centers on a manned, Mach 10-class reusable test aircraft launched from the back of a NASA/Lockheed SR-71A, and on an unmanned platform launched atop a rocket to explore physical phenomena at speeds approaching Mach 25. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
NASA engineers decided to stop operating the radar aboard the Magellan Venus mapping probe until early September in an attempt to preserve the spacecraft's one fully operational transmitter until Magellan swings over one of the large regions of the planet that it has not mapped. Ground controllers had relied on Magellan's backup transmitter since January, but the backup unit had developed radio noise that interfered with its periodic transmissions of scientific data. (Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at California Institute of Technology recently reported that they had found water ice on the planet Mercury. Radar beams aimed at both of the planet's poles bore telltale signs of having bounced off of frozen surfaces. (Time, Nov 2/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
NASA announced the selection of 321 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts under the agency's 1992 Small Business Innovation Research Program. The program aims to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally supported research innovations. (NASA Release 92-204)
Hubble Space Telescope scientists announced that Hubble has used a natural "zoom lens" it discovered in space to photograph an otherwise invisible distant galaxy and to chart concentrations of the mysterious dark matter that controls the fate of the universe. The astronomers said that the telescope was actually seeing a phenomenon known as a gravitational lens, which occurs when the gravitational field of a massive object bends light rays from a more distant source. They regarded the ability to discern in detail the structure of the distant magnified object as a major breakthrough in observing techniques. (W Post, Oct 9/92; UPI, Oct 8/92; NY Times, Oct 9/92; NASA Release 92-87 and 92-168)
NASA said that it was collaborating with Cray Research, Inc., of Eagan, Minnesota, to conduct joint research and development activities using the company's Cray T3D supercomputer. NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory expected to use the T3D system for applications that require high-power computers, such as turning planetary data from spacecraft into three-dimensional animations and analyzing Earth satellite data. (NASA Release 92-205; NY Times, Nov 17/92; WSJ, Nov 17/92; W Post, Nov 17/92)
NASA announced that it had begun flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, using the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, were developing fiber optic systems that weighed less and took up less space than the copper wiring in today's aircraft. (NASA Release 93-199)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)
NASA announced that engineer Karl Anderson from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, had invented a process that yields more accurate, faster stress measurements. Anderson's method uses a circuit called a "constant current loop"; the system prevents errors caused by temperature changes in the wires that link instruments, called strain gauges, to recording devices. (NASA Release 93-002; AP, Jan 25/93; Antelope Valley Press, Jan 20/93)
The White House provided more details on President Clinton's plans to shift spending from defense to domestic "investment" priorities. The 1994 NASA budget request moved the agency away from big space flight projects involving humans toward development of new technologies with potential for practical use on the ground. The agency's total budget would go to $15.27 billion, an increase of almost $1 billion. Most of the increase would be spent on aeronautics and other technologies, for example, development of a fleet of high speed planes for public transport and high speed computing. (W Post, Apr 9/93)
The Freedom Forum, a group that funds journalism programs, presented a $100,000 grant to the Mercury Seven Foundation to establish a lecture series about space. The series, which was intended to help improve public understanding of space issues, was to be held annually in Florida's Brevard County, the location of the Kennedy Space Center. (AP, Mar 22/93)
NASA announced the selection of 317 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase 1 contracts in NASA's 1993 Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR).  Over 2,850 proposals were submitted by small, high technology businesses from all parts of the United States. (NASA Release  93-207)
NASA has begun full-scale development of the first spacecraft to rendezvous with and orbit an asteroid.  Called Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR), the mission received funding in the FY 1994 budget and was scheduled to be the first in NASA's new Discovery program of small-scale, cost-effective space exploration missions to be launched. (NASA Release 93-220)
A fighter plane shaped like an arrowhead flew into NASA's Langley Research Center this week. The plane, a heavily modified version of the Air Force F-16 fighter, has a wing that is narrow near the front of the plane and flares out near the tail. The plane was part of a program to build an efficient supersonic jetliner. (Daily Press, Apr 16/93)
NASA announced that scientists from the University of Hawaii and NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had determined that the planet Pluto is covered with surface ices that are 98 percent nitrogen.  The scientists concluded that with such abundant nitrogen surface ice, Pluto's thin atmosphere must be primarily gaseous nitrogen. (NASA Release 93-142)
The Space Shuttle Discovery, with five astronauts on board, was scheduled to lift off at 1:32 a.m. April 6 to study the condition of the Earth's ozone layer and sample 30 to 40 other gases. Three instruments in the Shuttle cargo bay would measure ozone, and four others would probe solar energy. A nighttime launch was necessary to put Discovery on the desired course for observing sunrises in the Northern Hemisphere. Meteorologists predicted an 80 percent chance of good weather. (W Post, Apr 5/93, Apr 6/93; W Times, Apr 5/93; LA Times, Apr 5/93; NY Times, Apr 4/93; AP, Apr 5/93; UPn, Apr 3/93; RTw, Apr 3/97)
In mid-June a new breed of spacecraft, the Delta Clipper Xl (DC-X), was scheduled to be launched for a brief test. If things go according to plan, the craft would hover briefly 100 feet in the air, and then settle back in its launching pad. The spacecraft, built by McDonald Douglas Aerospace, was to take off vertically and land the same way. Some experts in the field suggested that the DC-X might mark the next phase of U.S. space exploration. (Business Week, June 21/93)
NASA announced that NASA scientists were to spend October and November in Antarctica testing "telepresence technology" that might be used in the future to explore Mars. The research expedition was sponsored by a joint NASA-National Science Foundation Antarctic Space Analog Program and funded for NASA by the Offices of Space Science and Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-178; LA Times, Oct 3/93; UPI, Oct 4/93)
NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)
NASA announced that the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had been selected to design and build, in-house, the Space Station Furnace Facility, the first major element of Space Station scientific instrumentation and the focus of microgravity materials science research on the Space Station. (NASA Release 93-211)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
NASA officials said that the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to be functioning well, but that they would not know until February whether or not the Hubble's vision problems had been corrected. (W Times, Dec 16/93; Fla Today, Dec 14/93, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; UPn, Dec 15/93)
NASA contracted with Stanford University to do additional work on the Gravity Probe-B experiment. The experiment tests predictions of the general theory of relativity. Gravity Probe-B determines how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth and its rotation by measuring small changes in the spin of four gyroscopes in a satellite at 400 miles altitude in a Earth polar orbit. The first Shuttle test flight was scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release C93-b)
NASA announced that it had awarded Government Technology services Inc. of Chantilly a contract to provide Unix work station products to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland (W Times, Mar 4/93)
NASA announced that the agency would design and install an acoustic lining in the wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The improved wind tunnel ultimately would help U.S. industry design quiet engines for a future high-speed civil transport and for new helicopters. (NASA Release 93-81; San Francisco Examiner, May 9/93)
NASA held a marathon, 59-hour dress rehearsal of the agency's $251 million mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope and repair its flawed vision. The 11-day mission aboard the Shuttle Endeavour was planned for December 1.
The Associated Press announced that NASA engineers had searched for the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine compartment. The sound was heard as the Shuttle was being prepared for a June 3 launch. (AP, May 14/93)
Officials at the University of California, Berkeley,  announced that a violent overnight wind storm had destroyed a multimillion-dollar radio telescope. The 85-foot diameter dish, which was built in 1962, was located at the Hat Creek Observatory in the Lassen National Forest 70 miles northeast of Redding. NASA used the dish as part of its Crustal Dynamics Program, which measures motion of plates that compose the earth's crust. (UPI, Jan 22/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center Director Robert Crippen and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had signed an agreement that would transfer benefits derived from the U.S. space program to the private sector and industries in Florida.  The two parties agreed to set aside $1 million each for the next two years to implement projects under this agreement. (NASA Release 93-155)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-61 to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was scheduled for December 1, 1993. The flight was the first in a series of planned visits to the orbiting telescope. The 11-day mission was designed to accommodate a record five spacewalks with the capability for an additional two if needed.
NASA scientists said they were "ecstatic" over their progress in bringing the Hubble Space Telescope back to life after this month's repair mission. Hubble's ground handlers at NASA predicted that they would focus the observatory completely by the end of January, about two weeks quicker than expected. (H Post, Dec 23/93; APn, Dec 29/93; B Sun, Dec 25/93)
NASA announced that the material that keeps the Space Shuttle from burning up when it returns from space may help treat medical problems on earth. Researchers from NASA's Ames Research Center in California were working with physicians in San Antonio to determine whether the Space Shuttle's ceramic surface insulation materials could be used in bone transplants. (NASA Release 93-102)
Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)
Bad weather delayed the landing of Space Shuttle Endeavour at Kennedy Space Center. The landing was rescheduled for June 30, weather permitting. (UPI, June 29/93, June 30/93; W Post, June 30/93; USA Today, June 30/93; NY Times, June 30/93; B Sun, June 30/93; AP, June 30/93; RTw, June 30/93)
Air traffic controllers reported that their new  $839 million radar system has some serious flaws: planes vanish from screens, phantom images appear, and even a squirrel can chew up the network.  NASA said that it has received many complaints at its Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California, home of NASA's aviation safety reporting system. (AP, September 21/93
Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Edward Stone announced that the laboratory expected to eliminate l,000 of its 7,500 jobs in five years. The cuts resulted from the "realities of the federal budget" and the drop in aerospace work from defense contractors, according to Stone. (W Times, Feb 27/93)
The Department of Justice filed a complaint accusing Paul Buchanan, director of NASA's Biomedical Operations and Research Office at Kennedy Space Center, of submitting false vouchers claiming lodging expenses for time spent in Washington, DC, while on temporary duty for NASA. (Fla Today, Dec 4/93; C Trib, Dec 5/93)
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
NASA scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica in 1992 was as severe as in any previous year. Ozone is destroyed by chorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which are used as solvents, propellants, and coolants.  On September 23, 1992, the surface area of the ozone hole reached 8.9 million square miles. Measurements were taken by the Nimbus-7 and Meteor-3 Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) instruments. (NASA Release 93-14; UPI, Jan 19/93)
Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
Two NASA scientists told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that a cosmic collision as powerful as the one that many scientists think killed all the dinosaurs on Earth 65 million years ago may take place on the planet Jupiter in 1994. The scientists speculated that the impact might come from the comet Shoemaker-Levy, which last year came so close to Jupiter that the planet's powerful gravitational field shattered the comet into about a dozen large chunks. Recent calculations show that most of the comet's remaining chunks may hit Jupiter in July 1994. Because of uncertainties about the comet's orbit, however, it was possible that the collision might not occur at all. (C Trib, June 13/93; P Inq, June 20/93; W Post, June 28/93)
NASA announced that it would soon begin tests using a modified Convair 990 commercial jet airliner to expand the operational landing capabilities of the Space Shuttle system. The Convair has been undergoing modifications for two years in preparation for tests that would help Johnson Space Center researchers better understand the operational capabilities of the Shuttle system. (Desert Wings, Jan 8/93)
Galileo's controllers at the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, continued to work on unfurling the spacecraft's stuck high-gain antenna. If their attempts were unsuccessful, the craft's controllers would use Galileo's low-gain antenna to gather data, including data from a probe that would descend into Jupiter's atmosphere. Use of the back-up system would enable NASA to complete 70 percent of its mission, according to project manager William O'Neill. (CSM, Jan 13/93)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
NASA said that it planned to launch a repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope as planned next month despite a troublesome sensor on one of Shuttle Endeavour's wing flaps. The faulty sensor poses no safety problems, a Nasa spokesman said. (APn, Nov 19/93; RTw, Nov 19/93)
Astro D, a cooperative x-ray astronomy mission with Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) and NASA, was scheduled for launching February 11 from the ISAS Kagoshima Space Center in Japan.
Officials at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico announced that the Delta Clipper-Experimental rocket had successfully completed its first test flight, boosting backers's hopes that the single-stage design would be cheaper and more reliable than current space launch rockets. During the test flight, which lasted only about a minute, the rocket hovered briefly, flew about 350 feet to one side, and then touched down vertically on a landing pad. It was the first time a spacecraft had landed vertically on Earth.  A second test flight was tentatively set for Aug. 27. In that test, the rocket was scheduled to go up about 650 feet.  (AP, Aug 18/93; WSJ, Aug 19/93; H Chron, Aug 19/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; W Times, Aug 21/93; Time, Aug 30/93)
NASA has chosen 38 research proposals to be incorporated into phase II of its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The projects will be conducted by 36 small business from 18 states; the projects have a value of approximately $19 million. NASA will select approximately 100 additional research proposals in January and February 1993.
The Senate confirmed John H. Gibbons as President Clinton's science and technology adviser. Gibbons was scheduled to direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), which advises the president on issues such as global warming, AIDS research, and support of science education in schools. A nuclear physicist, Gibbons, 64, headed the congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) for 13 years. (W Post, Jan 29/93)
NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)
A New York Times editorial recommended that Congress eliminate the Space Station program because of the need to find deeper budget cuts and the fact that the program looked "more like pork-barrel spending for the aerospace industry than an exciting technological venture." The editorial noted that cutting the program would force the nation to reassess just what role humans should play in space. (NY Times, June 23/93)
NASA announced that it had selected SYSCON Services, Inc., Washington, D.C., for negotiations leading to the award of a contract to provide technical and support services at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California.  (NASA Release C93-j)
NASA announced that beginning in February, NASA would test "technology incubation," a new laboratory-to-market approach designed to help space technology contribute to U.S. industrial competitiveness. NASA was funding two centers, the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The three-year experiment, which was being operated by the University of Texas, Austin, was receiving funding of $800,000 this year. (NASA Release 93-037)
Eleven high school students participated in an eight-week Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP) at NASA's Dryden space center this summer.  Four days a week, the participants completed a regular eight-hour workday, working alongside engineers and others, learning firsthand what it takes to succeed in these careers.  The fifth day was spent in career exploration, perhaps a tour of different facilities at Edwards AFB or a visit to a university such as UCLA.  (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 12/93)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had created the first geographically precise image of the Earth "breathing"--removing and releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. The dynamic computer model shows monthly changes for carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere as microbes decompose plant debris in the Earth's soil. (NASA Release 93-223; UPI, Dec 20/93)
NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia, with a science mission paid for and directed by Germany, was scheduled to be launched on April 24. The launch was scheduled to take place just seven days after Discovery's return from an atmospheric research flight. An engine shutdown March 22 halted Columbia's launch with just three seconds to go. (AP, 4/21; 93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 21/93; USA Today, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 22/93)
Executives from two major players in the aircraft industry, United Technologies Corporation and General Electric Company, said that job cuts and productivity improvement programs won't by themselves pull the industry out of its downturn. They were beginning to hint that they would like to team up with each other, perhaps through more joint research and development projects. Such hints might be merely a means of testing how far the Clinton administration would let them bend antitrust laws. However, even the suggestion of cooperation revealed the turmoil in the jet engine market, which was suffering because of slumping airline order and deep cuts in government spending on military aircraft. (WSJ, Jan 29/93)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were measuring how the human body reacted to exercise done on Earth and comparing those measurements to the exercise measurements of astronauts working in the microgravity environment of space. The goal was to try to improve the productivity of astronauts involved in space walks. (NASA Release 93-93)
Writing in the Washington Post, columnist Michael Schrage reported that physicist John H. Gibbons, White House science and technology policy advisor, was facing some tough choices. He soon had to decide whether science and technology would play a leadership role in the Clinton Administration's economic agenda or merely a supporting one. That choice appeared to be as yet unmade. (W Post, Apr 30/93)
NASA officials said that Germany was being charged only $150 million of the $400 million cost of launching a science mission aboard Shuttle Columbia on February 25. Columbia's crew was expected to include two German researchers and a laboratory of German science experiments. The price was agreed upon in 1986 under a pricing policy NASA officials admitted was outdated. (O Sen Star, Feb 4/93)
NASA scientists were scheduled to test an "intelligent" computer on the 14-day Spacelab Life Sciences mission, scheduled for launch in early October. The computer, known as the Astronaut Science Advisor, was designed to help astronauts work more efficiently and improve the quality of science in space. (NASA Release 93-180)
NASA announced that scientists using the Earth-orbiting Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had discovered a powerful pulsar that had become one of the brightest x-ray sources in the sky during the past two weeks. (NASA Release 93-141)
The Spacelab Life Sciences-2 (SLS-2) mission scheduled for October would offer scientists unprecedented opportunities to learn more about how life adapts to the microgravity environment of space flight.  For the first time in the history of space flight, scientists were to collect tissues during the mission.  Crew members were to draw blood samples from both themselves and rats and were to dissect five rats in space.  (NASA Release 93-173)
According to Space News, seven months after a NASA-appointed Management Review Team reported that lax security had created a high risk of espionage at the Ames Research Center in Northern California further investigations by the FBI and NASA's inspector general had not substantiated those charge. In the meantime, however, Ames had implemented many of the team's recommendations. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
The New York Times reported that an Orion rocket being prepared for launch at the European Space Range in Kiruna, Sweden, ignited while on its flatbed and shot through two buildings, killing a technician and injuring three others. The 20-foot rocket was to have measured the earth's ozone layer, using equipment from a German Space organization. (NY Times, Mar 1/93; RT, Feb 27/93)
In 1989, NASA embarked on a vast program, the Mission to Planet Earth, which set out to monitor the effects of climate change on Earth's atmosphere, land surface, and oceans. The centerpiece of this program was to be the Earth Observing System, or EOPS, a group of 30,000-pound space platforms that could cost as much as $30 billion to build, launch, and operate. The platforms were projected to beam home one trillion bits of data each day, ranging from the flux of solar radiation into the atmosphere to the growth of plankton beneath the ocean surface.
Marshall Engineers and Scientists Association President Wesley Darbro said that it appeared that the Marshall Space Flight Center would lay off about 478 workers, all associated with the Space Station program. (Huntsville Times, Sep 20/93)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
Hughes Aircraft and Perkin-Elmer Corporation agreed to pay $25 million to head off a threatened government lawsuit, charging them with liability for the defect that crippled the $2-billion Hubble Space Telescope, the Justice Department announced. (UPI, Oct 4/93; AP, Oct 5/93; NY Times, Oct 5/93; B Sun, Oct 5/93, Oct 8/93; W Post, Oct 5/93; WSJ, Oct 5/93; LA Times, Oct 5/93)
NASA announced that it would participate in the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People's (NAACP) national Afro-Academic Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics (ACT-SO) competition, to be held in conjunction with the groups's annual convention in July.  Two thousand high school students, representing 600 cities, were scheduled to compete for national honors.  NASA scientists and engineers were to participate as science fair judges.  National winner would receive certificates from NASA and a sponsored visit to a NASA field center.
Space scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, think they have identified what matter in deep space is absorbing certain wavelengths of light from distant stars. Researchers Farid Salama and Louis Allamandola demonstrated that the light is absorbed by unexpectedly large organic molecules spread throughout the vacuum of space. These molecules, shaped like chicken wire, are called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
The W Times reported that a joint U.S.-German experimental fighter jet had completed a revolutionary rapid turn in flight. The aircraft slowed from a speed of about 300 miles an hour and reversed direction in only nine seconds using a tight, looping turn. According to the Pentagon, the turn was far beyond the aerodynamic capability of any conventional fixed-wing aircraft. The test flight took place at Edwards Air Force Base, California.
NASA scientists reported that ozone-destroying forms of chlorine had  existed for much longer in the Arctic stratosphere this winter than last. Northern Hemisphere ozone abundance also was observed to be some 10 percent below that measured during the same period last year, with some areas 20 percent lower. NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) provided the information. (NASA Release 93-068; NY Times, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 14/93)
NASA announced that the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and California wine growers would use aerial and satellite images to battle an insect problem encountered by California's wine industry. Sensitive electronic scanners on aircraft and satellites would help a group from government, industry, and several universities map and analyze root louse damage in northern California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA Release 93-55; UPI, Mar 31/93; SF Chron, Mar 31/93; P Inq, May 2/93)
Writing in Sports Illustrated, Robert H. Boyle took to task those members of the media who have asserted that environmental problems such as depletion of the ozone layer and acid rain don't exist, that they were cooked up by scientists greedy for funding. Boyle pointed the finger at talk show host Ross Limbaugh but said that mainstream publications such as the Washington Post and the Wall Street Journal had also been guilty of misrepresenting environmental problems.  (Sports Illustrated, Jul 12/93)
Robert S. Harrington, 50, an astronomer with the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, died of cancer January 23 at George Washington University Hospital. Dr. Harrington was known for his work concerning the possible existence of a 10th planet beyond the orbit of Plato. He also focused on precise stellar distances, solar system dynamics, and multiple star dynamics.
On December 23, Bill Clinton picked John H. Gibbons, head of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, to be his science and technology advisor. Gibbons planned to emphasize civilian-sector competitiveness; he also hoped to broaden industry's input into White House policy making while making sure that companies invested serious money into government-backed projects. (Bus Wk, Jan 18/93)
NASA announced that it had joined with American Bio-Technologies Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, in an attempt to arrive at a better understanding of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The goal was to use advanced x-ray technology and expertise developed by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, to advance knowledge of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and AIDS, to develop new therapeutic approaches for HIV and AIDS, and to develop superior biological materials for vaccine development and HIV detection. (NASA Release 93-88)
An official of Japan's Science and Technology Agency announced that it would spend $4.6 billion developing an unmanned Space Shuttle that would repair satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro-gravity experiments. (Rtw, Jul 7/93)
NASA announced that a study at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, might lead to a reduction in the lightheadness astronauts feel after returning to earth from space. A reduced level of plasma was believed to contribute to the tendency to feel faint. (NASA Release 93-030)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
NASA announced that Salisbury State University had become the first college in Maryland named to participate in a joint study program with NASA. The university was expected to receive a $110,000 grant over three years from NASA's Joint Venture Institutions program. (B Sun, June 4/93)
The Boeing Company and the four leading European aerospace companies, partners in the Airbus Industrie consortium, reached an agreement to conduct a one-year study of the feasibility of jointly building a superjumbo airliner capable of carrying up to 800 passengers. (NY Times, Jan 28/93)
The Delta Clipper-Experimental, a 42-foot prototype for a new generation of reusable spacecraft, climbed to about 300 feet, hovered, moved laterally about 350 feet, then made a vertical landing at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.  This was the spacecraft's second successful test flight. (B Sun, Sep 12/93; National Journal, Oct 2/93)
Miles "Mike" Ross, former deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center, died of cancer Wednesday at his home.  He was 74.  Mr. Ross joined NASA in 1967 as deputy director of the center's engineering and technical operations.  He became deputy center director in 1970. (Fl Today, Oct 15/93)
The Washington Post reported that ozone layer problem appeared to be on the way to a solution. Thanks to the Montreal Protocol, an international treaty obligating signatory countries to phase our ozone-destroying chemicals, scientists expected the threat of ozone destruction to peak in 2000. In that year, according to the latest scientific projections, the ozone layer should start slowly getting thicker and better able to block the sun's harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. (W Post, Apr 15/93)
NASA announced that researchers at the NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed a new and unique group of ceramic processing chemicals that might revolutionize the ceramic industry.  The new processing chemicals might lead to high purity ceramic products that could better withstand temperatures over 2102 degrees F (1200 degrees Celsius). (NASA Release 93-143)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:29 a.m., ET, on an eight-day mission to study Earth's endangered ozone layer. Thursday's liftoff followed an earlier aborted launch. According to reports, the Shuttle, which carried a crew of five, lit up the night like a huge blowtorch as it rocketed into orbit. (AP, April 4/93; RT, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 4/93; USA Today, Apr 8/93; W Post, Apr 8/93; B Sun, Apr 8/93)
The House Space, Science, and Technology Committee passed a $15.16 billion authorization for NASA, in effect rejecting the attempt to kill the Space Station. The authorization would give the Space Station $1.9 billion a year for the next six fiscal years and $1.3 billion in the fiscal year 2000. Congressional opponents of the station, however, vowed to take the fight to the House floor. (NY Times, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; USA Today, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93)
Dr. Lonnie Reid, a fluid dynamics expert at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, was scheduled to be inducted into the Ohio Science Technology and Industry Hall of Fame in Columbus on February 7.
NASA said that scientists at the NASA-Langley Research Center had developed a radar that can detect wind shear before pilots fly into it. The FAA considers the Langley device an improvement over other wind shear radar on the market, according to an FAA spokesperson. NASA nominated Langley's radar work for the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy, a national award given annually by he  National Aeronautics Association to those who have made the greatest achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. (Daily Press, Nov 22/93)
NASA announced that it planned to launch Shuttle Endeavour and seven astronauts on December 1 on a  mission to repair the troubled Hubble Space Telescope. (UPI, Oct 21/93)
During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on April 26, daughters of Johnson Space Center employees got to see where astronauts prepare for space flights and were even able to test the pressurized spacesuit gloves worn by astronauts. Daughters were also welcomed at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, where they toured the control room, investigated an SE-71 cockpit, and crawled around inside a modified Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr 29/93)
The magazine Science reported that some researchers were complaining that NASA was overselling its satellites' products. They cited as an example news stories that fueled excitement about images of what NASA called black holes. Referring to an image featured on the front page of a November issue of the New York Times, one expert said that labeling the pictured cloud of dust a black hole was largely wishful thinking on the part of the observers and the backers of the space telescope. Science noted that outside astronomers often criticized NASA press releases, charging that they were misleading. (Science, June 4/93)
NASA announced that 40 college students had started a six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The summer residence training program was for college students interested in life sciences, bioengineering, ecology, or related fields. (NASA Release 93-117)
The Washington Post reported that the Space Station Freedom redesign team was struggling over a key issue: how to cut the facility's costs while retaining enough power to make the facility worth building. In 1985, NASA engineers envisioned a power system that supplied 135,000 kilowatts (kWs), far more than any other spacecraft. The basic outline of the original plan remained, but the planned capacity had dropped to about 57kW. President Clinton could select a new space design by mid-June. (W Post, May 31/93; USA Today, June 2/93)
Richard T. Barrett, a senior design engineer at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, was awarded the Federal Laboratory Consortium Award of Excellence in Technology Transfer for 1993. (NASA Release 93-73)
Rockwell International Corporation Chairman and CEO Donald R. Beall presented the Chairman's Team Award to National Aero-Space Plane engineers in recognition of the Engine Flowpath Team's significant contributions to hypersonic propulsion development in the United States. The team was composed of 11 engineers from General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Pratt & Whitney, Rockwell's Rocketdyne and North American Aircraft businesses, and NASA's Langely Research Center. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 26/93)
Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Joint Astronomy Centre, Hilo, Hawaii, discovered an unexpected type of molecule in the ices of a star-forming cloud.  The scientists have detected large amounts of molecular hydrogen frozen into the ice grains in a dense molecular cloud in Rho Ophiuchus. Rho Ophiuchus is known as a stellar nursery, a region in the Milky Way galaxy where new stars are being formed. (NASA Release 93-187)
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)
Researchers hoped that the lead coffins buried beneath the floor of the 17th-century Great Brick Chapel in St. Mary's City, Maryland, contained 300-year-old air. However, according to Joel Levine, the scientist who headed the team analyzing the air at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the coffins appeared to contain modern air, as signalled by the presence of Chlorofluorocarbons, which were first manufactured in the 1940s.
NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that a NASA advisory panel had found that the Hubble Space Telescope would have had even more component failure in orbit if the launch had not slipped from 1986 to 1990 as a result of the Challenger accident. The delay enabled technicians to do additional testing that revealed suspect parts. (AvWk, May 24/93)
Charles H. Vermillion, chief of the international data systems office at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was charged in a six-count indictment with violating federal conflict-of-interest laws and converting government property to his own use. Vermillion, who said he was innocent, was charged with taking NASA-developed plans for a programmable frame synchronizer, assembling the synchronizers at his own plant, and selling them privately. (W Post, Jul 23/93)
NASA announced that findings by scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, challenge the theories of how galaxies evolve. The  U.S. team included a scientist from the Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany.
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had provided the most detailed look yet at comet Shoemaker-Levy 5, which was hurtling toward a July  1994 collision with the planet Jupiter.  Hubble's high resolution images showed that the approximately 20 objects that make up the comet are much smaller than originally estimated from observations with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 93-188; USA Today, Oct 15/93; S F Chron, Oct 15/93; RTw, Oct 14/93; W Post, Oct 25/93)
NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)
NASA announced that in one of the deepest celestial surveys yet made by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers had discovered a small group of previously unknown interacting galaxies estimated to be three billion light-years away. Because Hubble caught the galaxies in an early stage of evolution, they offer new clues as to how galaxies have changed over time. (NASA Release 93-203)
NASA announced that it had tested helicopter rotor performance in icing conditions.  The tests were performed in the Icing Research Tunnel at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.  The new experimental database resulting from these tests was to be used to further refine and validate a computer code that predicts helicopter rotor performance loss occurring when ice accumulates on the rotors during an icing encounter. (NASA Release 93-147)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, announced that he had accepted an appointment as the Zachry Professor of Engineering at Texas A&M University and would retire from NASA on August 20. Cohen joined NASA in 1962.  He became Director of the Johnson Space Center in 1986. (NASA Release 93-131; AP, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 16/93; UPn, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have been able to see a double star whose existence they had known only by the intermittent bursts of x-rays recorded over the last 20 years. The binary star, made up of a neutron star and a white dwarf, is 30.000 light-years away from Earth. The report of the discovery was recently published in Astrophysical Journal Letters. (NY Times, Sep 7/93; W Times, Sep 5/93; W Post, Sep 13/93).
A Utah State university group sponsored by NASA's National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program Office was scheduled to launch a high-altitude research balloon on January 11 to measure ozone distribution and wind parameters in the Earth's stratosphere. The balloon, which was to fly across the Gulf of Mexico to Florida, was the eleventh launched by this team and the first of 24-hours duration.
The Plain Dealer reported that a group of African-American employees at NASA's Lewis Research Center had charged that the materials used in a pilot program intended to promote better communication between employees of differing cultural groups instead fostered racism. NASA was investigating. (The Plain Dealer, May 25/93; Space News, May 31-June 6/93)
Federal Computer Week reported that a small woman-owned Florida firm had protested Marshall Space Flight Center's decision to let companies with up to 1,500 employees bid on a small, disadvantaged business (SDB) set-aside program there. Challenger Engineering Inc., St. Petersburg, Florida, maintained that NASA's procurement policy was unfair to smaller minority-owned firms that could not compete with larger companies. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 1/93)
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
According to  Luke Dones, a visiting Assistant Research Astronomer at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, the Earth's rotation rate may be caused by early collisions with rocks as large as Mars. Without the large impacts, the Earth would rotate only every 200 hours instead of the 24 hours it rotates today, said Dones. (NASA Release 93-012; AP, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Jan 19/93)
NASA officials announced that further testing on the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II (WF/PCII), an instrument scheduled to fly on the Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission in December, might be necessary. Tests had cleared the camera of suspicion that it was flawed, but NASA asked for one last independent review of the data just to make completely sure.  (NASA Release  93-169; W Post, Sep 28/93)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, had awarded the Space Shuttle Orbiter Avionics Software contract to IBM Corporation, Houston.  The contract was for the development and maintenance of the primary avionics support software, tool development and maintenance, and certification of primary flight software. (NASA Release C93-s)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)
NASA announced that the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, would lead a multi-year research program effort to develop technology for a future high-speed civil transport. According to Louis Williams, Director of the High-Speed Research Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., "The program is laying a technical foundation for an environmentally compatible, economically practical commercial transport that could contribute up to 140,000 jobs and $200 billion to the national economy in the next century." (NASA Release 93-52; Daily Press, May 24/93)
President Clinton dissolved the Cabinet-level National Space Council as part of staff cuts to reduce the budget. The duties of the space council were to come under the umbrella of a broader policy-making group called the Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by new presidential science adviser Jack Gibbons. (H Chronicle, Feb 10/93; Space News, Feb 15/93)
NASA announced that the December flight of the Endeavor Space Shuttle mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope was scheduled to last ll days and to involve a record five spacewalks, with the possibility of two additional walks, if needed. (NASA Release 93-76; W Times, Apr 25/93)
The Hook Telescope on Mt. Wilson in California, which once ranked as the world's biggest, was written off as an astronomical anachronism eight years ago. However, using the latest electronic sensors and image-enhancers, scientists and philanthropists led by Robert Jastrow of the Mt. Wilson Institute and the founder of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Flight, were reported working to salvage the Hooker Telescope.  Jastrow had raised $250,000 for repairs and was seeking another $250,00 to make the telescope useful into the 21st century. (LA Times, Aug 2/93)
NASA announced that it had selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Applied Technology Division, Falls Church, Virginia, to negotiate a contract for scientific computing operations, maintenance, and communication services in support of the Center Scientific Computing Complex (CSCC) at the Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA (NASA Release C93-1; W Times, Jul 22/93))
Director Dale Compton and Deputy Director Victor Peterson, the two top directors at NASA's Ames Research Center, were scheduled to retire at the of the year. The retirements come at a time when women and members of minority groups have complained that the center's top jobs are reserved for an "old boy network" of white men. (San Jose Mercury News, Dec 11/93)
Using the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), NASA scientists measured thermal radiation differences across the universe and come up with more conclusive evidence than ever to support the "Big Bang" theory that the universe was created by a single blast 15 billion years ago. Measurements made by COBE revealed that 99.97 percent of the early radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year after the Big Bang itself. "This is the ultimate in tracing one's cosmic roots," said NASA scientist John C. Mather, who announced the findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society. (NASA Release 93-5; USA Today, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 8/93; AP, Jan 8/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
Jack Gibbons, President Bill Clinton's science advisor, said that the Clinton administration was debating various options for space policy management. Central was the question of whether to centralize control of the space program in a single White House office or spread out military, individual, and commercial space policy among several high-level councils. The role of science and technology in the Clinton administration was scheduled to be discussed during a January 30-31 meeting in Maryland. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
The first test flight of a re-usable single-stage rocket, called the Delta Clipper Experimental, was scheduled to occur shortly at the White Sands test facility, a Federal site in the New Mexico desert.  The 42-foot, 20-ton prototype was built by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for the Defense Department. (NY Times, Aug 10/93)
By firing small jets 10 times in one-minute bursts, NASA engineers have raised the orbit of the giant Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory by 66 miles and saved it from crashing to Earth. The observatory was scheduled to travel around Earth in an egg-shaped orbit until late November when a second series of firings was to circularize its travels so that it would be at 280 miles altitude all around the globe. (AP, Oct 19/93)
NASA officials said that its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had yielded three major breakthroughs, two of which would enable scientists to unmask hidden supernovae buried deep in the center of the Milky Way.  The third discovery pinpoints a source of the mysterious cosmic rays in this galaxy that have puzzled researchers since the rays first were detected more than 80 years ago. (NASA Release 93-182)
Scientists failed in a new attempt to get the Mars Observer spacecraft to re-establish contact with Earth, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said. The spacecraft did not respond to commands to turn on its primary telecommunications equipment. A proposal to try to restart the Observer's central computer was rejected because it was thought to pose an unnecessary risk to telecommunications with other spacecraft. (RTw, Aug 30/93; W Post, Aug 31/93; AP, Aug 31/93l CSM, Sept 1/93)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Magellan Project officials announced the successful first-of-a kind experiment to "aerobrake" a spacecraft by dipping it into the atmosphere of a planet.  The Magellan spacecraft's orbit was changed from highly elliptical to nearly circular by dragging it through the top of the thick Venusian atmosphere repeatedly over a period of 70 days, ending on August 3, 1997.
NASA announced the formation of an International Mars Exploration Working Group. In addition to NASA, members included the European Space Agency, the Russian Space Research Institute, the Italian Space Agency, the German Space Agency, and the French Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. The group would focus on producing an international strategy for the exploration of Mars after the year 2000. (NASA Release 93-87)
NASA announced that it would fund three new university research centers charged with fostering the next generation of researchers and engineers in hypersonic aeronautics--flight at more than five times the speed of sound.  Scheduled to receive $200,000 annually for three years were Syracuse University, New York; the University of Maryland, College Park; and the University of Texas at Arlington. (NASA Release 93-152)
Orbital Sciences Corporation said its Orbital Imaging Corporation unit had been awarded a two-year, $7 million contract to provide atmospheric research data to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center.  (W Times, August 31/93)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation of Germantown, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract. The seven-year, $91 million contract would provide instrument support services to the Engineering Directorate at Goddard. (NASA Release C93-h; W Post, June 15/93)
Writing in the journal Nature, U.S. scientist Walter Jaffe said that his team had taken pictures of a so-called nuclear accretion disk, which scientists have long theorized surrounds a black hole.  The idea is that matter swirls around the black hole as it is being pulled in, forming an accretion disk, a flat ellipse resembling a round Danish pastry.  The disk was discovered through use of the planetary camera on the Hubble Space Telescope. (RTw, Jul 14/93)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had reported that recent NASA Hubble Space Telescope observations of a class of active galaxies further supported the theory that they are fueled by a massive black hole at the center. (NASA Release 93-130; RTw, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
NASA announced that it had started flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, which used the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft, took place at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 93-199)
Under its High-Speed Research Program (HSRP), which began in 1990, NASA was doing basic research on developing a "clean" supersonic airliner, including preliminary studies of the potential of new materials. As part of this work, NASA was studying the atmospheric effects of supersonic aircraft in the stratosphere. The third report from this study, still in draft form and unlikely to be published in 1993, promised to dampen the optimism of previous research. (New Scientist, Aug 14/93)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, hosted six three-day sessions of Aerospace for Kids, designed to teach children about aerospace technology and Goodard this summer.  The program was to host 150 children over a six-week period this summer. (Prince George's Sentinel, Jul 29/93)
NASA announced that under a recently signed agreement NASA engineers and Learjet Inc. engineers, based in  Wichita, Kansas, would work on the development of a new high performance business jet. The engineers were to study aircraft size and aerodynamics to create the plane; they would use state-of-the-art supercomputers and wind tunnels at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-46; AP, Mar 15/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the establishment of a study team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to explore possibilities for a return mission to Mars to recover some of the scientific objectives of the Mars Observer mission, if communications with that spacecraft could not be reestablished. (NASA Release 93-157; UPI, Sep 1/93; AP, Sep 1/93)
NASA reported that it had lost all contact with Shuttle Columbia for 80 minutes on May 4 because of an erroneous computer command sent to the Shuttle. The blackout led to the loss of some science data but did not cause any major problems; NASA officials, however, reviewed procedures for creating and sending commands to the Shuttle antenna.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and a team based at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages most planetary flights, have examined a variety of options for a new mission to Mars to achieve the scientific goals of the lost Mars Observer at less cost.  The flight would be launched no earlier than 1996. (W Post, Nov 13/93)
NASA announced that NASA scientists had direct evidence that red supergiants--the largest stars known--end their existence in massive explosions known as supernovae. Until this week, astronomers could only speculate that these explosions represented the death of such stars. NASA's international Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite obtained the new evidence through observations of a new supernova on March 30. (NASA Release 93-63)
According to officials at NASA, a bad lot of batteries made by Gates Aerospace Battery Company, might shut down several satellites, including the $3633 million Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) sooner than expected. To make sure that UARS would finish its minimum 18-month mission, NASA scientists had to adjust the satellite's hardware. Instead of gathering extra data from UARS for 10 to 12 years as expected, scientists now estimate that contact with the satellite would last only four or five years. (Science, Feb 12/93)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it had selected NSI Technology Services Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for integration and test support services. The contract, which covered seven years, had an estimated value of $200 million and would provide services to all of Goddard and portions of NASA's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release C93-e)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
LTX Corporation announced that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had taken delivery of a Synchro mixed signal test system for use in the radiation effects and testing laboratory in Pasadena, California. (PR NEWSWIRE, Aug 11/93)
NASA announced that it had officially kicked off Phase II of its High-Speed Research Program, a partnership with U.S. industry to develop technology that could enable the development of a next-generation supersonic airliner. (NASA Release 93-202)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
A White House panel recently called for the American space program to cut back its program significantly. The panel's report, issued on December 17, said that duplication among agencies had to be eliminated and cold-war secrecy reduced. The panel added that the United States should seek to make international cooperation an essential component of its space exploration strategy. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)
NASA, the Alaskan Volcano Observatory (AVO) and Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, have agreed to a second robotic volcano exploration involving Dante, an eight-legged robot that attempted to explore Mt. Erebus in Antarctica earlier this year. (NASA Release 93-195; AP, Oct 26/93; W Times, Oct 31/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) contract award protests were settled. EG & G Florida, Inc; BAMSI, Inc.; and Westinghouse KSC Company, Inc. protested the awarding of the contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, charging that there were deficiencies in the agency's activities during the original proposal submission. As part of the settlement, NASA agreed to rescind its original selection and said that each of the four competitors would be able to submit a revised proposal. (NASA Release 93-18; WSJ, Feb 2/93; AP, February 2/93; O Sen Star, Jan 19/93; Fla Today, Jan 29/93)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts blasted off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission. The team was scheduled to carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments and undertake three space walks.  This was the fourth joint Russian-French space flight since 1982. (RTw, Jul 1/93; RT, Jul 1/93)
NASA awarded 20 universities grants for the first phase of a new training program that ultimately would create a cadre of young engineers skilled in multi-disciplinary design and analysis methods. Each university was to get about $50,000 to define a multi-disciplinary curriculum and graduate-level research program in the aeronautics field that would be accomplished with industry. The universities also were to prepare proposals for Phase II of the effort. (NASA Release 93-210)
John H. Gibbons, Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy, outlined to the members-designate of the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station, three budget options. The three options are a low option of $5 billion, a mid-range option of $7 billion, and a high option of $9 billion. Each option would cover the total expenditures for the Space Station from fiscal year 1994 through 1988. (NASA Release 93-64)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, selected Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Corporation, Houston, for the Engineering, Test and Analysis contract worth $12.5 billion over 10 years, beginning January 1, 1994.  (NASA Release C93-y)
NASA announced that Marta Bohn-Meyer, an aeronautical engineer at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, was one of 10 federal government employees chosen to receive the 1992 Arthur S. Flemming Award. The reward "recognizes U.S. government employees for outstanding and meritorious work," according to NASA.
Martin Marietta Corporation reported that its Martin Marietta Astronautics Group had received a $35 million contract from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build the propulsion module subsystem for NASA's Cassini spacecraft mission that was to study Saturn, its moon Titan, and the rest of the Saturnian system. The Cassini was scheduled for launch in October 1997. (W Times, Apr 13/93)
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
NASA announced a new initiative to commercialize NASA inventions by using top graduate students at Case Western to come up with new product ideas and strategies. NASA's Lewis Research Center, the Battelle Memorial Institute, and Case Western Reserve University, all based in Cleveland, Ohio, were involved in the program. (NASA Release 93-91)
NASA announced the selection of 130 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The SBIR goals are to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small businesses (including minority and disadvantaged firms) in meeting federal research and development needs and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. (NASA Release 93-219)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Dr. France Anne Cordova, head of the Astronomy and Astrophysics Department, Pennsylvania State University, was scheduled to assume the responsibilities of NASA Chief Scientist effective mid-October. She was to be on extended detail from the University to NASA. (NASA Release 93-162)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the California Institute of Technology announced that they had developed a computer software system to catalog and analyze the estimated half billion sky objects in the second Palomar Observatory sky survey. (NASA Release 93-067)
Robert McClure of Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in Victoria, British Columbia, said that Canadian and U.S. astronomers had used a telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, to obtain the first clear pictures showing galaxies colliding and merging on "a really grand scale." The pictures supported a theory that postulates that elliptical galaxies were formed by galactic mergers such as those observed. (W Times, June 20/93)
Three major aerospace companies announced cutbacks yesterday, with Connecticut and Washington State losing most of the jobs. Pratt & Whitney, a jet engine manufacturer whose plants are mainly in Connecticut, said that 6,700 jobs would be eliminated over the next 12 months. The Boeing Company announced that it would cut back production of all models of jet airliners. Such a downsizing could result in as many as 30,000 lost jobs. McDonnell Douglas, which had already announced that 8,700 jobs would soon be eliminated, most of them production jobs in its California factories, said that 1,500 white-collar jobs would disappear from its St. Louis headquarters. (NY Times, Jan 27/93; WSJ, Jan 27/93)
Throughout the balloon's flight, teams of amateur radio operators in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida were to receive information from the balloon's gondola; this information was to be relayed by high-frequency radio to the Utah State University team. Other flights of an longer duration were scheduled to be launched from Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Central America. (NASA Release 93-8)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor-derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had looked into the nucleus of a galaxy created by the collision of two galaxies and had discovered a pinwheel-shaped disk of gas surrounded by clusters of young stars born as result of the collision. "This may unlock the key for understanding how all globular clusters formed in ellipticals," said Dr. Brad Whitmore of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.
Some NASA scientists, following the "faster, better, cheaper" advice of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden, want to send two small space probes to study Pluto, the solar system's last known unexplored planet. The Plato mission could cost $600 million to $1 billion, depending on whether the probes were reached by Russian or U.S. rockets, respectively. By comparison, NASA expected to spend more than $2 billion to launch a spaceship in 1997 to explore Saturn. (AP, Feb 8/93)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered a group of stars that apparently had been cannibalized of their cooler outer gas layers by other passing stars, resulting in stellar "naked cores" with surface temperatures five times hotter than Earth's sun. (NASA Release 93-109; NY Times, June 10/93; P Inq, June 10/93; B Sun, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93; Science, June 14/93)
SBIR attempts to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small businesses to help federal agencies meet their research and development needs. (NASA Release 93-003)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that an SR-71 Blackbird reconnaissance aircraft, once used as a spy plane, took off this week on its maiden science flight. The plane was equipped with an ultra-violet camera to study stars and comets.
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) recommended eliminating the JPL Edwards Test Facility, staffed by 28 JPL employees and 18 contractors, at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert. If NASA managers accepted the recommendation, the facility could shut down by 1996. (UPI, Feb 8/93; Feb 9/Antelope Valley Press, Feb 9/93)
NASA announced that a NASA F/A-18, modified to test the newest and most advanced system technologies, made its first research flight on May 21 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The Systems Research Aircraft (SRA) was evaluating technologies that would benefit both civilian and military aircraft. (NASA Release 93-95; Mojave Desert News, May 27/93)
A team of astronomers using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope discovered a "double nucleus" in the center of the neighboring spiral galaxy M31, located in the constellation Andromeda.  Hubble shows that the M31 nucleus is much more complex than previously though, according to Dr. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, Tucson, Arizona.
Preliminary results from a U.S. Russian scientific expedition have shed new light on the geology of eastern Russian.  The data was obtained in August and September by NASA and Russian scientists using NASA's Learjet Model 23 based at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. The expedition studied a variety of sites on the Kamchatkan peninsula; the data were to be used to study the geologic evolution of the volcanoes on the peninsula as well as the impact of large volcanic eruptions on the atmosphere and its chemistry. The data were also to be used to model thermal and dynamical aspects of volcanoes. (NASA Release 93-198)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute were scheduled to host a conference in Cleveland, March 30 and 30, focusing on the new world of Cyberspace. The conference, called the Vision 21 Symposium on Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace, would provide "a panoramic view of the research and technology that will assist humans in exploration activities," said Dr. Sheila Bailey, conference chairperson. (NASA Release 93-50)
The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)
An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)
NASA, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and the Southern California Small Business Utilization Council were  scheduled to co-sponsor the 1993 High Technology and Small Business Development Procurement Conference on March 1-2 in Los Angeles. About 200 government prime contractors, federal agencies, and other large procurement organizations were expected to participate in the conference. (NASA Release 93-029)
The Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of five landed January 19 at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Endeavour circled Earth 96 times and traveled 2,501,277 miles during its six-day flight. The Shuttle and its five crew members were said to be in good shape. (LA Times, Jan 20/93; W Times, Jan 20/93; NY Times, Jan 20/93; B Sun, Jan 20/93)
NASA reported that the agency had overcome a thruster glitch to successfully complete the reboost of its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO), adding five years to the spacecraft's on-orbit lifetime. (Defense Daily, Dec 22/93)
NASA announced that during the third week in July  it had delivered the first data sets from the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to the National Space Science Data Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. As a result, researchers from around the world now have access to the COBE data that provided the scientific community with an unprecedented look at how the universe began. (NASA Release 93-145)
A study by James W. Elkins of the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration found that worldwide emissions of the two worst ozone-destroying chemicals were slowing sooner than researchers had expected, and the gradual repair of Earth's ozone layer could begin by 2000. This news came as NASA satellite data indicated that the stratospheric ozone layer that shields the Earth from cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation had dropped to its lowest levels ever. A NASA official said that even with the peak in emissions of chlorofluorocarbons by 2000, it would take about a century for the ozone layer to recover to what it was before ozone-destroying chemicals began to be widely used in the 1960s and 1970s. (AP, Aug 25/93; USA Today, Aug 26/93; W Post, Aug 26/93; NY Times, Aug 30/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Office of Space Flight would assume responsibility for management of the Space Station Program.  Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Associate Administrator of Space Flight, was scheduled to lead the integration of these major programs.  (NASA Release  93-1291; AP, Oct 20/93)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
NASA announced that researchers at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed an ion exchange material that in laboratory tests effectively removed contaminants from water. Tests showed that the new material was easy to use and inexpensive to produce. (NASA Release 93-86)
U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93)
The Christian Science Monitor reported that astronomers who study the evolution of the cosmos hoped that the Hubble space telescope, if it could be repaired as planned this December, would help them resolve a paradox relating to the universe's age. Current research implies that the universe is younger than the oldest stars. One of the Hubble's key missions was to refine what had become the foundation for many cosmic distance scales. (CSM, May 12/93)
NASA announced that researchers had recorded unexpected, huge flashes of light in the upper atmosphere that might affect atmospheric ozone and present potential problems for high-altitude research planes. The flashes occurred above a severe thunderstorm in the Midwest in the summer and were recorded aboard NASA's DC-8 Airborne Laboratory, based at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-167; W Post, Sep 24/93; AP, Sep 23/93)
After a one-day weather delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour lifted off before dawn on a mission to repair the out-of-focus $3 billion Hubble Space Telescope. Four members of the Shuttle crew, made up of six men and one woman, were to take five planned day-long spacewalks in an attempt to restore the full capability of the Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; TRw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; NY Times, Dec 3/93; APn, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93)
NASA announced that a NASAF-15 research aircraft made a touchdown on April 21, using only engine power for control. The plane landed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The flight was part of NASA's attempt to develop a computer-assisted engine control system that lets a plane land safely with only engine power if its normal control surfaces are disabled. (NASA Release 93-75)
Louis Williams, director of high-speed research for NASA, lectured at NASA's Langely Research Center about an environmentally safe, economically sound supersonic transport (SST) that is within the nation's technological reach. The plane, which would ferry 300 people across the Pacific Ocean in four hours, would go twice as fast as the Concord and carry three times as many people. Government research on the project began in 1990 and was scheduled to run another two years; early research focused on the project's environmental goals, which Williams maintained were being met. The federal government gave $450 million to the project.
NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPLA), Pasadena, California, announced the selection of two major aerospace companies as the associate contractors for the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network Phase B1 study and MESUIR Pathfinder support effort.  The companies were Hughes Aircraft Company; Hughes Spacecraft & Communications , El Segundo, California; and Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division, Downey, California.  (NASA Release C93-r)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA's Langely Research Center in Virginia was searching for an easy-listening
NASA announced that a task force established by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to review plans for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission had concluded that "the mission is achievable." The servicing mission was currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA Release 93-96)
Twenty-six Prince George's Country students with physical, mental, or learning disabilities spent six weeks in a jobs program at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, during the summer.  The program, which was under the auspices of the President's Commission on Employment for Persons With Disabilities, aimed to steer more young people into fields like science, engineering, and computer programming. (W Post, Aug 12/93)
NASA engineers believed that they had identified the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine section. A Kennedy Space Center spokesman said that probably a
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected NYMA, Inc., Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for scientific, engineering, technical, administrative, and related support activities of Lewis' mission responsibilities. (NASA Release C93-q)
NASA announced that starting in January 1994, the NASA Science Internet (NSI) would connect research sites in the United States with Russia's Space Research Institute (IKI) in Moscow.  Nine additional Russian space-related institutions were to be connected through what is called the Russian Space Science Internet (RSSI). (NASA Release 93-196)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Jackson and Tull Chartered Engineers of Washington, D.C. for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for multidisciplinary research and development. (NASA Release C93-p)
NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)
Bryan O'Connor, a former astronaut and deputy director of the redesign team and deputy associate administrator of the office of space flight at NASA, said that NASA engineers planned to have three new design options ready by June. O'Connor said that two plans could cut the cost of the project by 50 percent or more. The third plan, which would be based on the current Space Station Freedom concept, would cost more. Whether the redesign effort could be done quickly and cheaply was still in doubt, O'Connor said. (AP, Apr 6/93; W Post, Apr 6/93)
A rocky asteroid, rather than an icy comet, probably caused a huge explosion over Siberia in 1908 that flattened at least 40,000 trees over about 850 square miles. A research team from NASA and the University of Wisconsin used a computer simulation to determine that an asteroid measuring about 65 yards was a better explanation than the comet; the simulation revealed that comets would explode much too high in the sky to fit the projected altitude of the Tunguska blast. (B Sun, Jan 7/93; NY Times, Jan 7/93; LA Times, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 11/93; P Inq, Jan 7/93; WP, Jan 11/93)
NASA announced that NASA and industry engineers had designed and built a new measuring device that would save American taxpayers more than $1 million on a NASA project. The device, an improved "inlet rake,"  measures the air flowing into one of the engines on the F/AS-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle (HARV), based at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Engineers would be able to use the air flow data to help give fighter-type aircraft more power and better handling qualities. (NASA Release 93-035; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 19/93)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, scientists have developed a multifunctional glass that detects pollutants in the air by a dramatic change in color.  Dr. Albert Stiegman, a JPL chemist, and his associates described the development in a paper in the journal Chemistry of Materials. (NASA Release 93-209)
Richard B. Hoover of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was named NASA inventor of the year for his invention of the Water-Window Imaging x-ray Microscope. This instrument should enable researchers to see in great detail high contrast x-ray images of proteins, chromosomes, and other tiny carbon structures inside living cells. (NASA Release 93-024)
Reuter reported that Australian rocket scientists had completed the world's first successful test flight of a model scramjet, a supersonic air-breathing engine that might make sub-orbital space flight common. (RTw, May 31/93)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA announced that it had selected the Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, Maryland, to negotiate a cost-plus-fee contract for the Visiting Scientists Program at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The five-year contract was expected to take effect September 1, 1993; the proposed cost for the five-year period was $31 million. (NASA Release C93-g)
NASA announced that a specially modified NASA F-15 research aircraft had arrived at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The F-15 was to be involved in a research program aimed at substantially advancing the cruising efficiency and flight maneuverability of future U.S. aircraft. (NASA Release 93-115)
NASA announced that Guy Gardner, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight Russian programs, had been put in charge of overseeing two joint missions with the Russian space program.
Writing in the Baltimore Sun, Gwynne Dyer, syndicated columnist, described the plan for "terraforming" Mars held by a group of scientists loosely called "The Mars underground."  One of the leaders of the group was Christopher McKay of NASA's Ames Research Center in California.
Space Shuttle Columbia was fueled for the third launch attempt of a science mission chartered by Germany. The mission, which was years behind schedule, was scheduled for launch Monday, April 26 at 10:52 a.m. (UPI, Apr 25/93; AP, Apr 26/93; NY Times, Apr 26/93; USA Today, Apr 26/93; RTw, Apr 26/93
The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
NASA announced that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of color in space, had resigned to pursue interests in "teaching, mentoring, health care issues, and increasing participation in science and technology of those who have traditionally been left out."  Jemison, who joined the astronaut program in 1987, was a science mission specialist on STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 1992, a cooperative mission with the Japanese to study life sciences and materials processing. (NASA Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar 7/93; B Sun, Mar 7/93; W Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar 7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; People Magazine, Apr/93)
After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California announced that nearly two dozen engineers from the center would visit 22 schools in the Antelope Valley next week to celebrate National Engineer's Week. (LA Times, Feb 13/93)
The Navy announced that it was turning over the Moffett Naval Air Station, located 40 miles south of San Francisco, California, to NASA's Ames Research Center, which is located on the base. The Center was to continue developing and testing space and aircraft-related technologies. The center's wind tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test generations of spacecraft and commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. (AP, Jan 4/93)
Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
In his keynote address at the inaugural University of Southern California Engineering Day, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, emphasized that space exploration involved risks but that they were worth taking. He also said that NASA's specific challenge was to "win back our credibility through performance." ( LA Times, May 21/93)
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)
By using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have concluded that the Markarian 315 galaxy, a galaxy that has been observed for ten years, is in reality composed of two merged galaxies; the collision of the two galaxies is thought to have provided new fuel for a massive black hole, which has a "tail" of gas 240,000 light-years long. (NASA Release 93-006; W Times, Jan 8, 1993)
NASA announced the selection of 11 new science mission concepts in the Discovery Program for further study during this fiscal year. The Discovery missions were selected from 73 concepts discussed at the Discovery Mission Workshop held last November. The potential projects were those thought to have the highest scientific value as well as a reasonable chance of meeting budgetary guidelines.	 Discovery missions were designed to proceed from development to flight in less than three years.
NASA scientists reported in the British journal Nature that a supernova may have caused a huge void known as the "Local Bubble" that envelopes the solar system and many nearby stars. Researchers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that evidence suggests that the bubble, an area about 300 light-years across, was formed by the supernova or explosion of a star about 340,000 years ago. The blast was strong enough that its radiation could have disrupted earth's protective ozone layer and caused extra sunburns on the ancestors of modern humans. (NASA Release 93-036; USA Today, Feb 25/93; NY Times, Feb 25; P Inq, Mar 5/93)
A National Research Council (NCR) study found that Space Shuttle computer software programs were flawed by lax attention to safety by NASA engineers. Nancy Leveson, who headed the NRC committee that prepared the report, said that "many of the same kinds of mistakes that played a role in the Challenger accident are now being repeated with the shuttle flight software." NASA, which requested the study, was considering some of the report's recommendations. (AP, June 28/93; USA Today, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas to become the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Integrated Physiology. The new center would focus on arriving at a better understanding of how different organ systems of various species react to space flight. (NASA Release 93-040)
NASA announced that an ER-2 aircraft, an updated version of the U-2 spy plane, would spend seven months next year researching the ozone hole over Antarctica. The study, part of a joint New Zealand-U.S. atmospheric study into ozone depletion, would explore the extent of the hole in the ozone layer. NASA research pilot Jim Barrilleaux was to fly the NASA-owned ER-2 aircraft. The work was scheduled to begin in late March 1994. (RTw, Mar 4/93)
A November Discovery flight, the second Spacehab flight of the year, was scheduled to carry the Wake Shield Facility (WSF), designed to be released from the payload bay to create an atomic oxygen wake as it circled the Earth. Discovery astronauts would conduct experiments to determine the effect the "space wake" had on them. The December flight of Endeavour was scheduled to be the first servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release 93-10)
William F. Ballhaus Jr. was named president of the Martin Marietta Corporation's Aero & Naval Systems division in Maryland. Ballhaus was director of NASA's Ames Research Center for a number of years. (B Sun, May 3/93)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
Vigyan Corporation, Hampton, Virginia, last week asked the General Services Administration's Board of Contract Appeals to overturn what was thought to be the largest minority-set-aside contract ever, a $180 million pact with Nyma Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for engineering support services at NASA's Lewis Research Center. Vigyan specifically charged both Nyna and NASA with conflict of interest, saying the company's winning proposal listed a current NASA employee "who possesses both proprietary and source-selection information" relevant to Vigyan's bid." (Federal Gomputing Week, Aug 23/93)
NASA announced that astronomers working with the Hubble Space Telescope had some success in their attempts to measure the Hubble Constant and the age of the universe. The Hubble Constant (HO) is the ratio of the recession velocities of galaxies to their distances in the expanding universe. The age of the universe can be estimated from the Hubble Constant and currently is thought to lie between 10 and 20 billion years. A more precise measurement of the Hubble Constant is required to narrow this range. (NASA Release 93-108; P Inq, June 10/93; RTw, June 9/93)
Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)
Nasa announced the selection of 111 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). These proposals and the 38 previously selected proposals came from 130 small, high technology firms located in 27 states. The SBIR program is intended to stimulate technological innovation by using small businesses, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development requirements and to encourage the commercial application of federally funded research innovations. (NASA Release 93-33; Washington Technology, Feb 25/93)
After conferring with Space Station contractor McDonnell Douglas, space officials confirmed that a cost overrun of at least $500 million was expected if costs were not brought under control. They told a congressional panel that the Station was now a $31.3 billion project. The increases appeared to be mainly in the Johnson Space Center portion of the program. NASA's Marty Kress, the Space Station project's new deputy director, said managers were determined to lower costs and were considering various means for doing so. Key congressional aides expressed anger at the news of the overrun, noting that for years NASA had ignored their advice on a design strategy to lower costs. (W Post, Jan 31/93; Space News, Feb 1-7/93; O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)
Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)
NASA released two new Hubble space telescope photographs that show a bullet of gas streaking across the sky. According to J. Jeff Hester, an Arizona State University astronomer, the new pictures show a "shock wave from a colossal explosion of a star 15,000 years ago smashing into a pocket of interstellar gas, heating the gas and causing it to glow." Following the blast wave is a shaft of gas traveling at more than 3 million miles an hour. The images show the structure behind the shock waves in the Cygnus Loop supernova remnant. The Hubble photos are giving astronomers their first detailed look at the anatomy of the powerful astrophysical shock wave generated by a supernova. (NASA Release N93-002; B Sun, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 18/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
Donald Yeomans of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that "There is almost no question" that major chunks of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 would hit the planet Jupiter in late July  of 1994. Astronomers planned to aim virtually every telescope in the world at Jupiter in late July  to see what happens when big chunks of a shattered comet crash into the largest known planet at almost 40 miles a second. Astronomers predicted that the chunks would explode with the energy equivalent to almost a billion megatons of TNT. (W Post, Jul 5/93; W Times, Oct 5/93)
The U.S. Postal Service unveiled a new $2.90 stamp featuring the image of a futuristic spaceship. Deputy Postmaster General Michael Coughlin and ex-astronaut Robert Crippen, director of the Kennedy Space Center, dedicated the stamp at a brief ceremony that was to have occurred the same day as the launch of Shuttle Endeavour. That launch was delayed for two weeks because of engine problems. (AP, June 3/93)
NASA selected Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, a small disadvantaged business, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for Computational Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services to support NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C93-t)
NASA announced that it planned to launch a $550 million-plus mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. Observers viewed the mission as very important for NASA's future; failure to repair the telescope would not only be a blow to astronomy but also would fuel the debate in Congress about NASA's ability to build Space Station Freedom later in the decade. The concern over the repair mission led to extensive oversight, numerous internal debates about the mission, and talk of a possible lengthening of the duration of the mission in order to allow for as many as six spacewalks. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93; Science, Feb 12/93; RTw, Mar 11; B Sun Magazine, Mar 14/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
NASA selected Hughes STX Corporation, Lanham, Maryland, to negotiate a five-year contract, proposed at $121,7 million, to provide support of computer systems management for Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C93-m)
Space Shuttle Columbia was launched on Monday, April 26, on a German science mission that had been delayed for over two months. This was the third attempt at launching the
Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)
According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
A team of astronomers from the University of Massachusetts in Amherst and Arizona's Kitt Peak Observatory announced at a gathering of the American Astronomical Society in Phoenix that they had gotten a glimpse of hundreds of sun-like stars shortly after the stars emerged from the clouds of dust that would have obscured their birth. The team found that many stars begin life in small, tight-knit families and at that stage are surrounded by orbiting disks of dust grains and gas. Scientists believe that this is the material from which planets like Earth are derived. (W Post, Jan 11/93)
NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was to receive a scheduled boost to a higher orbit beginning on October 4, to prevent the spacecraft from reentering the Earth's atmosphere. The reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit decay, which is the result of solar activity slowly pushing the satellite toward Earth over a period of time, said NASA officials. (NASA Release 93-179)
Alumni of the Aerospace Human Factors Division office of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, south of San Francisco, reportedly were exerting pressure to maintain the division as a separate entity in the restructuring taking place under new director Ken K. Munechika. These alumni had prominent positions in the airline industry, aircraft manufacturing, and government. Moreover, NASA created human factors research and a human factors pioneer such as John Lauber, of the National Transportation Safety Board, maintained that a separate organizational structure, combining computer sciences, engineering, psychology, medicine, and other disciplines, was essential. (W Post, Jun 24/94)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope took new images of the planet Uranus that revealed the planet's rings, at least five of the inner moons, and bright clouds and a high altitude haze above the planet's south pole. (NASA Release N94-78)
Kathryn Hire, who worked at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) for Lockheed Space Operations Company, became the first KSC worker to be selected as a future astronaut. (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
Scientists of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which managed the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanography satellite, had been studying data it developed. The findings from two years of monitoring the oceans, which were to be announced at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had risen about 0.12 inches a year from December 1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indicator of global change and supported theories than an increase in "greenhouse" gases was causing long-term global warming. (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94)
NASA announced the selection of Raytheon Service Company, Burlington, Massachusetts, to provide logistics support to the Mission Operation and Data Systems Directorate at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-h)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced the selection of Loral Space Information Systems of League City, Texas, to provide support services for JSC's Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance Office. (NASA Release C94-cc)
NASA ground controllers were to send final commands to the Magellan space probe on October 7 to send it crashing to its death in the atmosphere of Venus on October 11. The robot had been in a highly successful Venus orbit since 1990 but its solar panels were failing and its gyroscopes worn out. On October 12 NASA announced that Magellan was expected to burn up within two days. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, declared Magellan dead on October 12. However, Magellan lasted long enough to radio back telemetry showing how much rocket power would be required to offset the increasing atmospheric turbulence, which was useful data for future designers seeking to use the atmosphere of Mars for orbit purposes. (LA Times, Oct 6/94; AP, Oct 6/94; USA Today, Oct 7/94; C Trib, Oct 9/94; W Post, Oct 10/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 11/94; Reuters, Oct 11/94; W Times, Oct 12/94; LA Times, Oct 12/94; CSM, Oct 12/94; NASA Release 94-170; Fla Today, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 12/94; W Post, Oct 13/94; NY Times, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
Sayed Z. Shariq, director of the Office of Commercial Technology at NASA's Ames Research Center, said NASA had reshaped its technology transfer program so as to make it an integral part of NASA's business relationships with the private sector. In this regard, Shariq said that Government should adapt to industry's practices and both NASA and industry should work together during the research and development, product planning, prototyping, and fabrication stages. In addition, agency staff performance evaluations, incentives, and awards should be structured to foster commitment to the commercial program. One of the first signs of NASA's commercialization mission was the Aerospace Industry Technology Program, funded at $20 million for fiscal 1994. (AvWk, May 16/94)
The Hubble Space Telescope enabled a team led by Rice University astrophysicist Robert O'Dell to survey 110 young stars in a field of 3,000 in the Orion Nebula, which was 1,500 light-years from Earth. As a result, O'Dell reported at a NASA news conference, scientists found that the material required to create planets was common around stars; the same would be true of Earth's home galaxy, the Milky Way. (Reuters, Jun 13/94; W Post, Jun 14/94; B Sun, Jun 14/94; NY Times, Jun 14/94; LA Times, Jun 14/94; USA Today, Jun 14/94; H Post, Jun 14/94)
NASA was scheduled to deliver in late October for Clinton Administration review a comprehensive plan for the United States to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV). Proposals were contemplated that would be funded by business with NASA providing the needed technologies, for two RLVs: the X-34 for small payloads and the X-33 single-stage-to-orbit that could lead to a replacement of the Shuttle. The goal was, eventually, to replace expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). With a declining budget NASA's future depended on cheap space transportation and thus far there was little evidence that such RLVs were likely in the near future. In late November it was reported that Boeing Company and McDonnell Douglas Corporation would announce on November 29 that they were joining to compete for initial contracts to build a next-generation Space Shuttle based on reusable rockets. McDonnell Douglas had led in the development of single-stage-to-orbit launch systems and Boeing was a major integrator of complex programs. (AvWk, Nov 7/94; WSJ, Nov 29/94; Reuters, Nov 29/94; AP, Nov 29/94; LA Times, Nov 30/94; USA Today, Nov 30/94; H Post, Nov 30/94; Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94; SP News, Dec 5-11/94; CSM, Dec 6/94)
Glenn Cunningham, manager of the new program at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said NASA planned a new program of Mars exploration. The program was to begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996. Launchings were to occur every 25 months over the next 10 years, using relatively low-cost spacecraft. Funds in the current NASA budget were to go for designing the first of the orbiting craft, the Mars Surveyor. Another Mars program, the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR), was to establish a seismic network on Mars. The program was to begin with the already authorized $175 million Pathfinder mission. (NY Times, Feb 15/94; CSM, Feb 16/94)
NASA determined it was cheaper to tear down the giant hammerhead crane originally built for the Apollo moon landing program rather than to refurbish it. Therefore, the crane was in the process of being dismantled at the Kennedy Space Center launch pad. (Fla Today, Dec 11/94)
NASA announced that a small quantity of nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) was accidentally released from the Thermochemical Test Area at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, during a test setup. The resulting cloud of N2O4 gradually dissipated, but area traffic was halted briefly and some 46 people were treated in local medical facilities for mild respiratory symptoms. Nitrogen tetroxide is an oxidizer used in some rocket engines. (NASA Release 94-030; AP, Apr 21/94; Reuters, Apr 21/94; H Chron, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; UP, Apr 22/94)
The International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers filed unfair labor practice charges against NASA because of the April 4 memorandum from Jeremiah Pearson, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, transferring several positions from headquarters to Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center without collective bargaining. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)
The Book Review section carried an extensive review of Eric J. Chaisson's The Hubble Wars: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope. Chaisson served as spokesman and director of educational programs for the Space Telescope Science Institute, a NASA-supported group of astronomers responsible for planning and directing the telescope's observational program. According to the author, the space telescope's progress toward scientific discovery was hampered by squabbling among NASA, the military intelligence community, industry, the press, and scientists. Some of the problems might have been avoided if the Hubble scientists had had access to the technical experience of the military intelligence community. (NY Times Book Review, May 29/94)
The Space Telescope Institute released photographs made by the repaired Hubble Space Telescope of comet fragments that were to smash into the planet Jupiter in July. The fragments were projected to strike with the force of 100 million hydrogen bombs, with the explosions so bright that the light would be reflected off Jupiter's moons. (Reuters, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94; AP, Feb 9/94)
A feature article described the potential scenario envisaged by David Morrison, chief of space science research at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, and Clark Chapman of the Planetary Science Institute and Science Applications International Corporation, Tucson. Their 20-year study of asteroids led them to predict that the Earth was on a calamitous collision course with an asteroid that could kill 1 billion or 2 billion people. The odds of the collision in any one year were 1 in 500,000. (USA Today, Feb 8/94)
NASA announced that the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) was awarding the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon management team the CNES Medal in recognition of their achievements. Seven team members from NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, and the CNES project office received the awards.Launched August 10, 1992, TOPEX/Poseidon continued to study the topography of the oceans. (NASA Release 94-132)
NASA announced that it had released the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Cassini mission to Saturn, which would be available for public review and comment over a 45-day period. Cassini was a cooperative scientific mission of the U.S. and European space agencies scheduled for launch in October 1997 for a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey to Saturn. (NASA Release 94-174)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that members of the NASA Hubble Space Telescope Recovery Team would receive the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association on May 6 for their outstanding work. (NASA Release 94-71; H Post, May 6/94)
A critical article broke down the percentages NASA would devote to various programs during the 1995 fiscal year, out of the $14.4 billion approved by Congress. The following categories were listed: Space Shuttle, 25 percent; NASA bureaucracy, 15 percent; Space Station, 15 percent; Mission to Planet Earth, 9 percent; physics and astronomy, 8 percent; aeronautics, 6 percent; planetary exploration, 5 percent; advanced concepts and technology, 4 percent; mission communications, 3 percent; launch services, 2 percent; life and microgravity sciences, 2 percent; space communication and telecommunications, 1 percent; new construction, 1 percent; safety office, .5 percent; inspector general, .5 percent. Not included were wind tunnel operations. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
Roger Bonnet, science director of the European Space Agency (ESA), stated in an interview that the ESA, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, sought some $350 million from member states to fund the first in a series of lunar programs that could end in a manned moon station within 25 years. The first European emissary to the moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (Lunar European Demonstration Approach), could land on the moon by 2001. LEDA would carry instruments to measure the darkness of the lunar sky, the frequency of meteorite impacts, and the stability of the ground, factors that would affect the functioning of a future astronomical observatory. LEDA would also need to analyze lunar soil for components to be used in the construction and operation of a permanent station. Such a European approach would bypass NASA's plans for an orbiting Space Station, a plan with which many European countries had become disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of a contract for logistics services to Pioneer Contract Services, Inc., Houston. (NASA Release C94-ee)
NASA's appointment of France Cordova as the agency Senior Scientific Adviser, on a three-year leave of absence from Pennsylvania State University was featured. She was to serve as the principal link between NASA and the science community and ensure that NASA programs were regarded as scientifically and technologically well-founded. She was also to coordinate an integrated strategic plan for all the scientific disciplines within NASA. (The Penn Stater, Feb/94)
NASA created or saved an estimated 5,300 direct and indirect jobs in the U.S. economy in the preceding 18 months because of technology transfer programs at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Of these, some 1,170 were in Alabama, according to Harry Craft Jr., manager of the MSFC Technology Transfer Office, 1,078 in Pennsylvania, and 430 in Tennessee. Most of the companies helped by the Office were small businesses. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 24/94)
Some 100 astronomers from around the world, including Tim Livengood from the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, traveled to the European Southern Observatory at La Silla in the mountains of northern Chile, to view the collision of the comet with Jupiter in July. (W Times, Aug 7/94)
Although NASA as yet lacked congressional approval for a proposed $2 billion wind tunnel complex for testing commercial aircraft, California's congressional delegation lobbied NASA's Administrator Daniel Goldin to have the wind tunnel built in California at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View. Goldin refused to discuss the subject. Virginia also expressed interest in being a site for the wind tunnels, according to Representative Robert C. Scott. (LA Times, Apr 12/94; SF Chron, Apr 12/94; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 12/94; LA Times, Apr 12/94; Daily Press, Apr 20/94)
Wilbur Trafton, NASA's Space Station program director, who was in Houston to attend the Space Exploration 94 conference sponsored by the NASA Alumni League, said several Chinese officials attending a gathering of aerospace professionals in Huntsville, Alabama, asked informally about joining the U.S.-led International Space Station program. They were urged to pursue their goal through diplomatic channels. (H Chron, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94)
NASA announced the selection of a team led by Lockheed Space Operations, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a contract to provide propulsion test and technical services at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Hancock County, Mississippi. (NASA Release C94-aa)
Disagreements continued to exist between the United States and Russia over the Salyut FGB "space tug" with regard both to the tug's price and the cost of launching it, which Russia wanted the United States to pay. Khrunichev Machine Building Enterprise was in the early stage of working on the tug. An agreement was worked out on November 10 about the medical certification process for joint flights, under which each country would accept the medical certification of the other's space flight personnel until prelaunch examinations were performed 30-45 days in advance of Russian Soyuz flights and 10 days in advance of U.S. Shuttle flights. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)
In anticipation of spending cuts when the new fiscal year would begin October 1, NASA had begun to cut civil service and contractor positions at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at Cape Canaveral. Although NASA was eliminating four times as many jobs as in the previous two years, KSC contractors were obliged to let 17 workers go for every government job eliminated. These cuts were taking place despite NASA's plan for eight Shuttle launches in the coming year. (O Sen Star, Aug 14/94)
Astronomer Alexander Wolszczan at Pennsylvania State University in an article published in Science magazine, claimed "irrefutable evidence" of at least two planets orbiting a nearby star--the first confirmed observation of planets outside the Earth's solar system. The planets were in orbit around an unusual neutron star located 1,200 light-years away in the constellation Virgo. Various NASA staff members commented on the discovery. Robert Millis, director of the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, said NASA had a major effort underway to search for planets around stars but its program focused on ordinary stars like the sun. (LA Times, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; P Inq, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc., of San Diego, California, for contract negotiations for two definite launches and options for seven added launches using the Atlas intermediate expendable launch vehicle. The first mission was to be the Earth Observing System-AM-1 spacecraft scheduled for 1998. (NASA Release C94-g)
NASA announced its selection of NSI Technology Services of Sunnyvale, California, for a contract to provide engineering, technical, logistical, and administrative technical services to support two airborne science aircraft at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-bb)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had found a new quasar, a mere 600 million light years away in Earth's cosmic backyard, as opposed to other quasars that were billions of light years away. The discovery of a quasar in galaxy Cygnus A would give astronomers their first opportunity for detailed study of a quasar. (NASA Release 94-160)
NASA announced the discovery in the southern constellation Scorpius of an unusually bright X-ray source by an instrument aboard NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. It remained to be determined whether the new source was a black hole, a pulsar, or some new object, according to B. Alan Harmon of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 94-140)
Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, received the Distinguished Executive Presidential Rank Award. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 6/94)
NASA was learning to "fly leaner" as a result of a shrinking budget. Examples given were that launches now were no longer scheduled on weekends when overtime would need to be paid and if the weather were bad, liftoff was called off before fueling, saving $400,000 in tanking costs. More than 1,400 Shuttle-processing jobs had been eliminated at the Kennedy Space Center in the previous three years and various Shuttle improvements had been deferred. (W Times, Nov 13/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a life sciences support services contract to Dynamac Corporation, Rockville, Maryland. The contract supported Kennedy's Biomedical Operations and Research Office and the Payload Management and Operations Directorate in program management support for life sciences activities. The work included processing medical, biomedical, and biological flight experiments for launch and landing in addition to continuing research on NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support System, a bioregenerative concept for long-term space travel. In addition, Dynamac would be responsible for environmental and ecological monitoring of Kennedy's premises, located on a national wildlife refuge. (NASA Release C94-kk)
A former NASA researcher and subcontractor at the Johnson Space Center, Jong-Hun Lee, was ordered deported as a suspected North Korean agent. The action followed a hearing at which he was not allowed to see all the evidence against him. (AP, Sep 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of 38 college students for an intensive six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The summer residence training program was for undergraduate students majoring in life sciences, bioengineering, and related science and engineering fields. (NASA Release 94-95)
The Wide Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) spacecraft was designed to use recent advances in large format infrared technology to answer some key questions concerning the formation of stars. The project--the fifth in a series of NASA Small Explorer program missions--was being designed to observe starburst galaxies about 500 times fainter than those recorded at 25 microns by the Infrared Astronomical Satellite in 1983. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory worked with the Space Dynamics Laboratory at Utah State University to build the cryogenically cooled infrared telescope. The three-axis spacecraft, which would be provided by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center--would be the same design Goddard developed for the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite, a Small Explorer mission planned for 1995. The WIRE spacecraft was to be launched on an Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL, which was scheduled to be air-dropped from an L-1011 carrier aircraft. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
NASA announced its selection of Brown & Root Services Corporation, Houston, as a contractor to provide minor construction, modification, and rehabilitation to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-y)
NASA announced that its Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had provided new insights into how stars might have been formed billions of years ago in the early universe. A preliminary assessment of HST observations indicated that a pair of clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud instead of containing fewer than 1,000 stars as earlier thought, contained nearly 10,000 stars. If this were true billions of years ago, it would have altered drastically the early history of the universe, according to Nino Panagia of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-171)
The research of engineers at NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was featured, together with its applications to industry. Specifically, pistons were discussed and the benefits of making them from carbon instead of aluminum. NASA had "working agreements" with Ford, General Motors, lawn mower engine maker Briggs & Stratton Inc., and engine maker K&B Manufacturing Company, that would allow them to use Langley piston technology if they should decide to make the pistons. (Daily Press, Oct 23/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Winston-Salem State University faculty members to participate in the NASA/University Joint Venture Program (JOVE). The program enabled faculty and students to become involved in space science research. NASA was to invest $138,000 over three years to support Winston-Salem State's program participation. As part of the program, two faculty members would spend 10 weeks in the summer of 1994 at NASA field centers being "mentored" by NASA scientists. (NASA Release 94-48)
NASA officials indicated that details of scientific evidence supporting the theory that man-made chlorine was causing the ozone hole above Antarctica would be released on December 19. The evidence was based on three years of data from NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). UARS instruments had found chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in electronics and refrigeration systems in the stratosphere. The stratospheric ozone layer was responsible for protecting people, animals, and plants from too much ultraviolet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA Release 94-215; UP, Dec 19/94; Reuters, Dec 19/94; LA Times, Dec 20/94; NY Times, Dec 20/94; W Post, Dec 20/94; W Times, Dec 20/94; USA Today, Dec 20/94; WSJ, Dec 20/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94; H Chron, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 20/94; C Trib, Dec 20/94; AP, Dec 20/94)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had discovered the best evidence yet of a black hole in the constellation Virgo. The proof consisted of a whirlpool of hot gas at the core of galaxy M87, which lies more than 52 million light-years from Earth. The stars in the whirlpool appeared to be streaming toward the galaxy's center and then into orbits bound to an apparent black hole hidden at M87's core. Data from the Hubble spectrometer, used to measure the velocity of stars orbiting within the nucleus of the M57 galaxy, also appeared to confirm the black hole. Sally Heap, a NASA astronomer, at a national meeting of the American Astronomical Society, commented on the Hubble findings in terms of her own research. (NASA Release 94-82; Fla Today, May 25/94; B Sun, May 26/94; USA Today, May 26/94; W Post, May 26/94; NY Times, May 26/94; W Times, May 26/94; Fla Today, May 26/94; WSJ, May 26/94; O Sen Star, May 26/94; AP, May 26/94; CSM, May 26/94; Oregonian, May 27/94; Fla Today, May 29/94; AP, May 30/94; H Chron, May 31/94; C Trib, May 31/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 2/94; Newsweek, Jun 6/94)
Major Oleg Kulakovsky of the Military Space Forces, the branch of the Russian army that runs Baikonur Cosmodrome, was quoted as saying that people were leaving adjacent Leninsk because "There's nothing to stay for." The population was said to have fallen from 100,000 to 45,000 since Kazakhstan gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kazakhstan has a severe energy crisis and a chronic water shortage, which contribute to the harsh life for the population. Since the first Soviet manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin in 1961, Baikonur has averaged one launch a month, according to General Oleg Goryushkin, space center deputy commander. However, the space industry appears to be undergoing a crisis of confidence, and in view of Russia's economic crisis, the cost of maintaining Baikonur is being questioned. (UP, May 26/94)
An Air Force panel was completing the space launch modernization study mandated by Congress; and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy was preparing recommendations on vehicle developments. The trade Aviation Week & Space Technology publication advocated the United States' developing a modern expendable launch vehicle with money both from government and industry. The next step, which would need multi-billion-dollar investment, would require "leapfrog technology" such as the use of propulsion, and could benefit from cooperation with the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AvWk, Mar 21/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
NASA was to award a Program Information System Mission Services (PrISMS) contract worth up to $800 million by May 1. Three companies were seeking to win the eight-year Marshall Space Flight Center contract: Computer Sciences Corporation, Harris Corporation, and incumbent Boeing Computer Services, Inc. The winning PrISMS vendor was to manage NASAwide communications, provide some NASAwide information management services, and run extensive computational services at Marshall. PrISMS had a two-year base with six one-year options; 10 percent of the work was to be set aside for small, disadvantaged businesses. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 25/94)
Bowman Cutter, deputy assistant to the President for economic policy, took a lead in developing a space policy for the administration, according to a statement he made on May 26. As a first step, he convened a meeting May 13 at the White House with a diverse and bipartisan group of industry representatives, NASA managers, military officers, and academicians to discuss the space program's future. Although there was some talk about the Space Station, the major emphasis was on longer-term policy. Rather than new programs, White House officials said the focus was to be on streamlining NASA's bureaucracy, focusing research and development to help private industry, and pushing small missions to demonstrate advanced technologies. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
Although the November 3 mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis would be devoted primarily to the study of Earth's ozone layer, it would also entail a study of mammalian development in space, based on research on ten pregnant laboratory rats and their twin offsprings. The countdown for the launch was to begin on October 31. (Fla Today, Oct 22/94; AP, Oct 31/94; Tass, Nov 1/94)
NASA's Office of Space Communications announced the installation of a Video Teleconference System facility at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, to expand video teleconferencing coverage to Russia. The installation supplemented the university's existing video teleconferencing capabilities with the Russian Institute of Space Research in Moscow. The new facility allowed NASA scientists and engineers to work directly with Soviet researchers. (NASA Release 94-28)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and astronaut James D. Halsell gave a talk at California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). Both men stressed the importance of education and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. The talk ended with congratulations to CSLA electrical engineering professor Helen Boussalis, who won a $3.8 million grant for her project to design and build a model space segmented telescope. (University Times, Oct 27/94)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with the Boeing Company on the key elements of the prime contract for the International Space Station. The agreement dealt with the scope of work, program schedule, cost ceiling, and fee arrangements as well as establishing contractual terms for the contract to be signed before year's end. (NASA Release 94-144)
NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center (SSC), Hancock County, Mississippi, announced the award of a contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida, to provide propulsion and technical services at SSC. (NASA Release C94-dd)
NASA announced the selection of Honeywell, Inc., for a contract for developing flight deck technologies in support of NASA's High Speed Research program. NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was to manage the eight-year project. The advanced technologies to be developed included design for a potential future High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C94-r)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
The General Accounting Office, in a report to Congress, said that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology, was poorly controlled and lost about $1 million in property annually. (Reuters, May 10/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 11/94; AP, May 11/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
NASA announced that high-speed information technologies it had developed could support physicians in remote locations on a new medical information superhighway by providing them instant access to information and treatment strategies for their patients. The new, integrated computing and telecommunications technologies developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were scheduled to be demonstrated to members of Congress and the Clinton Administration on September 20 by the National Information Infrastructure Testbed, a non-profit consortium of corporations, universities, and government agencies. (NASA Release 94-156)
NASA showed photographs taken by Galileo spacecraft revealing for the first time an asteroid orbited by its own moon. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory released the photos of asteroid Ida. (NASA Release 94-50; Reuters, Mar 23/94; P Inq, Mar 24/94; LA Times, Mar 24/94; W Post, Mar 24/94; USA Today, Mar 24/94; NY Times, Mar 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division, Seattle, Washington, for a contract to provide the Shuttle Upper Stage system with related integration and launch support services for the space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). (NASA Release C94-q)
Sandy Valenti, project team leader at NASA's Lewis Research Center, said the Center had compiled an inventory of space-related technology that has relevance to biotechnology and the work of medical researchers in northeastern Ohio. NASA's goal was to support existing organizations in he community, such as local hospitals and universities. Five specific research areas in which NASA could provide technological support were fluid mechanics, electronics, communication and instrumentation, materials development and structural design, surface modification, and energy storage systems. (Crain's Cleveland Business, May 30/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center obtained an Andros robot to increase the safety of its workforce and save time and money. The robot could perform such tasks as deflating Space Shuttle tires and checking for bombs, which would be dangerous for humans. (Fla Today, Oct 30/94)
The Boeing Company denied any intentional wrongdoing but paid the U.S. Government $75 million to settle accusations that it systematically overcharged and mischarged the Government on military contracts. U.S. Attorney Kate Pflaumer said the most egregious mischarging was in Boeing's divisions that explored artificial intelligence applications to robotics, military command and control, high-speed jets, and Space Stations. Boeing admitted having improperly charged the Government several million dollars in costs incurred in selling aircraft overseas and having charged the Government millions of dollars for hazardous-waste disposal. (NY Times, Apr 30/94; WSJ, Apr 30/94)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
Boyce Mix, deputy manager for the Shuttle main engine program at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, said that technicians at Paragon Precision Products of Valencia, California, had used a super-strength glue for as many as six years to make unauthorized repairs on Space Shuttle engines, without the knowledge of company officers. A January inspection revealed the glue and the situation was corrected. (AP, Feb 11/94; Reuters, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; NY Times, Feb 13/94; USA Today, Feb 14/94)
Students and teachers at Alvin High School in Texas, with the assistance of a neighboring community college and members of the Consortium for Aerospace Technology Education (CATE), were building their own space center similar to that at the Control Center Complex of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC). Frank Hughes, chief of the Flight Training Division at JSC, initiated the CATE program, which integrated cooperation from industry (Rockwell) with that of community colleges and universities. (H Chron, Dec 14/94)
In a report by the House Government Operations Committee it concluded that NASA's sloppy management had resulted in some $14 billion of NASA equipment--including computers and construction equipment--ending up in the hands of contractors. Moreover, NASA had failed to curb unallowable contract costs. Furthermore, NASA's recordkeeping was so bad that it was almost impossible to edit NASA's books. In addition, Committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, said NASA's "planning is so unrealistic that budgets are hopelessly optimistic." A report in another context concerning Houston's Johnson Space Center, dealt with equipment failures and human errors resulting from carelessness or stupidity. (Tampa Tribune, Nov 24/94; O Sen Star, Nov 24/94; H Post, Nov 30/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Space Grant Consortiums: Virginia and Colorado, and two universities: Pennsylvania and Cincinnati, to participate in the Student Launch Program. The program was intended to provide undergraduate students hands-on experience in flying space and Earth science experiments on suborbital sounding rockets and scientific balloons. (NASA Release 94-113)
Mars Pathfinder, the first of NASA's Discovery missions, was beginning construction in preparation for launch in two years' time. Anthony J. Spear, project manager for the Mars Pathfinder project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said fabrication of the cruise portion's structure had begun; final assembly of the spacecraft was to begin in June 1995. Testing of various kinds would follow with the spacecraft being shipped to Cape Canaveral for launch by early September 1996. The primary goal was an engineering demonstration of a low-cost Martian landing system. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
Possible evidence of a new planetary system only 52 light-years away arising from observation of a star named Beta Pictoris was published in Nature. Harold F. Levinson and colleagues at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio showed how a system of planets and comets could account for the phenomena seen near the star. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled some of these new discoveries. Planet hunter Charles M. Telesco at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama said of Levinson's work, "Whenever you can put a body of evidence into a coherent picture like that, everybody feels much better." (CSM, Dec 1/94; H Post, Dec 1/94)
Andrea Donnellan, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, stated that Oat Mountain in the Santa Susana range, north of the San Fernando Valley, had jumped several inches during the 6.6 earthquake that hit Los Angeles January 17. NASA collected data from a global network of 45 stations. (NASA Release 94-19; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 13/94; National Black Review, Feb/Mar/94)
As part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program, NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) was using its National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex to study and curb the noise from the takeoff exhaust or "plume" of turbulent air in the wake of future supersonic jetliners without affecting takeoff performance. Project Manager Paul Soderman, an aeronautical and acoustical engineer, said that such future aircraft would have to comply with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. An exhaust nozzle of an "ejector suppressor" type was being studied by laser and infrared video. (NASA Release, Jan 31/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a contract to Rockwell International Corporation, Downey, California, to continue providing Shuttle Orbiter logistics operations requirements. (NASA Release C94-hh)
NASA announced that aerospace industry engineers were finding NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT) at the Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, was saving them time and money in testing a model of a next-generation supersonic transport. The RAWT was equipped with a computer and video camera that allowed them to send real-time test data to engineers at aerospace companies nationwide. (NASA Release 94-186)
France's national space agency CNES launched a public relations campaign featuring its astronauts in order to improve strained relations between CNES and the inhabitants of French Guiana on South America's northeast coast, where the Ariane rocket series was launched. The Guiana space center gave France independent launch capacity for civilian and military satellites. (Reuters, Nov 19/94)
In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)
NASA Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn L. Huntoon announced a number of changes designed to assure the success of the Shuttle and International Space Station programs. Changes included the establishment of a new Projects Office, a new Business Management Directorate, and a new Information Systems Directorate; encouragement of rotational assignments and "teaming"; and new leadership appointments. Larry Bourgeois became head of the Projects Office, Terrence Hesse became director of the Business Management Directorate, and Jane Stearns became director of the Information Systems Directorate. A number of other appointments also were announced. (NASA Release 94-036; H Chron, Jun 17/94; H Post, Jun 17/94)
Paul F. Holloway, Director of NASA's Langley Research Center, said the Center had no desire to serve as a site for the two new wind tunnels. The Center feared its existing research would suffer if the new structures were located there. California, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Washington were vying as wind tunnel sites. (Daily Press, Apr 27/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)
The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)
Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)
Lawrence Dietlein, assistant director for life sciences at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, said that in 1963 and 1974 the Center conducted experiments involving the use of very small doses of radiation on humans. The experiments, done with the consent of the subjects, concerned bone loss and weightlessness during space flight. (Reuters, Feb 17/94; W Times, Feb 18/94; USA Today, Feb 18/94)
In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
Numerous federal agencies, including NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), were accused in a Senate report of "offloading" by devising elaborate practices for circumventing federal law so that hundreds of millions of dollars in government business could go to favored companies. The Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee on oversight of government management said they had "abused and misused" the law and otherwise could have cut costs by half. (W Post, Jan 28/94)
NASA announced the selection of a research consortium headed by IBM to carry out research and test computer systems for a new national aeroscience research program using parallel computer technology. NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was to be the main computational site for the new program (NASA Release C94-k)
NASA announced that the first cooperative space flight research between NASA and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) was intended to help scientists better understand the effects of microgravity on the growth of human bone and muscle cells during space flight. It might also increase understanding of changes in muscle and bone on Earth after severe injury, certain degenerative diseases, or prolonged bedrest. This research was to be a part of the April Space Shuttle mission. (NASA Release 94-55)
NASA in a cooperative agreement notice called on third parties to develop public-use applications of its remote sensing databases in order to make use of the reams of Earth and space science data collected to date. Paul Hunter, Program Manager for NASA's Information Infrastructure Technology Applications program, said NASA planned to grant about eight to 10 large awards of $500,000 to $1.5 million per year, and eight to 20 smaller awards of about $100,000 to $300,000. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 11/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, awarded the Computer Sciences Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, an eight-year contract to provide Program Information Systems Mission Services (PrISMS). (NASA Release C94-l; W Post, May 4/94)
Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)
The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)
Dr. Carolyn Huntoon, the new Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), appointed George W.S. Abbey as Deputy Director of JSC. He succeeded Paul J. "P.J." Weitz, who was to serve as Acting Associate Director during transition of the new Center management team and who had been the Center's Deputy Director since 1987 and Acting Director since August 1993. (NASA Release 94-26; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had taken an important step toward determining the age and size of the universe. They had been able to calculate with considerable precision the distance to a remote galaxy, M100, in the Virgo cluster of galaxies. This measurement established the distance to the cluster as 56 million light-years (with an uncertainty of +/- 6 million light-years). The research results, which were to be further refined, were being published in the October 27 issue of Nature. The overall conclusion was that the universe was only 8 billion to 12 billion years old. (NASA Release 94-180; Reuters, Oct 26/94; NY Times, Oct 27/94; W Post, Oct 27/94; USA Today, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; C Trib, Oct 27/94; Bakersfield Californian, Oct 27/94; CSM, Oct 28/94; W Times, Oct 29/94; Time, Nov 7/94; U.S. News and World Report, Nov 7/94)
The Mars Observer spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. NASA officials reported the probable cause of communication loss as a rupture in the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine--MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have put the craft in a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. Goldin asked Dr. Wes Huntress, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science, to conduct a thorough review of the findings and recommendations and to report back in the near future on corrective actions to be taken by NASA. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
The French national space agency CNES proposed for government approval developing a series of small spacecraft to broaden science mission opportunities at lower cost. If approved in 1995, France would invite other European countries or the United States to participate. According to Pierre Contreras, head of the System Engineering Division at the CNES Toulouse Space Center, satellites weighing about 500 kilograms were contemplated. The first flight would be a radar altimeter spacecraft designed as a follow-on to the NASA/CNES TOPEX/Poseidon sea surface topography mission currently underway. The chairman of the European Space Agency's (ESA) Space Science Advisory Committee, Lodewijk Woltjer, said that all ESA members "like the idea of small missions because of their low costs, but for most of ESA's objectives small satellites are too small." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
Space Tec Ventures, a Hampton, Virginia, company created by Joseph Casas, helped NASA's Langley Research Center in Virginia build a laser scheduled to be be used to monitor Earth's environment from space. The laser was to measure the amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and was to be aimed at Earth from Space Shuttle Endeavour's cargo bay. The firm built two other lasers that were scheduled for NASA flights in August and September.
Dr. Robert Wingate of NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, as chairman of an investigation board appointed by Jeremiah Pearson, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, released a study of the cause of an anomaly on Shuttle Discovery--STS-51. During deployment of the ACTS communication satellite, commands for firing a single explosive cord caused the firing of both primary and backup cords, which ruptured a containment tube and released debris into the cargo bay. The study described the primary and contributing causes--a ten-year-old design flaw--and made recommendations for corrections. (NASA Note to Editors 94-8, USA Today, Jan 28/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
Scientists said that the first spacecraft to fly over the sun's south pole--the Ulysses probe, a joint project of the European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA--reached the climax of a 3 billion-kilometer journey through space the week of September 12. As it did so, 80 of the project's 120 scientists met at ESA's research center in the Dutch town of Noordwijk to assess data gained during the four-year space odyssey. Ulysses' chief scientist Richard Marsden believed that the mission would give scientists greater insight into how the solar wind interfered with radio communications and electrical devices on Earth. (Reuters, Sep 16/94)
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in Huntington Beach, California, to reconfigure the Delta Clipper experimental vehicle (DC-X) using advanced lightweight materials and advanced auxiliary propulsion systems. NASA was acquiring the DC-X from the Department of Defense to test new technologies needed to develop a reusable launch vehicle that could assist NASA's ultimate goal of gaining low-cost access to space. (NASA Release 94-125)
A Youth Science Symposium, "Your Place in Space," drew 400 middle school students to the California Museum of Science and Industry. Randii Wessen, a science systems engineer with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, was an instructor in one of the space-age exercises. Other students launched rockets and learned the fundamentals of comets and rockets. (LA Times, Dec 16/94)
NASA and contractor engineers were studying a number of existing engine designs as they tried to lower the propulsion technology risk for private development of a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) in the early 2000s. Operability rather than performance would be the key to any RLV engine. According to Len Worlund, director of the Advanced Transportation Technology Office at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to get reusability, NASA and its partners were working to build components that better withstood repeated firings. They were also trying to lower the high turbine temperatures that had saddled the Shuttle's engines with crack-prone cooling shields that required frequent repairs. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) was making components and expected to integrate the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) by early June 1995. NEAR was the second mission approved in NASA's Discovery program but would be the first to be launched. To make a scheduled January 1999 encounter with 433 Eros--a silicate rock asteroid--NEAR would need to be launched within a two-week period beginning February 17, 1996. It would be launched on a Delta 2 and would swing by Earth in 1998 so that its plane could be changed to match that of Eros. The spacecraft would carry four instruments: a visible imager, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a near infrared spectrograph, and a magnetometer. In entrusting to APL its first planetary science mission to be developed outside the agency, NASA turned to a laboratory experienced in rapid, inexpensive space programs. APL was responsible for three other proposals that NASA was considering under the Discovery program. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
Jeffrey E. Carr, a spokesman at NASA's Johnson Space Center, confirmed that NASA had ordered a safety investigation of a medical experiment scheduled for spaceflight in 1995 after an astronaut collapsed and required emergency treatment during a test of a chemical used in the research. It was later revealed that the incident occurred to Bonnie J. Dunbar, while in Houston for training in October; a review board was to examine the incident. (AP, Nov 3/94; H Post, Nov 4/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94)
NASA announced that as a result of a 10-year joint NASA-Army research program (the UH-60 Airloads Program) at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on helicopter rotor vibration, noise, motion, and airflows, future helicopters would be quieter and more efficient. (NASA Release 94-21; UPI, Feb 9/94)
Kevin Zahnle, a research scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was quoted concerning the large amount of information gathered by spacecraft Galileo about Jupiter that would be lost because of the crippling of Galileo's communications capabilities. Nevertheless, much remained to be learned from the data already transmitted, as was seen at the recent meeting of the Planetary Sciences Division of the American Astronomical Society held in Bethesda, Maryland. (Contra Costa Times, Nov 20/94)
NASA announced the preliminary findings of the investigating team at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, California. The findings indicated that a faulty vertical gyro was responsible for the accident November 22 that resulted in severe damage to a Perseus remotely piloted research aircraft. (NASA Release 94-218)
Flight tests of the X-31 at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base were featured. Dryden director Kenneth J. Szalai noted that the X-31 had completed more flights than any other experimental aircraft, demonstrating methods of enhancing fighter maneuverability. Gary Trippensee was NASA project manager and director of the International Test Organization that included the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Navy, Air Force, Rockwell Aerospace, the German government, and Deutsche Aerospace. The program focused on technology transfer--industrial use of data gathered during government research projects. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/94; Bakersfield Californian, Apr 21/94)
NASA was scheduled to open a new facility, the Global Hydrology and Climate Center, in Cummings Research Park West in Huntsville, Alabama, October 27. The focus of the Center's $15 million annual program was to study Earth's water cycle and the ways in which it affected climate. Research would involve collection and analysis of rainfall, lightning, and temperature data on a global scale, according to Center director Ron Greenwood. The Center was to house 42 scientists from Marshall Space Flight Center, 59 from the Universities Space Research Association, and 46 faculty, staff, and students from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was present to open the Center, which was to operate in cooperation with the other institutions mentioned and to concentrate on studying water vapor. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 25/94; Htsvl Tms, Oct 27/94)
McDonnell Douglas awarded Computer Sciences Corp (CSC), with EER Systems and CTA, Inc., a five-year, $49 million subcontract to support NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The Systems Engineering, Integration and Management Support Services contract would support several space observation missions. (Def Daily, 12 Jan/94)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, announced the selection of Robert P. Madison International for an engineering, construction, and environmental services contract at the Lewis Research Center and at Plum Brook Station, Sandusky, Ohio. (NASA Release C94-i; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
NASA announced the resignation of Jeremiah W. Pearson as Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight and the appointment of Wayne Littles as new Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 94-191; AP, Nov 16/94; H Post, Nov 17/94; W Post, Nov 18/94; NY Times, Nov 21/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin presented Congressman Louis Stokes with the National Association of Small Disadvantaged Businesses Meritorious Award "for his outstanding contributions in the performance of contracts at the NASA Lewis Research Center and turning NASA Lewis Research Center around." (Call and Post, Oct 20/94)
As a result of an investigation by NASA's Inspector General, Omniplan Corporation, with offices near the Johnson Space Center, four related companies, and five employees, together with the Chief Executive Officer Ralph Montijo Jr. and his wife, Guillermina, were named in a federal grand jury indictment. They were charged with conspiracy to present false claims to NASA, embezzling from an employee benefits plan, money laundering, and making false statements to NASA, the Internal Revenue Service, the Small Business Administration, and the Defense Contract Audit Agency. The company had been previously indicted for allegedly swindling $4 million from NASA and its own employees. Omniplan subcontracted through Rockwell Space Operations Company to write flight plan documentation for the Space Shuttle. The government filed a lawsuit to try to recover $3.75 million. (H Post, May 28/94)
NASA's Office of Space Science was scheduled to use the Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Island Flight Facility to manage a Sounding Rocket Program of almost 50 missions worldwide in 1994. One study over Fairbanks, Alaska, was to examine auroras by using eight unguided suborbital sounding rockets at altitudes of 55 to 287 miles. One rocket was to carry a 21-foot-long payload called the Auroral Turbulence Rocket, with 28 instruments on a main payload and two subpayloads. The latter two would be deployed from the main payload in space, and simultaneous measurements from the three spacecraft would permit a study during 9 of the 12 minutes of flight. They were to measure the acceleration process that energizes particles and causes the emission of light called auroras. (NASA Release 94-12)
A ceremony held at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility marked its return to its former status as an independent NASA center. For 13 years it was administered by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, and designated a facility. Kenneth J. Szalai, formerly deputy director of Ames Research Center for Dryden, was named Dryden director. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 1/94)
Bernadette Cardenas, an aerospace engineer at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, filed a civil suit against astronaut Lt. Col. Charles (Sam) Gemar and his wife Charlene, also a NASA employee. The suit claimed the Gemars had harassed her mentally and physically; Mrs. Cardenas wanted to force Col. Gemar to submit to blood tests to establish paternity for her two-year-old son. NASA said the lawsuit would not prevent Gemar's participation in the forthcoming shuttle mission. (AP, Feb 24/94; NY Times, Feb 25/94; B Sun, Feb 25/94; USA Today, Feb 25/94)
A scale model of Boeing's High Speed Commercial Transport was undergoing testing in the supersonic wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the New York Medical College (NYMC) in Valhalla, New York, were using satellite remote sensing and computer technology to predict the risk of Lyme disease transmission. The NASA team, working with Dr. Durland Fish of NYMC and Westchester County Health Department investigators, found that the higher the proportion of vegetated residential area next to woods within a municipality, the higher the transmission risk. (NASA Release 94-123)
NASA announced the establishment of a committee to develop a plan to identify and catalogue, to the extent practicable within 10 years, all comets and asteroids that might threaten the Earth. Eugene Shoemaker, an astronomer with the Lowell Observatory, was appointed chairman of the eight-member Near-Earth Object Search Committee. The committee was formed in response to congressional direction to NASA to develop a plan in coordination with the Department of Defense and the space agencies of other countries. Gregory Benford, professor of physics at the University of California, Irvine, commented on the congressional charge by saying that publicizing such tracking would be an opportunity for NASA for "smart public relations and smart science." (NASA Release 94-128; LA Times, Aug 21/94; B Sun, Aug 24/94)
NASA announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce, currently Deputy Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, as Chief Scientist at the Ohio Aerospace Institute, Cleveland, effective September 18. (NASA Release 94-130)
A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)
A laudatory assessment was given of NASA's Technology Transfer program with specific reference to the Marshall Space Flight Center. According to Harry Craft, Jr., Technology Transfer office manager, the program had three elements: Industrial Outreach, Space Act Cooperative Agreements, and Dual Use Programs. Each was intended to increase cooperation between government and industry. In the Industrial Outreach area, industries came to NASA with problems they needed to resolve, requiring less than 40 hours work. For more complex problems, Space Act Cooperative Agreements were used. The Dual Use Program was a technology reinvestment program in which both government and industry contributed funds and technology to benefit both parties. (Huntsville News, Nov 30/94)
An article discussed finding other planetary systems as an inspiring new challenge for astronomy and pointed out NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's proposal that NASA's core mission might be the search for a habitable planet. Mention was made of Proxima Centauri, the nearest neighbor of a bigger, hotter, brighter star: the sun, which made it an easy star around which to look for planets. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope was used to study Proxima Centauri and recently the Hubble discovered discs in the Orion nebula, which might produce planetary systems. Although the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) was eliminated by Congress, SETI continued with private money and became Project Phoenix, scheduled to be connected with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia in early 1995 and to listen for faint radio signals from hundreds of stars. (Economist, Jul 16/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
An example was given of the way in which NASA-sponsored research in aeronautics, in this case at the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, had practical applications in daily life. The example involved a redesign of big rig trucks, based on Ed Saltzman's research, which made the trucks more fuel efficient. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Oct 16/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California, chairman of the House Science Committee, sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin asking that NASA develop cost estimates for upgrading the infrastructure surrounding Russia's Baikonur Cosmodrome. He also requested that NASA explore options for establishing direct relations with Kazakhstan in the areas of science and technology. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
After three years of testing by NASA's Langley, Virginia research center, the airline industry, industry suppliers, and the Federal Aviation Administration, a new device was approved to alert pilots of wind shear danger. Called the Bendix RDR-4B, it was made by Allied Signal Inc. in Morristown, New Jersey and was being installed by various commercial airlines. The device complements ground-based wind-shear detection systems, known as Terminal Doppler Weather Radars, being installed at 47 major U.S. airports. (W Times, Dec 6/94)
NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft, the first probe to explore the sun's environment at high altitudes, had completed a pass on November 5 over the southern solar pole, ending the first phase of its primary mission. Members of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, reported the development including the fact that Ulysses found a uniform magnetic field at the sun rather than any magnetic poles. In the sun's polar regions, the solar wind was found to be flowing at a very high velocity of about 750 kilometers per second, nearly double the speed of the solar wind at lower latitudes. (NASA Release 94-187; LA Times, Dec 4/94; UPI, Dec 5/94)
Richard DalBello, assistant director for space programs in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that NASA's competion for a reusable rocket to replace the Space Shuttle was on hold while White House budget officials mulled over the technical, financial, and political prospects for the program. The White House Office of Management and Budget must sign off on the NASA plan before NASA officials invited the U.S. aerospace industry to submit competing designs for the rocket. Most U.S. aerospace firms already had competing blueprints for a reusable rocket. (SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA announced its selection of 15 organizations to receive a total of $20 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. The remote sensing database applications would make the information more accessible to a wider audience than in the past. (NASA Release 94-138)
A retrospective article looked at the role that NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California had played in the past, beginning with its establishment in 1947. It asserted that although now Dryden was used only for Space Shuttle landings when bad weather prevented the Shuttle from landing in Florida, it still managed to keep some 1,000 government and civilian employees busy. (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 30/94)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to develop and manufacture an improved, lighter version of the Space Shuttle External Tank. The Super Lightweight External Tank was to be made of aluminum alloys and weigh 8,000 pounds less than the current model. (NASA Release 94-32; AP, Feb 28/94; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
The Clinton Administration authorized NASA to be an advocate for satellites in the evolving National Information Infrastructure/Global Information Infrastructure (NII/GII), the so-called information superhighway. The Administration wanted to ensure that industry--satellite builders and operators and telecommunications users--was intimately involved in formulating satellites' role in the NII/GII. Industry in turn wanted NASA to provide research and development on "pre-competitive technologies." (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
On April 9-10, radio astronomy experts from Stanford University and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena sent a signal from the Clementine spacecraft, which was engaged in a moon-mapping mission for the Pentagon, into a huge crater on the lunar South Pole. NASA's Deep Space Network picked up the reflection of the signal, and the Pentagon was scheduled to undertake a preliminary review of the data to determine whether the moon contained ice. (AP, Apr 16/94)
Russia marked its Space Day in a subdued mood, with the Baikonur Cosmodrome having become part of Kazakhstan and Russia's cosmonaut team decreased from 100 to 40 people. The Buran Space Shuttle was ended after its only unmanned test flight in 1988. But workers remaining at the Molniya complex in northwestern Moscow, established to construct Buran, hoped to work on the MAKS project involving small shuttles launched from the giant An-225 Mriya transport plane to carry cargo into space. (AP, Apr 12/94)
Boeing Company of Seattle, prime contractor for the International Space Station, submitted a proposal to NASA outlining work that would be performed under a final contract and the cost of each task. NASA was to review the proposal and then begin negotiations. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)
NASA announced that based on technology developed for its Hubble Space Telescope, a new, non-surgical breast biopsy technique had been developed. The new technique, known as stereotactic large-core needle biopsy, was predicted to reduce national health care costs by about $1 billion annually. The technique involved an improvement to digital imaging technology called a Charge Coupled Device, a high tech silicon chip that converted light directly into an electronic image. (NASA Release 94-107)
A feature article described three women engineers who worked at the Kennedy Space Center and were among the 120 finalists being interviewed by NASA's astronaut selection board for assignment as astronaut candidates. (Fla Today, Oct 7/94)
NASA announced the award of a contract to the Boeing Company, Commercial Airplane Group, Renton, Washington, for engineering design and trade studies in support of the National Wind Tunnel Complex (NWTC). The NWTC was a joint effort between government and industry to construct state-of-the-art transonic and low-speed wind tunnels to meet the turn-of-the-century needs of the aerospace industry. The Wind Tunnel Program Office at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, was to manage the contract. (NASA Release C94-u)
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)
Retired Air Force Colonel Ken Munechika, former chief of Onizuka Air Force Base's Satellite Test Center, was designated the new chief of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC). (Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)
NASA and the California Institute of Technology (CIT) signed a five-year, five-billion-dollar, cost-plus-award-fee contract to manage NASA's 7,300-member Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). This contract consolidated two previous contracts for CIT, which has managed JPL since NASA's inception in 1958. JPL, NASA's lead site for solar-system exploration, designed and built the Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WF/PC II) recently installed on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). It also runs programs such as NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, its Galileo mission to Jupiter, and the Magellan mission to Venus, as well as the U.S. half of the NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the sun, the NASA/CNES TOPEX/POSEIDON, and the SIR-C/X-SAR radar system on the Shuttle. (NASA Release C94-c)
More than 700 Space Shuttle support personnel at NASA's Kennedy Space Center had been on strike for 15 weeks in a labor dispute with contractor EG&G Corporation. The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, the labor union representing the striking workers, said negotiations were deadlocked over an EG&G demand to limit health insurance benefits for its employees. NASA denied charges that safety had been compromised during the three Shuttle flights launched since the strike began July 5. On October 21 negotiators reached a tentative agreement in their meeting at the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service headquarters in Washington, D.C. The contract proposal covered health insurance, wages, and pensions. The contract remained to be approved by three EG&G subcontractors and then ratified by the striking union members. (Defense Daily, Oct 14/94; AP, Oct 21/94)
As the astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia neared and passed the halfway point of their mission, they continued medical and metal research experiments, growth studies with protein crystals, and physical exercises. Lettuce and other seeds flown on Columbia were to be planted after the shuttle returned and then tested. Apart from the desire for a hot shower, the astronauts had no complaints and hoped they might break the U.S. record of time in space flight. The study of spacecraft glow on March 12 experienced difficulty when the ultraviolet light detector malfunctioned. On March 14, the astronauts began tests of a robot arm targeting system. On March 17, the astronauts started packing up experiments in preparation for landing the following day. Columbia landed uneventfully on March 18, having completed 223 orbits over 5.8 million miles. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 10/94; AP, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 11/94; AP, Mar 11/94; UP, Mar 11/94; B Sun, Mar 12/94; W Post, Mar 12/94; NY Times, Mar 12/94; Reuters, Mar 12/94; W Times, Mar 12/94; LA Times, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 13/94; Reuters, Mar 13/94; UP, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 14/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; USA Today, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 14/94; UP, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 15/94; Reuters, Mar 15/94; UP, Mar 15/94; W Post, Mar 16/94; AP, Mar 16/94; C Trib, Mar 16/94; USA Today, Mar 17/94; W Times, Mar 17/94; AP, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 17/94; Reuters, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 18/94; AP, Mar 18/94; Reuters, Mar 18/94; B Sun, Mar 19/94; NY Times, Mar 19/94; W Times, Mar 19/94; W Post, Mar 19/94; USA Today, Mar 21/94)
Preparations for the launch, the launch itself, and experiments conducted aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia received extensive media coverage. Fueling began the morning of March 4 prior to the crew's boarding. The mission commander and the pilot wore newly devised long johns with tubes that plugged into water pumps to keep them cool while awaiting takeoff and during reentry. Most of the major experiments were to be operated from the ground so that the astronauts could concern themselves with medical tests, some mechanical structures, and observation of the 12 rats used in a bone density study. On March 5, one of Columbia's three auxiliary power units registered an unusually high pressure reading, causing concern; the readings returned to normal when the crew switched to other heaters. It developed that the high pressure apparently resulted from an ice buildup in one of the auxiliary power units. Meanwhile, several articles expressed concern that budget cuts endangered the safety of NASA flights, but NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin denied this was true. As the space flight progressed, two crew members at a time took turns in taking four hours off duty in view of the lengthy nature of the mission. (W Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; NY Times, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; B Sun, Mar 5/94; P Inq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq, Mar 6/94; Daily News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY Times, Mar 7/94; AP, Mar 7/94; UP, Mar 7/94; Reuters, Mar 7/94; NY Times, Mar 8/94; CSM, Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C Trib, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had obtained the clearest views yet of distant galaxies that existed when the universe was a fraction of its current age. Hubble findings suggested that elliptical galaxies developed quickly into their present shapes. However, spiral galaxies in large clusters evolved over a much longer period. (NASA Release 94-201; Reuters, Dec 6/94; NY Times, Dec 7/94; W Post, Dec 7/94; W Times, Dec 7/94; H Chron, Dec 7/94; USA Today, Dec 7/94; CSM, Dec 7/94; H Post, Dec 7/94; Newsweek, Dec 19/94)
The official newspaper, China Daily, quoted a spokesman for the China Aerospace Corporation as expressing confidence it would fulfill all launch services for overseas clients in 1994. China launched the Apstar-1 satellite made by U.S. Hughes Aircraft, from the Xichang Space Center in southwest China on July 21. An Australian satellite was scheduled to be launched in August. China sought a larger share of the commercial space market dominated by NASA, Europe's Arianespace, and Russian launchers. (UPI, Jul 30/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin made a state-of-the-agency address to all staff members in which he stressed that NASA intended to become less costly and quicker during the next four years, ending with as many as 4,000 fewer workers. Kennedy Space Center Deputy Director Gene Thomas, who answered questions after the televised address, said it would be a year of "significant change." (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
NASA announced that it had assumed the satellite-development contract for Landsat 7 from the Department of Defense. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was to manage the contract with Martin Marietta Astro Space, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Landsat 7 was to provide essential land remote-sensing data critical to understanding environmental change. (NASA Release 94-78)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, were observing rare gamma ray flashes above thunderstorms at a rate six times that of previous observations. Steve Goodman of Marshall's Space Sciences Laboratory said the observations were being made by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment aboard NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which was recently modified by ground commands to be more sensitive to such events. NASA planned to bring together investigators from the fields of space and atmospheric physics to study the newly discovered events. (NASA Release 94-204; AP, Dec 7/94)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced the award of a grant to Sierra College, Rocklin, California, for a hands-on community college engineering curriculum as part of the government's technology reinvestment project. (NASA Release 94-63)
Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center began moving into a new $72 million building where all U.S., European, Japanese, and Canadian station hardware were to be prepared for launch. The modern computers and equipment in the new control rooms were commended particularly in the media. (Fla Today, May 13/94; B Sun, Jun 2/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; O Sen Star, Jun 2/94; CSM, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)
Gregory Reck, Acting Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT), said that NASA had tasked an industry team with reviewing the direction of its research and development (R&D) efforts in space communications technologies. The group, which was to be composed of satellite manufacturers such as Hughes and Space Systems/Loral, ground station builders like Harris Corporation, and small aerospace firms like Orbital Sciences Corporation, was to identify future space-based systems, both in low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, and how they might tie into the National Information Infrastructure. NASA's role in the activity was to be directed by Samuel Venneri, head of spacecraft and remote sensing in OACT. The consensus findings of the team were to be used in relation to NASA fiscal year budgets. According to the NASA officials, the key motivation behind the initiative was to minimize inroads by European and Japanese competitors into the 60 percent market share held by U.S. firms in satellite communications. (Defense Daily, Apr 7/94)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
NASA announced that it and the National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU) had agreed July 13 to explore possible cooperation in remote sensing and Earth sciences, telemedicine, space biology, space welding, advanced concepts and technology, and student and scientist exchanges. Robert W. Clarke, NASA Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations, headed the U.S. delegation and Valeriy G. Komarov, Deputy Director General of NSAU, headed the Ukrainian delegation. (NASA Release 94-119)
Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report on the Mars mission to NASA. The spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. Despite lack of any communication with the craft, the board found that the probable cause of the loss of communication was a rupture of the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine - MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have caused the craft to enter a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. The board discussed a number of other concerns of a procedural nature. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, announced the award of a contract for information and communications support services for Ames to I-Net, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-bb (sic); duplicates number on contract announcement of August 3)
NASA encountered difficulties in its desire to deliver planetary video data to microcomputer users because of the limitations of the technology. Mike Martin, a science data systems technologist with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that so far he and his colleagues had been unable to incorporate Apple Quick Time video into multimedia presentations to run on the Macintosh and multimedia PCs. (Government Computer News, Mar 21/94)
Jack Anderson's column indicated that the ties of Isadore Hyde, convicted in 1993 of defrauding the federal government, to Senator Trent Lott, Democrat from Mississippi, were investigated by NASA officials among others. Hyde's company received a contract in 1984 to provide security services at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, and diverted more than $186,000 for personal use. Former Hyde employees alleged that Hyde used NASA resources to do political favors for Lott and put Lott's mother, who was 71 at the time, on the company's payroll. (W Post, Apr 25/94)
NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)
A lengthy review of the four-hour TBS documentary film "Moon Shot," described the extraordinary footage obtained from NASA, primarily from the Johnson Space Center, and the story behind the U.S. 10-year race to beat the Soviet Union to the moon. (TV Times, Jul 10-16/94)
Intermetrics, Inc., of McLean, VA, was awarded an $81 million, 10-year contract as part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. It provide Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of the Earth-Observing system (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), for the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland. EOS was projected to generate about 1 trillion bytes of new data per day, offering access to data on the Earth's ecosystem, permitting scientists to distinguish natural from human-made changes. (NASA Release C94-b)
NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center released their annual economic impact statement in terms of the effect of the Center on Brevard County. Despite budget cuts, the 1994 impact on the economy was $1.18 billion in comparison to $1.32 billion in 1992; the total workforce (including contractors, civil service, and construction) was 16,500 in 1994 in contrast with 18,700 in 1992. The review of NASA operations should result in more job cuts, which would occur in early 1995. (Fla Today, Nov 24/94)
NASA announced that it had begun resurfacing the runway at the Kennedy Space Center, which would improve the wear on Shuttle tires and potentially lead to an expansion of the Return to Launch Site landing crosswind flight rule beyond the present constraint of 15 knots. (NASA Release 94-153)
The impact of a huge Fragment G, a two-mile-wide piece of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, was as great as 6 million megatons of TNT when it hit Jupiter early July 18, according to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. A similar piece hit late July 18, and a further piece was expected on July 20. In contrast the total energy that could be created on Earth with atomic bombs was 10,000 megatons. The comet left a scar larger than Earth's diameter on Jupiter's gaseous surface. Scientists began to study the long-term effects on Jupiter of the comet's impact. The media also focused on the work of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in tracking developments on Jupiter and the excellent view of Jupiter for astronomers at the South Pole. In the final stage of the comet barrage that ended late July 21, four large comet fragments hit Jupiter, creating tremendous fireworks for watching astronomers. Furthermore, as a result of the scars made by the fragments, white hot gases from the planet's interior erupted through the holes in great fireballs. In measuring the dazzling light produced, astronomers believed they had detected hydrogen sulfide, which could contribute to Jupiter's colors. The potential dangers associated with the comet collision with Jupiter led the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology to propose legislation that, if passed, would direct NASA to submit a plan by February 1995 for a 10-year program to catalog "all comets and asteroids that are greater than one kilometer in diameter" traveling along orbits that intersect that of the Earth. (LA Times, Jul 18/94; C Trib, Jul 18/94; LA Times, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; W Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; B Sun, Jul 19/94; C Trib, Jul 19/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; W Times, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 20/94; B Sun, Jul 20/94; CSM, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; P Inq, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; C Trib, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 22/94; NY Times, Jul 22/94; W Post, Jul 22/94; B Sun, Jul 22/94; USA Today, Jul 22/94; W Times, Jul 22/94; Time, Jul 25/94; LA Times, Jul 26/94; NY Times, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 26/94; CSM, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Aug 1/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
Fifty-four minority high school students, mostly African Americans, from the Los Angeles area, began a four-week stay at Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, studying computer science, Earth sciences, and mathematics. NASA sponsored the $300,000 Earth to L.A. program in order to encourage minority students to pursue such courses at traditionally black colleges and universities. Following the courses at Central State, the students would spend two weeks visiting 12 black colleges, looking toward future college entrance. (LA Times, Jul 21/94)
NASA announced the near completion of a $115 million restoration of a unique NASA wind tunnel located at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, which began operating nearly 50 years ago. (NASA Release 94-193)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston as his first stop on a fall tour of all NASA facilities. In a tough speech to all employees, he said he wanted more innovation and less bureaucracy. He stressed that in a time of tight government budgets, "every single person is going to have to justify their activity--all the time." In emphasizing the need to improve business practices, he cited the NASA worker-to-manager ratio on some projects as 2-to-1, whereas 12-to-1 was the private sector goal. (H Post, Sep 13/94; H Post, Sep 14/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
A feature article described the work of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. The astronomers devised plans for a Polar Stratospheric Telescope (POST) intended to reveal stars and galaxies in twice the detail possible with the Hubble Telescope and do so more cheaply. The telescope, which was to hang from a blimp tethered over the South Pole, was to be the prototype for a new generation of observatories that could follow Hubble into space. The Institute, together with Johns Hopkins University, a consortium of other universities, and two private manufacturers, planned to ask NASA for $500,000 to $1,000,000 for a six-month design and cost study. (B Sun, Feb 22/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., announced the selection of a scientific investigation that included the development of a new camera for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). NASA was scheduled to work with Holland Ford of Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, to develop a new camera, called Hubble Advanced Camera for Exploration. The new camera would be installed on the HST by Shuttle astronauts during the third servicing mission scheduled for November 1999. (NASA Release C94-oo)
NASA scientists would like to send an unmanned spacecraft to look for ice inside craters on Mercury, the solar system's hottest planet with temperatures reaching 800 degrees at its equator. However, inside the craters at Mercury's poles the temperatures were 235 below zero and scientists conceived that life might exist. Robert M. Nelson of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena discussed JPL's proposal for a mission to Mercury, named Hermes, which NASA was considering. The discussion occurred at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union. (AP, Dec 6/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Wesley T. Huntress announced two new science missions, both aboard small, relatively inexpensive spacecraft. The first, the Transitional Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE), would observe the sun to study the connection between its magnetic fields and the heating of the sun's corona. TRACE, scheduled for launch in 1997, would have Alan Title of the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, California, as the principal investigator. The second spacecraft, the Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE), scheduled for launch in 1998 to study the evolution of galaxies, would be headed by Perry B. Hacking of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The two missions were part of NASA's Small Explorer Program for highly focused science missions. Small Explorer spacecraft weigh approximately 500 pounds, and the missions were expected to cost approximately $50 million for design, development, and operations through the first 30 days in orbit. (NASA Release 94-152)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of 42 additional proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The programs supplemented the 130 firms announced in December 1993. (NASA Release 94-18)
The Analytic Sciences Corporation (TASC) signed a three-year cooperative agreement with NASA to make NASA's space and Earth science data available to elementary school students and their teachers over the Internet. TASC was scheduled to work with the staff at Franconia Elementary School in Fairfax County, Virginia, to design and develop software allowing kindergarten through 6th grade students to access NASA's vast remote sensing weather data. Fritz Hasler, manager of the project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said that the project should not only help students learn about the weather but also improve their knowledge of the information highway. (PR Newswire, Oct 19/94)
Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)
Two NASA-sponsored scientists, Scott Hudson of Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, and Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, created the first three-dimensional model of an asteroid based on radar data. The asteroid was the double-lobed 4769 Castalia, discovered by Eleanor Helen of JPL at the Palomar Observatory in 1989. The model and resulting pictures appeared in the February 18 issue of Science magazine. (NASA Release 94-26)
Abe Martinez, assistant U.S. attorney in Houston, said that one corporation and eight individuals, including a NASA contracting officer, Stephen Cleland, had pleaded guilty to criminal charges in connection with Operation Lightning Strike at NASA's Johnson Space Center. The U.S. attorney's office was to ask a grand jury to indict another Johnson official, David Proctor. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)
NASA Program Manager for Human Systems Technology in the Office of Aeronautics, Washington, D.C. announced that NASA was designing an electronic chart to make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often fly in potentially dangerous conditions above forest fires. The Electronic Chart Display being developed at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, shows pilots an area's terrain and obstacles on a computer screen. (NASA Release 94-69)
Before setting the final date for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA engineers were studying the results of tests conducted on Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engine that shut down 1.9 seconds before takeoff, aborting the launch. (AP, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 4/94; B Sun, Sep 4/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; Fla Today, Sep 4/94)
Two groups of astronomers, one centered at Indiana University and the other at Harvard University, announced, based on findings from the Hubble Space Telescope, that the universe was billions of years younger than previously estimated. The Indiana group said the universe could be as little as 7 billion years old whereas the Harvard group estimated the age of the universe at between 9 billion and 14 billion years. The Indiana study was published in the September 29 issue of Nature and the Harvard study in the current Astrophysical Journal. According to Stephen Maran, a senior astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Center and a spokesman for the American Astronomical Society, the findings should lead to further research to explain the discrepancy beween the oldest stars and the age of the universe. (LA Times, Sep 29/94)
NASA announced that it would conduct a joint campaign with Brazilian space agencies to study the Earth's space environment over the magnetic equator from August 15 through October 20, 1994, as part of the International Equatorial Electrojet Year. During the campaign, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, was scheduled to launch 33 rockets from the Centro de Lancamento de Alcantara launch range in the northeastern state of Maranhao, Brazil. (NASA Release 94-126)
NASA announced the establishment of a joint government research program that might result in developing plants that could withstand drought, unseasonable temperatures, soil salinity, and other adverse growth conditions. The program, called the Research Network on Plant Sensory Systems, was supported by NASA and the National Science Foundation. The program also was selected as NASA's ninth Specialized Center of Research and Training. (NASA Release 94-213)
NASA announced the development at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, of a new tile known as Toughened Uni-Piece Fibrous Insulation (TUFI). The low-density composite thermal insulation was to undergo its first flight test on the Endeavour in April. (NASA Release 94-54)
NASA announced the signing of a collaborative agreement of the chief executive officers of the nation's 28 largest aerospace contractors, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Education in a plan to improve the nation's mathematics, science, and technology education goals. The agreement was in furtherance of President Clinton's Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which he signed March 31, 1994. (NASA Release 94-190)
NASA's Astrophysical Data Service allowed access to an astronomical data base that ultimately was to contain nearly a billion stars and several million galaxies. The data resulted from the comprehensive National Geographic Sky Survey made by the Mount Palomar Observatory in the 1950s. To this Mount Palomar added a second survey, underway for several years, of the northern sky covering more than 50 million galaxies and nearly 2 billion stars. (W Times, Feb 13/94)
According to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, NASA received 28 outstanding proposals from universities, the aerospace industry, and government laboratories for smaller, less expensive planetary science missions under its new Discovery program. By January 1995 NASA was to select a few to pursue seriously with the expectation that one or two would be developed and launched by the period 1999-2001. NASA set forth specific funding limitations and wanted models of streamlined management of such projects while demanding high quality. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
Astronaut Tom Jones on Space Shuttle Endeavour answered questions about radar mapping and the Earth's ozone layer from students at his former school in Stemmers Run. Among the areas Endeavour radar was mapping were traces of ancient rivers beneath the Sahara Desert. Other areas being targeted for mapping were the Andes and the East Australian Current as well as fires in China south of the Yellow River and flooding in the Midwest. Astronauts assured C-span television questioners that the mapping radar was strictly for scientific not military purposes. At the halfway point of the mission, NASA said Endeavour already had collected 95 percent of the data it was to gather. The astronauts were divided into two shifts of three persons each in order to work round the clock monitoring radar performance, taking pictures of the Earth, and recording observations on tape. An air pollution monitor aboard Endeavour found surprisingly high level of carbon monoxide in the Northern Hemisphere, according to NASA. NASA scientists on the ground were delighted with the quality of pictures and other data beamed by radar.
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)
Terri Bracher, Patrick Air Force Base spokeswoman, said the first nighttime practice rescue operation for Space Shuttle crew who might be downed at sea is to be conducted on May 18 near Kennedy Space Center. More than 200 members of the Air Force, Air National Guard, Marines, Air Force Reserve, Coast Guard, and NASA were to take part. Rescuers were to use night vision goggles and NAVSTAR Global Positioning System receivers to find the floating crew members. (O Sen Star, May 17/94)
The Russian embassy in Washington announced that during Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin's visit to the United States the week of June 20, an agreement on joint space exploration was scheduled to be signed. (Reuters, Jun 20/94; USA Today, Jun 21/94; AP, Jun 21/94
NASA announced the establishment of a Phase One Program Office at the Johnsonn Space Center, Houston, to direct upcoming Shuttle flights to the Russian Mir Station. Tommy Holloway was appointed manager of the office. (NASA Release 94-172)
NASA announced the selection of a system to control microbial contamination in drinking water as both the NASA 1993 Invention of the Year and the NASA 1993 Commercial Invention of the Year. NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Deputy Chief of the Biomedical Operations and Research Branch Richard L. Sauer developed the system together with Gerald V. Colombo and Clifford D. Jolly of Umpqua Research Company, Myrtle Creek, Oregon. The process had applications for long-term space flight as well as commercial use in developing nations particularly. (NASA Release 94-33)
Space Shuttle Endeavour, which had been rescheduled to lift off on April 8, was launched April 9 because of bad weather. In its cargo bay was the Space Radar Laboratory, weighing 23,000 pounds and containing $366 million worth of imaging systems. The system was to bounce radar waves off Earth in three frequency bands to produce three-dimensional maps of ocean currents, river valleys, forests and farm lands, the geology of volcanoes, and features under desert sands. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the German and Italian space agencies developed the equipment. The radar developed a glitch after the first day, but ground control was able to repair it and the results were most successful. (NY Times, Apr 8/94; W Post, Apr 8/94; B Sun, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 8/94; USA Today, Apr 8/94; AP, Apr 8/94; UP, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 9/94; W Post, Apr 10/94; NY Times, Apr 10/94; B Sun, Apr 10/94; P Inq, Apr 10/94; UPI, Apr 10/94; Reuters, Apr 10/94; AP, Apr 11/94)
Space Shuttle Columbia was moved to the launch pad to begin preparations for a July launching at Kennedy Space Center. (Reuters, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 18/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)
New Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich indicated in an interview that he favored a NASA confined to research and development, with remaining functions contracted out to the private sector as far as possible. His overriding mission for NASA was drastically reducing the cost of getting into space. Gingrich praised NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's efforts to reshape NASA but considered the agency still to be "a people-heavy, obsolescent bureaucracy." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
Ecologists Christopher Potter and Steven Klooster of NASA's Ames Research Center processed ten years of data to construct a map charting one month's exchange of the heat-trapping gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and the Earth's land plants and soils. This is a key process in determining the extent to which the release of this gas through burning fossil fuels and land-use changes might cause global climate warming, and this is the first time satellite data have been combined with computer simulation of soil processes. A 1990 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave estimates in billions of tons of carbon per year to try to answer the question of where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton University geochemist Jorge L. Sarmiento hypothesized a terrestrial sink, while Harvard University geochemist Steven Wofsy agreed with Potter that simulation also needed detailed studies of plant-soil processes. (CSM, Jan 19/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight center, Huntsville, Alabama, had discovered unusual gamma-ray flashes in the upper atmosphere high above thunderstorms. The heretofore unseen flashes were detected by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, a Marshall instrument aboard NASA's orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (NASA Release 94-86; W Post, May 30/94)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, and Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan, announced they had concluded a two-year cooperative agreement for the transfer of NASA-developed technology to improve the design and engineering of Ford vehicles. This was the first broad technology transfer process between NASA and any automotive manufacturer. (NASA Release 94-166; H Post, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 13/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and a consortium led by Texas Instruments' Metallurgical Materials Division were trying to use advanced aerospace materials to develop a demonstrator automobile engine significantly lighter and more efficient than the ones in present use. They planned to use high-temperature, high-strength materials developed for the defunct National Aerospace Plane. NASA would provide funding under its Aerospace Industry Technology Program. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1994 activities and provided a chronology of major space events. Of particular note were the flight of a Russian cosmonaut aboard a U.S. spacecraft for the first time and a spectacular cosmic collision that occurred on Jupiter. However, it was the work of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope that dominated NASA news in 1994. Among Hubble results were the following: evidence of a massive black hole in the center of a galaxy 50 million light-years away, supporting Einstein's theory of relativity; observations of huge pancake-shaped disks of dust, raw material for planet formation, swirling around half the stars in the Orion Nebula; confirmation of a critical prediction of the Big Bang theory that helium should be widespread in the early universe; and significant progress in determining the age of the universe--between 8 and 12 billion years--and its size. (NASA Release 94-216; UPI, Dec 22/94)
NASA announced a new Mars exploration program in fiscal year 1995 involving the development of a small Mars Surveyor orbiter. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, was to manage the program, which was designed to study the surface of Mars. (NASA Release 94-20)
Businessman James Robertson of James M. Beggs Associates consulting firm of Arlington, Virginia, pleaded guilty to accepting inside bid information involving NASA contracts at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (AP, Mar 2/94)
Harry Holloway, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications, stressed that both the Spacelab and Mir were critical elements in NASA's orbital research program. During the next three years, NASA was scheduled to fly four Spacelab missions and five of the scheduled 10 Shuttle flights to Mir were to use the long Spacelab module to conduct priority research in fluid physics and combustion. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)
Commenting on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's urging of space scientists to search for a habitable planet among the stars, science columnist Robert C. Cowen viewed such a quest as feasible in view of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. He saw the next phase of the search as involving a look for signs of gravitational interaction of a star and planets. (CSM, Jun 22/94)
NASA announced that Jack Farmer, a paleontologist and geologist at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a strategy to search for microfossils on the planet Mars. Farmer presented his strategy, which was based on principles of Precambrian paleontology, at the Geological Society Meeting of America in San Bernardino, California. (NASA Release 94-49)
NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA continued tests of the Research External Vision Display (REVD), a new optical system allowing pilots to see a runway during nose-high landings without computer-generated views. The REVD, basically an upside-down periscope, is a system of lenses and mirrors that reflects the view of the runway under the aircraft nose to the pilot. NASA started the first of up to 20 tests on the device on an F-104 aircraft at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The REVD approach differs from that used in the European Concorde and Russian Tu-144 supersonic transports, which drop the entire nose of the aircraft in front of the windshield. It could be used on a future U.S. supersonic airliner. (NASA Release, 94-2)
NASA announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had yielded data indicating that gamma-ray bursts show relative "time-dilation"--"a result of the General Theory of Relativity"--suggesting they occur not only near the Milky Way Galaxy but also far away, and thus indicating expansion of the universe. (NASA Release 94-10)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science told the NASA Advisory Council that NASA wanted to launch one Discovery mission every 12 to 15 months on a Delta or smaller expendable launch vehicle (ELV). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center planned to issue a competitive procurement later in the year for up to 15 ELVs, paying $25 million to $30 million per vehicle. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, in addressing a Maryland Space Business Roundtable, warned aerospace contractors that congressional budget cutters were targeting NASA's Space Station; meanwhile other congressional members supported increased funds for human services programs and sought to cut from science and technology projects. Senator Mikulski stressed the importance of investments in science and technology within the framework of a balanced budget. (B Sun, Feb 16/94)
NASA announced the selection of Scientific Applications International Corporation, of San Diego, California, for a contract to provide occupational safety, industrial hygiene, and environmental services to support NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-jj)
Jim Doyle, spokesman for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that additional federal funding would allow the Magellan Spacecraft to continue studying Venus's interior and atmosphere at least through September 1994. Space Shuttle Atlantis launched Magellan in May 1989, and it arrived at Venus 15 months later. (AP, Feb 28/94; W Post, Mar 1/94)
NASA announced the selection of six Hispanic-Serving universities to receive five-year, Institutional Research Award grants for multidisciplinary research in science and engineering. The universities were to receive $400,000 the first year, $600,000 the second year, $800,000 the third year, and $1 million in the fourth and fifth years, for a total of $3.8 million over the five-year period. The universities selected were: California State University at Los Angeles; Florida International University, Miami; New Mexico Highlands University, Las Vegas; City College of New York; University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras; and University of Texas at San Antonio. (NASA Release 94-85)
An article described awards of the National Science Foundation (NSF) to historically black colleges and universities and institutions serving Latinos and Native Americans. Specific reference was made to Clark-Atlanta University in Georgia, which had built a multimillion-dollar science research facility, doubled its science faculty, increased the number of students in science and mathematics, and attracted large federal grants, including funds from NASA. As a result of its efforts, Clark-Atlanta was now a finalist for one of six $25 million NSF grants. (C Trib, Oct 22/94)
Russia inherited the Soviet Union's ambitions in space but lacked its main launch pads. Russian President Boris Yeltsin in a visit to his Kazakh counterpart, Nursultan Nazarbayev, hoped to sign a 30-year lease on the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The outcome was a 20-year lease with an option to renew for 10 more years, and an annual payment of about $115 million. However, should this effort proved unsuccessful, Russia was developing other sites. Russian space scientists considered the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Far North unsuitable for manned flights, but Colonel General Vladimir Ivanov told the Itar-Tass news agency that Russia planned to build a major new space center in the Far East at Svobodny, north of Blagoveshchensk. (LA Times, Mar 28/94; Reuters, Mar 28/94; W Post, Mar 29/94)
A federal grand jury indicted Ram Bachan Ram, chairman of the mathematics department at Hampton University, on seven counts of mail fraud related to alleged plagiarism in submitting a proposal for a research grant to NASA. The proposal concerned "Implications of Pressure Diffusion for Shock Waves," and for it Ram received $100,810 from NASA's Langley Research Center. However, it developed that Ram had stolen the proposal and findings from the work of a professor at Clemson University in South Carolina. (Virginia Pilot, Mar 9/94)
NASA researchers were to go underground on April 11 in Lechuguilla Cave in Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico to try to replicate conditions on Mars. NASA engineer Larry Lemke was mainly interested in the technology aspect of developing robots to collect the microorganisms in Lechuguilla if it proved a useful source. NASA planetary scientist Chris McKay and contract microbiologist Penny Boston wanted to see if microorganisms living inside Lechuguilla could reveal life that might exist on Mars. Bacteria in the cave get their energy from sulfur and iron, believed to be two main ingredients of Mars's soil. Samples taken during the five-day underground stay that ended on April 16 were to be analyzed at the U.S. Geological Survey laboratory in Denver, a NASA-contracted laboratory in Boulder, Colorado, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. (AP, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 13/94; AP, Apr 18/94)
In discussing the role of the South Pole infrared explorer (SPIREX), and two other projects operated by the National Science Foundation's Center for Astrophysical Research in Antarctica (CARA), a comparison was made of the way in which work from the South Pole on the ground resembled work of the Hubble Telescope in space. The astronomers involved, together with those at the Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore were seeking NASA support for a design and cost study of a balloon that would float 40,000 feet above the South Pole and carry a powerful telescope. (AP, Apr 22/94)
NASA announced the successful completion of the first and largest of eight mirrors for the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The mirror was scheduled to be a part of the AXAF telescope which was to be launched in 1998. (NASA Release 94-139)
NASA announced that it had selected 412 small business research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts up to $70,000 to perform a six-month feasibility study under its 1994 Small Business Innovation Research Program. Successful completion of Phase I would make companies eligible to compete in 1995 for two-year contracts in the amount of $600,000. (NASA Release 94-176; Huntsville News, Oct 26/94)
Russian and U.S. Mars mission planners were meeting the week of June 6 at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to define how the two countries could best cooperate in a proposed multinational space exploration program to be called "Mars Together." France, Germany, and Italy were also considering joining the new 1998 mission to Mars. The new mission resulted from Russia's delay in its originally proposed "Mars 94" and "Mars 96" flights. The idea would be to combine major technological elements on which individual nations were already working. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)
An article analyzed the role played by lasers in advancing atmospheric science. Reference was made to the end of the last Space Shuttle flight when NASA was gathering data simultaneously from different altitudes over the same spot on Earth with three laser systems--one on Discovery and two on research aircraft. A fourth, ground-based Lidar (light detection and ranging) at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, also gathered data concurrently. This combination should significantly advance technology toward the goal of a permanent, automated Lidar satellite. The article provided scientific details of the flights undertaken and Discovery's operation of Lite, the Lidar In-space Technology Experiment. (AvWk, Oct 3/94)
A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center's Western Aeronautical Test Range passed a milestone on March 18: the 10,000th mission monitored by the range. In this case it was NASA's F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle's second flight of the day. (Antelope Valley Press,Mar 19/94)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology announced its solicitation of proposals from all sources for industry-led research and development projects under the Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP aims to develop and apply advanced technology rapidly in the aerospace industry and in the non-aerospace commercial marketplace. (NASA Release 94-91)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, announced the award to Gilcrest Electric and Supply Company, Elyria, Ohio, of a contract to provide technical and fabrication services for the Center's in-house research and development program. The Lewis Center also announced the selection of R&R International, Akron, Ohio, for a contract for facilities operations and technical support services. (NASA Release C94-o; NASA Release C94-p)
NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)
Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)
Swales and Associates, Inc., Beltsville, Maryland, received an eight-year small-business set-aside cost-plus-award-fee contract of $275 million to support the Mechanical Systems Division of the Goddard Engineering Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). (NASA Release C94d)
The U.S. attorney confirmed that David R. Proctor, an engineer assigned to the Life Sciences Project Division, was the first NASA Johnson Space Center employee indicted as part of the FBI's Operation Lightning Strike. The Operation began in December 1991 as an undercover probe into aerospace contractors. Proctor was indicted on charges of conspiracy and bribery, among others. (UP, Jun 9/94)
A photograph was featured of the first node of NASA's international laboratory designed as part of the International Space Station. It was being manufactured by Boeing at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. (Fla Today, Oct 2/94)
JoBea Way, a radar scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, came up with the idea for KidSat in November 1993 while working with scholarship students in NASA's Space Radar Laboratory program. KidSat was a project to establish a permanent orbiting research payload that only students could operate to broaden their educational horizons. Sally Ride, director of the California Space Institute at the University of California, San Diego, was backing the project, which would enlist help from NASA and other organizations such as the National Science Foundation and private charitable foundations. The aim would be to begin the first KidSat classroom lessons in the 1995-96 school year. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
Officials at NASA, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said mission designers were being discouraged from including Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) in future satellites. RTGs were plutonium-powered and were used most frequently on spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because solar panels became increasingly less efficient the farther they were from the sun. Scientists and engineers planning NASA's proposed Pluto Fast Flyby mission wanted to use an RTG, but thus far approval had been refused. The scientists were concerned that NASA was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA officials and the White House denied there was a policy decision to end the use of RTGs. In late June, a Technology Challenge team headed by Dwight Duston, director of science and technology for the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, "unanimously recommended the use of an RTG without reservation" for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94)
Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)
In connection with its April mission, Space Shuttle Endeavour was to carry a radar imaging experiment that would collect data on surface texture in several areas of the globe, including California's Mojave Desert and Death Valley. The movement of sand was determined by a complex interrelationship among wind velocity, wind intensity, and the surface texture of the ground. Diane Evans, a geologist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, explained that if the experiment works well it might become a permanent part of NASA's comprehensive study of global change. The experiment also was to study vegetation around the world; in order to see as much of the Earth as possible, the Endeavour was to be launched on a trajectory that would cover most of the globe, with the orbit ranging from 57 degrees north of the equator to 57 degrees south. (LA Times, Mar 28/94)
In a wide-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin reviewed his tenure to date and focused on prospects for civil space flight. Goldin proposed that while private industry would use the low orbiting costs offered by a new single-stage-to-orbit vehicle to profit from commercial space applications, governments would cooperate on building a space infrastructure to support robotic and human exploration. He believed that countries could cooperate in space infrastructure while maintaining competition in space ventures such as the development of a launch vehicle. (AvWk, Sep 5/94)
The joint Air Force-NASA space plane program, which involved NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, ended September 30. It was replaced by a program that focused on the plane's engine rather than the entire plane. Engineers at Langley had conducted space plane engine research for 35 years under the Hypersonic Systems Technology Program and were attempting to solve the most challenging problem: how to propel the space plane into space. Currently they were testing a scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet). In addition to Langley, engineers were working on the space plane at NASA centers in Ohio, California, and Mississippi, and at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. (Daily Press, Nov 6/94)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, announced the selection of EG&G Langley, Inc., Hampton, Virginia, for a contract to provide maintenance, construction, and engineering support for the Center. (NASA Release C94-m)
NASA's budget was scheduled to face possible major cuts according to top congressional sources. The Space Station, Earth Observing System, International Ultraviolet Explorer, Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer, Cosmic Background Explorer, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, Mission Operations and Data Analysis, Cassini, AXAF, and two $1 billion wind tunnels for the High Speed Civil Transport program could be affected.
A feature article described the Voyager spacecraft and the work of Paul Schenk, who had been a college summer intern at NASA'S Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California and was now with the Lunar and Planetary Institute (LPI) in Houston. Schenk became fascinated with Voyager and its images. With his colleagues, Daniel G. Wilson and Robert D. Morris of LPI and Jeffrey M. Moore of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, he created stereo views of various bodies in the outer solar system using images provided by Voyager. (Science News, Nov 12/94)
NASA announced the opening of a new, remote ground station in Tidbinbilla, Australia, called the Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO) Remote Terminal System. The station was to receive scientific data from the Compton GRO via a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite that was moved into position over the Indian Ocean. (NASA Release 94-42)
The six pilots at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base believed that they had the best flying job in the world. Their work entailed a great deal of variety, flying in different types of planes and conducting numerous research experiments. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Apr 18/94)
Following a final flight ceremony at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA retired its last F-104 fighter jet of the 1950s. NASA used the plane, known as the Starfighter, for biomedical research and to simulate the X-15 jet. The F-15 was to replace Lockheed's Starfighter. (Bakersfield Californian, Feb 4/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, refitted over a 19-month period at a cost of $96 million to enable it to dock with Mir, was expected to arrive at Kennedy Space Center from its overhaul at Rockwell Space Systems Division in Palmdale, California. The plan was for Atlantis to dock with Mir during a series of 10 shuttle flights between 1995 and 1997. Other modifications were designed to make Atlantis safer. Atlantis's return means limited space at Kennedy Space Center for processing the various Shuttles. (Fla Today, May 27/94; AP, May 29/94; W Post, May 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 1/94)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, awarded the Engineering Design Group, Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma, a contract for engineering, construction and environmental services in the rehabilitation, modification and construction of research and institutional facilities and systems. This small-business cost-plus-fee contract had a two-year basic period and three one-year renewals, a base value of $13.6 million, and a total value of $45 million. (NASA Release C94-e)
NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)
Joseph P. Martino, senior research scientist at the University of Dayton Research Institute, examined space launch costs in a study released by the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation. Because of high costs, he noted that the United States was now farther away from having people on the moon than when President Kennedy launched the Apollo program. In 1994 it cost $3,500 per pound to put items into orbit. The cost increase started in the 1950s, when high performance of ballistic missiles was needed at any price and has been continued by NASA's policy of developing new technology for each new mission. Launch costs must be lowered and can be by three new approaches: use of commercial practices for vehicle construction, long production runs of single designs, and designing launchers to be reusable like aircraft instead of producing single-use like missiles. (W Times, Jan 25/94)
At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)
The publication of Moon Shot by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton was set for release one month before the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 lunar landing. The book gives a history of space flight and includes many little-known anecdotes. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
The Russian President made an edict in mid-November establishing the state's first experimental space center at Plesetsk. The edict divided the Plesetsk facility, with one part being retained by the strategic missile forces and the other transferred to Russia's military space forces without, however, increasing logistical support, staffing, or pay. In contrast to Baikonur, for which Russia annually paid Kazakhstan $116 million, the Plesetsk Space Center would give Russia its own launching site. From the Soviet era Plesetsk had nine launchpads and was the top secret site for launching more than half of all satellites. However, a critical state of electricity supply to industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast had occurred, resulting from the payments crisis, which threatened a cut-off of electricity to Plesetsk and to Severodvinsk, where atomic submarines were built. (Izvestiya, Nov 17/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
NASA announced that 166 small, high technology firms located in 31 states had been selected for Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Funding for Phase II contracts could be up to $600,000 for a two-year performance period. (NASA Release 94-192)
A 20-month long Justice Department sting operation centered on NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston resulted in criminal fraud and bribery charges against nine men and one contractor. Two other contractors, General Electric Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, which had employed two of those charged, agreed to pay the government $1 million to cover cost of the undercover operation, code named Operation Lightning Strike. The two firms cooperated with the probe and might continue to do business with the government. Among the charged were Astro International Corporation of League City, Texas, and two NASA employees. The sting, conducted by the FBI, NASA's Office of Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and Life Sciences Division in Houston. In October 1993 NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud investigations underway. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; W Post, Feb 23/94; W Times, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 23/94; NY Times, Feb 23/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94; WSJ, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 23/94; C Trib, Feb 23/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, Washington, D.C., was to receive valuable data from a flight test in June of a new laser-diode initiated ordnance system on Orbital Science Corporation's Pegasus air-launch space booster. (The intent is that space flight operations be safer and more efficient than with present electrical systems.) (NASA Release 94-36)
Johnson Space Center denied one of its largest prime contractors, Martin Marietta Services of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, an "award fee" or profit on its contract for the six-month period ending March 31, 1994. The action resulted from a much more stringent contract compliance policy by NASA and the fact that the contractor did not control its labor costs under the terms of the contract. (H Chron, Dec 3/94)
SETI Institute President Frank Drake announced that the organization in Mountain View, California, will work with private backing, despite cancellation by NASA due to a funding cut by Congress. SETI--the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence--was to continue as the new Project Phoenix, with some NASA scientists doing the latter half of the former NASA project, which had been a sky survey by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and a targeted search by NASA's Ames Research Center. They planned to target areas around 1,000 nearby sun-like stars. The NASA project was begun as a $100-million, ten-year project on October 12, 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus' landing in the Americas, but was stopped less than one year into its planned ten-year life. Observations were now planned to last into the next century. Major donors included Arthur C. Clarke through the British Interplanetary Society (BIS) and the founders of Hewlett-Packard, Intel, and Microsoft. It was announced that $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the next year had been raised. (Reuters, Jan 12/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)
NASA announced that it would negotiate contracts with 15 small companies to enable them to fully develop innovative new high technology products they had proposed for application in the aerospace industry. The contracts would be financed under NASA's Small Business Technology Transfer Program. (NASA Release 94-111)
William Baragar, Boeing Company's corporate director of congressional affairs, said that Boeing planned to help NASA develop a High Speed Arm Transport (HSAT) that could cut flying time from Los Angeles to Tokyo from 12 hours to four. Baragar said NASA had asked Congress for $220 million for research on the plane, which could fly at about 2.4 times the speed of sound or slightly faster than the Concorde and carry about 300 people. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also discussed the project with a British newspaper. (Antelope Valley Press, May 17/94; Financial Times of London, May 30/94; LA Times, Jun 1/94)
NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
Flight tests of new terminal automation software confirmed that airline traffic could be routed to arrive at a gate within 20 seconds or less of a scheduled time, while enabling fuel-efficient descents initiated at pilots' discretion. According to NASA researchers, when deployed at hub airports, the complete Center-Tracon Automation System (CTAS) would optimize the flow of aircraft and improve air traffic control productivity significantly. Recent evaluations dealt with the Descent Advisor portion of CTAS but other parts of CTAS provided air traffic controllers with the data they needed to ensure efficient and safe operations. The recent flight tests were performed under a joint research and development effort involving the Federal Aviation Administration, NASA's Ames and Langley Research Centers, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, several contractors, and United Airlines. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
NASA announced that the U.S. component of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) program, the Wind and Polar spacecraft, would experience launch delays to give NASA a chance to examine the materials and process used to build two power subsystem electronic boxes on each spacecraft similar in design to those determined to be the cause of the NOAA-13 spacecraft failure in 1993. The decision followed a GGS technical review at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Instead of launches occurring in April and June 1994, they probably would occur in the next fiscal year. (NASA Release 94-30; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT) scheduled a one-day forum, including an Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP), to encourage high-risk, high-payoff technology development. NASA responsiveness to industry's need was shown by industry participation in all aspects and phases of the AITP program, with representatives making presentations on both program content and structure. The fiscal 1994 budget allocation for this technology initiative was $20 million. (NASA Note to Editors N94-6)
Diane Farrar of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, stated that NASA, the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, and the National Science Foundation were conducting an eight-month airborne study of the Antarctic ozone hole and its possible effects. The study, which was to use high-altitude ER-2 NASA aircraft, was to be based in Hawaii and New Zealand. This was the first NASA-sponsored airborne study of the southern polar region since the 1987 campaign that confirmed chlorofluorocarbons were the primary cause of ozone destruction. (UP, Mar 16/94)
The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)
The Boeing Company announced that it planned to cut about 900 jobs at its plant in Huntsville, Alabama, because it lost an eight-year, $1.05 billion contract with NASA. However, Boeing anticipated that Computer Sciences Corporation, which won the NASA contract, would hire most of the affected workers. (NY Times, May 10/94)
One of NASA's high-altitude, remote-controlled, Perseus research aircraft crashed, severely damaging the plane. NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center operated the craft, which was used to collect data from the upper reaches of the atmosphere--it could fly up to an altitude of 90,000 feet. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 23/94; H Chron, Dec 5/94; LA Times, Dec 5/94)
Jon Linderman, a National Research Council fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, said that based on experiments with rats, exercise combined with growth hormone may help prevent muscle atrophy in astronauts, seniors, and patients confined to bed following illness or injury. Russian cosmonauts discovered that extensive exercise alone was insufficient to prevent muscle atrophy. (UP, May 27/94; UP, Jun 3/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, released photos of the Chicxulub crater on the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. The photos, taken from NASA's spaceborne radar, showed the site where scientists considered an impact 65 million years ago might have caused climatic changes that killed the dinosaurs. (USA Today, Jul 29/94)
Celebrating National Engineers Week, more than 20 engineers from NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center visited classrooms around Antelope Valley to discuss their careers. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of ten organizations to receive a total of $6.8 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to stimulate public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-194)
NASA announced the identification of nine proposals to begin cooperative agreement negotiations in NASA's Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP was established to focus industry's research and development efforts on dual-purpose aerospace technologies that showed potential for strong commercial applications that might also benefit NASA's programs. In addition to NASA funding, each project also would involve 50 percent or more in non-government cost-sharing. (NASA Release 94-165)
Kenneth Iliff, NASA Dryden Flight Research Center's first chief scientist, was featured. He developed a mathematical methodology used by nearly all the free world's flight test organizations to study flight dynamics, performance, and aerothermodynamics. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 1/94)
"Destiny in Space," the latest IMAX space film, being shown in Langley Theater in the National Air and Space Museum, took viewers on a 40-minute hi-tech space ride that examines space exploration by astronauts and robots. (Journal, Jun 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
NASA announced the development by the Ames Fatigue Countermeasures Program of a training course that taught pilots steps to be used against fatigue. The first workshop was to be held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on May 18-19. (NASA Release 94-64)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, and Lockheed Corporation of Calabasas, California, reached agreement to merge and create the world's largest space and defense company. The agreement remained to be approved by shareholders and regulators. According to Lockheed chairman Daniel M. Tellep the merger would result in "significant reduction of costs to the government." Biographic data on Norman R. Augustine, chairman and chief executive of Martin Marietta and president-designate of Lockheed Martin Corporation, were included. (W Post, Aug 30/94; CSM, Sep 1/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; U.S. News and World Report, Sep 12/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
A NASA engineering team succeeded in lifting the endangered Compton gamma-ray observatory to a safe orbit after its propulsion system malfunctioned. NASA said the reboost had extended the mission life of the observatory by five years, thus meeting its original two-to-eight-year life span--it was launched on April 5, 1991. (CSM, Feb 23/94)
On February 9, the Discovery was to launch the Orbital Debris Radar Calibration Spheres, designed to help locate "little junk" orbiting in space, which could pose a hazard to space flight. (CSM, Feb 7/94)
Following a protest ruling in its favor, Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, received payment for its Computational, Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services contract with NASA's Lewis Research Center. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 7/94)
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
NASA officials said that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had not been home to any secret radiation tests on humans, and no workers were unknowingly exposed to any harmful materials. "We do not do anything like that here," KSC spokeswoman Lisa Malone said. Life science research underway at the space center mostly involves growing plants and food in an environmentally controlled chamber at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station as well as some muscle fatigue research in long-term bedrest studies to simulate weightlessness. The Johnson Space Center in Houston and the Ames Research Center near San Francisco are the facilities where most medical research on humans is conducted.
Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)
NASA announced that two teams of astronomers, working independently with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, had ruled out the possibility that red dwarf stars consituted the invisible matter, called dark matter, believed to account for more than 90 percent of the mass of the universe. The results increased the mystery of the missing mass because whatever dark matter was, its gravitational pull ultimately would determine whether the universe would expand forever or would someday collapse. Bruce H. Margon, an astrophysicist at the University of Washington at Seattle, in discussing the mystery of the missing matter, said "It's a fairly embarrassing situation to admit that we can't find 90 percent of the universe." Various theories had been proposed by physicists, such as that neutrinos, electrically neutral subatomic particles produced prolifically in the Big Bang, had mass, or that the value of the cosmological constant, a concept invented by Albert Einstein, was low, helping to account for the difference between the observed density of matter and the critical density. (NASA Release 94-188; Reuters, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 16/94; H Chron, Nov 16/94; C Trib, Nov 16/94; CSM, Nov 17/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94)
NASA's Cleveland Lewis Research Center was scheduled to work with the Russians on a project to use the sun's rays to power the Russian Mir Space Station. In addition, the Lewis Center was to direct the building of two wind tunnels desired by the commercial aircraft industry to help design airliners that fly at 2.4 times the speed of sound. The two projects would help compensate for jobs lost at Lewis by funding cuts. (Plain Dealer, Feb 11/94)
Former NASA Space Station Director Richard Kohrs was a member of a team to revamp the Cassini mission for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also contacted him, reportedly asking that he look at the troubled Space Station program. (SP News, Mar 28-Apr 3/94)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
NASA announced that some 50 U.S., Canadian, and European scientists had begun the second phase of a detailed ecological study of the forests of Canada and the role these forests played in climate change. The Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study (BOREAS) was a large-scale, ground-based, and remote-sensing investigation of the way the forests and the atmosphere exchange energy, heat, water, carbon dioxide, and other trace gases. From April 11 to May 2, scientists were to study the forests during the annual snowmelt. The Focused Field Campaign-Thaw, the second of five parts of BOREAS, was to build on spaceborne data resulting from the first flight of the Space Radar Laboratory (SRL) aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour. BOREAS and SRL formed part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 94-65)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used the European Space Agency's Faint Object Camera on the Hubble Space Telescope to confirm a prediction of the Big Bang theory--that helium should be widespread in the early universe. The July 7 issue of the British science journal Nature reported the way in which the helium was detected. (NASA Release 94-109)
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
NASA announced that Suzanne Smrekar, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, who had been working on data from NASA's Magellan mission, had found that the planet Venus was still geologically active in places, even though radar images of its surface indicated little change in the past half-billion years. Data suggested that there were at least two, and possibly more, active hot spots on Venus. (NASA Release 94-105)
NASA researchers hoped that, among other things, Endeavour's comparison radar images from its second environmental voyage would enable them to peer through the mists of Rwanda to track the imperiled mountain gorilla. In the category of experiments, shortly after liftoff, the crew of Endeavour were scheduled to engage in mixing up a batch of special order concrete, which was to be allowed to harden during the 10-day voyage. After the flight, Master Builders Inc. of Cleveland, who had prepared the ingredients, were to test the concrete to determine the critical particle dispersion that ensured hardness for possible future construction on the moon or elsewhere. An experiment in earthquake forecasting also was planned. Another planned experiment was the dumping of oil and algae byproducts into the North Sea off Denmark to see if Endeavour's radar could detect them. The countdown for the flight began August 15. (AP, Aug 13/94; AP, Aug 15/94; UP, Aug 15/94; Reuters, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 16/94; USA Today, Aug 16/94; AP, Aug 17/94; Reuters, Aug 17/94; NY Times, Aug 18/94; W Times, Aug 18/94; W Post, Aug 18/94; USA Today, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, selected Pioneer Contract Services for a five-year, $42 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for logistics support, such as all handling of property, warehouse, and bondroom operations. (NASA Release C94f)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
NASA announced the development and testing of a new integrated flight and propulsion control system to help pilots land under difficult conditions. Aerospace engineers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, were developing the digital fly-by-wire control system to reduce a pilot's workload and help stabilize landing aircraft. NASA was testing the new system in the Vertical/Short Takeoff and Landing (V/STOL) Systems Research Aircraft (VSRA) to improve takeoff and landing capabilities for V/STOL aircraft in reduced visibility. The VSRA was a modified version of the U.S. Marine Corps' AV-8B Harrier jet fighter, which could take off and land vertically. (NASA Release 94-209)
NASA announced the selection of BDM Federal, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to form a Remote Sensing Public Access Center for demonstrating, testing, and transferring technology to help provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-131; Federal Computer Week, Aug 22/94)
NASA announced the dedication of the Independent Verification and Validation facility, a new research facility in Fairmont, West Virginia, that was to support NASA's work in advanced research, stimulate commercialization efforts, and provide training in a variety of engineering and technology areas. In addition to housing staff working on software for the International Space Station, it was to house parts of the Earth Observing System Data and Operations System. Senator Robert C. Byrd attended the opening. (NASA Release 94-88; Times-West Virginian, Jun 2/94)
NASA announced that it, a team of U.S. aircraft and engine manufacturers, and the Russian aircraft firm, Tupolev Design Bureau, planned to use a Russian Tu-144 supersonic transport as a flying testbed for conducting flight research on high-speed enabling technologies. Included in the U.S. team were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell International, General Electric, and Pratt and Whitney. (NASA Release 94-143; Antelope Valley Press, Sep 1/94)
In a press release, Jim Waterman, Boeing Space Station manufacturing manager, said that Boeing had built 18,700 pounds of hardware to date for the International Space Station and was on schedule to complete almost 50,000 pounds of hardware within the next year. Using the manufacturing facility at Marshall Space Flight Center originally built for fabricating Saturn rocket stages, it had made a good start on three pressurized modules for the Station as well as hatches and experiment racks. (Aerospace Daily, Oct 26/94)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory selected Lockheed Martin Astronautics to develop two small spacecraft that will explore Mars in 1998. They will be half the weight and cost of the 1996 Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Pathfinder. Their low weights of the new orbiter and lander will allow them to be launched on a new launch vehicle called the Med-Lite, which is being developed by McDonnell Douglas. (NASA Releases 95-30 & 196; Space News, Mar 27/95)
NASA tests a new noise reduction jet exhaust nozzle for a high speed civil transport (HSCT). The tests are being conducted at the Ames Research Center. (NASA Releases 95-69; AvWk, May 15/95)
A new Mission Control center at the Johnson Space Center began operating about 10 hours after the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery. It replaces the 30 year old Mission Control which began controlling manned space flights in Houston rather than at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A network of 200 computer work stations are replacing the lumbering and inflexible, but highly reliable mainframe computer. Launchings and landings, the most dangerous parts of space flight, will be monitored from the original Mission Control at least through the end of the year to be sure there are no glitches with the new center. (NY Times, Jul 15/95;W Post, Jul 16/95; Fla Today, Feb 12/95 & 15/95; Space News, Dec 11/95; H Chron, Jul 9/95; AP, Jul 15/95; Reuters, Jul 14/95; AvWk, Jul 31/95)
An article in "Space News" noted that in the year since its dramatic repair, the once-ridiculed Hubble Space Telescope had opened a new window on the universe and established itself as one of the most important observatories ever built. Astronomers were full of praise for Hubble, which had finally lived up to its pre-launch hype. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95; Fla Today, Jan 22/95)
A natural laser in space was detected coming from a young, very hot, luminous star in the constellation Cygnus. The laser was created as intense ultraviolet light from the star excites the densely packed hydrogen atoms in the gaseous, dusty disk surrounding the star. When infrared light shines on the excited hydrogen atoms, it causes the atoms to emit an intense beam of light at exactly the same wavelength, creating the circumstellar laser. This natural laser was detected on NASAs Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) during missions based on Hawaii. The existence of such natural lasers was predicted more than 15 years ago. (NASA Release 95-148; Reuters, Aug 29/95; Fla Today, Sep 10/95; Science, Sep 8/95)
An article in "Space News" noted that in the year since its dramatic repair, the once-ridiculed Hubble Space Telescope had opened a new window on the universe and established itself as one of the most important observatories ever built. Astronomers were full of praise for Hubble, which had finally lived up to its pre-launch hype. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95; Fla Today, Jan 22/95)
Today is the first of three dates that the Earth will be able to view the rings of Saturn on edge in about 15 years. Thirteen of Saturns 18 moons were discovered during past ring crossings. The other two dates in this trio will be August 10, 1995 and February 11, 1996. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory will use these opportunities to fine tune the mission of the Cassini spacecraft to be launched in 1997 for an examination of Saturn beginning in the year 2004. (NASA Releases 95-72 & 118; W Post, May 3/95; C Trib, Apr 28/95; AvWk, Apr 24/95)
A fully automated landing of a transport aircraft was made using only engine thrust for control. Landing was a McDonnell-Douglas MD-11 using a Propulsion Controlled Aircraft (PCA) system at NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center. PCA is expected to become an important back-up system in the event of a loss of an aircrafts hydraulic flight control system. (NASA Release 95-149; Fla Today, Sep 24/95; AvWk, Sep 4/95)
During an occultation of the comet Chiron and a star, an airborne NASA observatory was used to help determine the size of this comet that orbits like a planet(in a nearly circular orbit(in our solar system. According to an international team of scientists, Chiron is between 103 and 193 miles in diameter and 20 times the size of Halleys comet. The Kuiper Airborne Observatory flew near Recife, Brazil on this project. Chiron orbits the Sun once in 50 years. (NY Times, Jan 10/95; UPI, Jan 6/95)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope to study quasars began to reassess their theories after studying a series of quasars during the past few months. The astronomers expected the quasars, thought to be super-massive "black holes," to be surrounded by galaxies that "feed" the quasar. Instead, none of the first eight quasars they studied was surrounded by a galaxy, raising questions about of how black holes form and sustain themselves. "I really don't understand this," said project astronomer John Bahcall in a report to the American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona. (LA Times, Jan 13/95; W Post, Jan 13/95)
Remote control technology and the Internet are expected to play major parts in the operation of the South Pole Infrared Explorer telescope and the Antarctic Submillimeter Telescope and Remote Observatory, both in Antarctica. These instruments were built and are operated by the Center for the Astrophysical Research in Antarctica, a consortium of universities and research laboratories supported mostly by the  National Science Foundation.  Astronomers will be able to control these instruments from any place in the world with an Internet or modem connection. (NY Times, Jan 10/95)
Two amateurs discovered comet Hale-Bopp, which will pass near Earth in 1996. It could be the brightest comet in 20 years. Pictures from the Hubble Space Telescope show a remarkable pinwheel pattern and a blob of free-flying debris near the comets nucleus. (NASA Release 95-178; W Post, Jul 31/95; Fla Today, Aug 27/95; AvWk, Oct 16/95)
The first element of the International Space Station Alpha will be the Functional Energy Block (FGB). It is actually a 21-ton space tug being built in Russia and set for launch in November 1977. The U.S. Boeing Defense and Space Group has teamed with Russias Khrunichev Space Center on this project. Boeing will procure one block for launching. (Fla Today, Aug 18/95; Reuters, Aug 15/95; Space News, Dec 18/95; AvWk, May 8/95 & Sep 4/95)
NASA's Johnson Space Center denied Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Co. a large profit fee because of poor performance under a tougher procurement compliance policy implemented by the space agency in 1994. (H Chron, Jan 7/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope serves as an interplanetary weather satellite for Mars and Venus. It shows that the Martian climate has changed since Viking visited Mars in the mid-1970s. The planet is now cooler, clearer, and drier. Venus continues to recover from an intense shower of sulfuric acid rain triggered by a suspected volcanic eruption in the late 1970s. Such knowledge of weather is critical to the planning of future missions to these planets. They also make natural laboratories for testing computer models that will lead to a general theory of the behavior of planetary atmospheres. The Hubble Space Telescope is a project of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA). (NASA Release 95-31; Fla Today, May 14/95; AvWk, Mar 27/95; Science, Mar 31/95)
Senior NASA managers have recommended that Ames Research Center be placed under the oversight of a private contractor. However, it also recommended that Ames aerospace facilities be transferred to Langley Research Center and that its space station centrifuge be transferred to Johnson Space Center. The Zero Based Review Team also endorsed sweeping changes in the organization of NASAs other research facilities, but it rejected a proposal to have a contractor run the Kennedy Space Center. (SF Exam, Feb 18/95; Science, Apr 21/95)
NASA and Russian space station officials were scheduled to begin a series of technical exchange meetings at the Johnson Space Center intended to give clear direction to joint cooperation in constructing the international space station. Twenty-five teams of Russian technicians and engineers were expected to arrive to discuss a number of issues, including docking procedures, power supply distribution; structural mechanics, depressurization; and place and use of antennae. Crew size was also to be discussed. The meetings were expected to last until February 10. NASA officials hoped to agree on as much common ground as possible so that Russia could be made an official partner in the station project before the year is out. (Phillips Business Information, Jan 19/95)
NASA astronomers said that a stellar object that erupted last summer with powerful bursts of X-rays and jets of hot gas at near the speed of light may be a black hole or possibly a neutron star in the act of gobbling up a companion star. The object, a relatively close 10,000 light-years from Earth, was discovered in July when it exploded with flashes of the most powerful natural X-rays in the heavens. The radiation was detected by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (AP, Jan 12/95)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that the El Nino phenomenon had returned and was getting stronger. The TOPEX/Poseidon satellite, a program of NASA and the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etude Spatiales, provided radar data confirming the buildup of a large warm water mass called a Kelvin wave in the tropical Pacific Ocean. This high sea-surface temperature heats the atmosphere and alters atmospheric jet streams, which affect worldwide weather patterns. (NASA Release 95-7; W Post, Jan 25/95; LA Times, Jan 25/95; AP, Jan 24/95; H Post, Jan 25/95; Reuters Press Agency, Jan 24/95; Bakersfield Californian, Jan 25/95)
The "New York Times" reported that University of Illinois atmospheric scientists had begun this month aiming a powerful laser beam into the atmosphere above the South Pole, expecting to illuminate many details about the deletion of the global ozone layer. The scientists hoped that the laser will help them create continuous three-dimensional maps of the chemical composition and physical details of the atmosphere throughout the year. (NY Times, Jan 24/95)
A 94-percent scale model of Boeings proposed Joint Advanced Strike Technology Fighter (JAST), now under construction, is planned to begin using the 80 by 120 foot wind tunnel at the Ames Research Center in early 1996. (AvWk, Mar 6/95)
A testbed for a solar-powered regenerative fuel cell system was dedicated at Edwards Air Force Base. The Lewis Research Centers new government and industry multi-use regenerative fuel cell program mirrors the administrations policies of developing technologies that both foster U.S. competitiveness and support government programs. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory is an active member of the Lewis fuel cell team. Fuel cell applications include electric cars, buses, and locomotives in addition to less expensive means of power distribution for communities. (NASA Release 95-8)
El Nio is stronger this year compared to the winter of 1992-93, according to NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The TOPEX/Poseidon ocean observing satellite, launched on August 10, 1992, is part of a joint program of NASA and the French space agency. The satellite uses a radar altimeter to measure sea-surface height with an accuracy of better than 2 inches. Sea-surface elevation is related to the heat in the upper ocean, which is important for long-range weather forecasting. (NASA Releases 95-7, 146 & 159; NY Times, Jan 14/95 & Apr 25/95; W Post, Jan 25/95 & Feb 11/95; AP, Jan 24/95; Reuters, Jan 24/95; Science, Feb 3/95)
An air-safety computer system developed by NASA at its Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, in 1985 had yet to be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration. The Takeoff Performance Monitor was designed to help pilots handle takeoff mishaps more quickly and safely, but airlines, manufacturers, and Federal Aviation Administration officials said the cost and liability burdens outweighed the benefits. Troublesome takeoffs occur less than 1 percent of the time but account for 10 percent of all serious airplane accidents, according to the National Transportation Safety Board. (CSM, Jan 6/95)
Two new images taken by NASA's Hubble Space Telescope provided details of the results of two violent cosmic events.  One image shows a single star, actually a planetary nebula in the constellation Draco, which blew off its outer shell 1,000 years ago and is in the last stages of its life. The other shows the result of a rare and spectacular head-on collision between two galaxies located 500 million light-years away in Sculptor. (NASA Release N95-1; B Sun, Jan 12/95)
NASA is developing plans for the Science Institutes which are expected to help streamline the agencys management structure and improve the quality of its scientific research. Two institutes are being defined as pathfinders. One is affiliated with NASA Johnson Space Center that would conduct biomedical research. The other is affiliated with NASA Ames Research Center that would focus on research related to the origins and evolution of life, and planetary biology. (NASA Releases 95-110 & 132; Science, Nov 17/95)
An historic wind tunnel at NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia is being retired. Originally called the Full Scale Tunnel when built in 1931, it was the largest wind tunnel in the world until 1945. (NASA Release 95-194; AvWk, Nov 20/95)
In experiments aimed at answering one of the most intriguing questions in particle physics and cosmology, scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico produced especially strong evidence that elusive particles called neutrinos do indeed have mass. If proven, the finding means that neutrinos could constitute a major component of the mysterious invisible matter, the long-sought missing mass, that cosmologists think fills and shapes the universe and could dictate its fate. Finding a mass for the ubiquitous neutrino would help toward completing an inventory of the missing matter, a tally that will determine whether the universe will fly apart, fall in on itself, or settle on a middle path. D. Hywel White, leader of the research team, said that the most likely explanation for the observed behavior of neutrinos produced by a proton accelerator was that these particles have some as yet undetermined amount of mass. (NY Times, Jan 31/95)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) found an oxygen atmosphere on Jupiters second moon, Europa. This detection was made by a team of researchers at Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Science Institute, both in Baltimore. They used data provided by HSTs Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS) instrument from observations taken on June 2, 1994. Europas atmosphere is only one hundred billionth that of Earth. Europa, about the size of Earths moon, has an unusually smooth surface of solid water ice. The oxygen on Europa, whose surface temperature is -230 degrees Fahrenheit, is formed from purely non-biological processes. Water vapor and the gases oxygen and hydrogen are formed by the combination of sunlight and the bombardment of the dust and charged particles trapped in Jupiters intense magnetic field. (NASA Release 95-17; C Trib, Feb 23/95)
The "New York Times" reported that University of Illinois atmospheric scientists had begun this month aiming a powerful laser beam into the atmosphere above the South Pole, expecting to illuminate many details about the deletion of the global ozone layer. The scientists hoped that the laser will help them create continuous three-dimensional maps of the chemical composition and physical details of the atmosphere throughout the year. (NY Times, Jan 24/95)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite was launched to probe the Suns hidden interior, its boiling atmosphere, and the physics behind the supersonic solar wind. SOHO is a joint project of the European Space Agency and NASA. It will be positioned at the point where the gravitational pull of the Sun and Earth cancel out. (NY Times, Dec 3/95 & Dec 5/95; W Post, Dec 3/95 & Dec 4/95; USA Today, Dec 4/95; Fla Today, Nov 22/95, Nov 24/95, Nov 28/95 & Dec 1/95; CSM, Nov 28/95; Space News, Nov 6/95; AvWk, Nov 13/95)
Astronomers have confirmed the existence of a brown dwarf, the object of a 30-year search. Twenty to 50 times the size of Jupiter and too hot to be classified as a planet, GL229B is a small companion to the cool red star Gliese 229 in the constellation Lepus. It is near the theoretical limit (eight percent of the mass of the Sun) where a star has enough mass to sustain nuclear fusion. The brown dwarf was first sighted using the 60-inch observatory on Mt. Palomar. Scientists identified it in October 1994. Follow-up observations were made by Hubbles Wide Field Planetary Camera-2 on November 17, 1995. Another Hubble observation six months from now will yield an exact distance to GL229B.
A team of aerospace executives has recommended that NASA modify the Space Shuttle programs management structure. The team was headed by former Johnson Space Center Director Christopher Kraft. The report to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recommends separating developmental activities from flight operations. The Kraft report endorses the themes of reducing the role of civil service employees, increasing contractor accountability, and reducing the number of government-to-contractor interfaces. (NASA Release 95-27; NY Times, May 22/95 & Apr 14/95; W Post, Jun 7/95; Fla Today, Mar 2/95 & Apr 5/95; Reuters, Mar 13/95; AvWk, Mar 6/95, Mar 20/95, Apr 10/95 & Jun 12/95)
Data from NASAs Upper Atmospheric Research Satellite indicate that chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are responsible for the destruction of Earths protective stratospheric ozone layer. By mid-1995, the amount of methyl chloroform in the atmosphere was found to have begun to decrease, although the Antarctic hole in the ozone grew significantly. (NASA Release 95-115; NY Times, Jul 16/95, Aug 3/95, Oct 12/95 & Nov 29/95; W Post, Jul 14/95, Sep 13/95; W Times, Oct 12/95; UPI, Sep 20/95; AvWk, Jan 2/95; Science, Oct 20/95)
A device invented at NASAs Langley Research Center may protect homeowners everywhere from deadly carbon monoxide fumes. It uses a new class of low-temperature oxidation catalysts to convert carbon monoxide to non-toxic carbon dioxide at room temperature. It also can remove formaldehyde gas. (NASA Release 95-218)
An experimental X-31 aircraft crashed at Edwards air Force Base in California. Its German military pilot ejected safely. The craft, one of two X-31's operated at NASA Dryden Flight Research Center, was returning from a one-hour test flight when it crashed. First flown in 1990, the aircraft had proven its ability to outmaneuver other fighters, particularly at low speeds. The cause of the crash was under investigation. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 20/95; H Chron, Jan 20/95; Daily News, Jan 20/95; APn, Jan 19/95; UPn, Jan 19/95; USA Today, Jan 20/95; W Post, Jan 20/95; C Trib, Jan 20/95; LA Daily News, Jan 20/95; LA Times, Jan 20/95; Bakersfield Californian, Jan 20/95;)
Two astronomers at the American Astronomical Society's annual meeting in Tucson, Arizona, presented an extraordinary photograph of a nearby star in red-hot death throes similar to the cataclysm that astronomers theorize will destroy the solar system in several billion years. The photo, taken with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, showed never-before-seen detail in the glowing red gas cloud ejected by the dying star. The "Cat's Eye Nebula," or NGC 6543, is about 3,000 light-years from Earth in the constellation Draco, the dragon. (B Sun, Jan 12/95)
NASA selected 30 research proposals for negotiation of Phase I contracts as part of the 1995 Small Business Technology Transfer Pilot Program (STTR), which is one of the ways that NASA takes the knowledge gained in air and space exploration an transfers it to the public. Companies that successfully complete Phase I activities are eligible to compete for Phase II awards the following year. The Phase II award allows for two-year, fixed-price contracts of up to $500,000. (NASA Release 95-103)
Astronomers using NASAs Astro-2 observatory announced the definitive detection of one of the two original building blocks of the universe-the element helium created in the Big Bang explosion. The evidence was found using the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope (HUT), one of three ultraviolet instruments on the Astro-2 observatory which was operated in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle Endeavour during its 17-day mission in March. Johns Hopkins University astronomers were able to detect the helium in the light from a distant quasar called HS1700+64, about 10 billion light years away. The astronomers were essentially looking at the universe when it was a quarter of its present age.
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) shows that radio galaxies(which existed when the universe was half its present age(are surprisingly varied and intricate structures that are even more complex than previously thought. A team of astronomers at Cambridge University, England, is analyzing 28 radio galaxies that have been imaged by HST in visible light, by the Very Large Array Radio Interferometer, and by the UK Infrared Telescope. They propose that the remarkable structures seen in the Hubble images are different manifestations of activity associated with radio galaxies. The new details may be a combination of light from massive star forming regions, small satellite dwarf galaxies, and bow shocks caused by jets of hot gas blasted out of the galaxys core by a suspected black hole. The period of strong radio emissions is quite short relative to the total lifetime of a galaxy. (NASA Release 95-133)
Scientists at the University of Chicago advanced a new theory explaining the "mass extinctions" of living species that have occurred on Earth, the most famous being that of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago.  They theorized that supernovas burned off the Earth's ozone layer and caused the sun's rays to flood the surface with deadly radiation.  The theory borrows from work done on the effect of ozone depletion in Antarctica.  Scientists estimate that five mass extinctions have occurred on Earth, one every 120 million years. (AP, Jan 2/91; C Trib, Jan 3/95)
According to an article in "Space News," the fate of a proposed U. S. mission to Pluto rested on the ability of NASA engineers to cut the program's cost below the existing $580 million estimate, presumably by incorporating high-risk technologies. U. S. scientists said time was running out for a Pluto mission. The planet is currently moving away from the sun. Scientists predicted that by 2025, Pluto's atmosphere will be completely frozen for centuries, precluding any effort to view the planet's surface. The existing plan called for launching two probes in 2001 that would map the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon before flying off into deep space. Cost-cutting measures being considered included reducing the amount of fuel for maneuvers at Pluto and the type of power source the craft will utilize for the mission. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95)
Remotely controlled tests by Ames Research Center of a modified Russian planetary rover, Marsokhod, are planned for February 13-18 in a volcanic area that resembles the surfaces of the Moon and Mars. The test site is in Kilauea Volcanos summit caldera and southwest rift zone on the island of Hawaii. Marsokhod, which combines the Russian rover chassis with western avionics, is a sophisticated prototype of a long-distance rover. (NASA Release 95-14)
Childbirth is expected to be made safer and easier with the space-age forceps being developed by Marshall Space Flight Center with the Collins Clinic in Slidell, Louisiana. Using space program instrumentation technology, fiber optic sensors in the forceps will enable the physician to monitor forces on the infant throughout the delivery. The use of composite materials will help ensure a safer distribution of pressure on the infant. Additionally, the instrumented forceps will allow obstetrical students to learn to use forceps within safe limits before entering practice. (NASA Release 95-153)
The Hubble Space Telescope has detected a long-sought population of comets dwelling at the icy fringe of the solar system. Based on the Hubble observations, astronomers estimate the belt contains at least 200 million comets. The existence of a comet belt encircling our solar system-like the rings of Saturn-was first hypothesized more than 40 years ago by astronomer Gerard Kuiper. The theory remained conjecture until 1992 when ground-based telescopes began detecting about 20 large icy bodies ranging from 60 to 200 miles in diameter. Hubble was able to identify objects just a few miles across. This region is thought to be the source of the short-period comets that orbit the Sun in less than 200 years. The planet Pluto is considered by astronomers to be the largest member of the Kuiper Belt region. The comet-disk lies just beyond Neptune and might stretch 500 times farther from the Sun than Earth.
The final states of starbirth shown in new pictures by the Hubble Space Telescope, seem to touch off a cosmic celebration. Out of the dense whirlpools of gas and dust creating the stars erupt jets of shimmering gases extending billions of miles. The stars themselves, in machine-gun fashion, fire bursts of material at speeds of half a million miles an hour, creating what appear to be glowing beads. While many questions remain to be answered, the Hubble pictures appear to exclude whole classes of models regarding jet formation and evolution. (NASA Release 95-83; NY Times, Jun 7/95; W Post, Jun 7/95; USA Today, Jun 7/95; AP, Jun 7/95; Reuters, Jun 6 95; Time, Jun 16/95)
During the edge-on view of Saturns rings on May 22 by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers found what may be two new Moons. (NASA Release 95-127; W Post, May 3/95 & Jul 28/95; USA Today, Jul 28/95; C Trib, Apr 28/95; AP, Jul 28/95; AvWk, Apr 24/95 & Aug 7/95; Science, Aug 4/95)
A large storm on Saturn was imaged by the Hubble Space Telescope on December 1, 1994. The storm, which was on Saturns equator and the size of Earth, was white and in the shape of an arrowhead. It was only the third storm seen on Saturn in the past two centuries. (AvWk, Jan 9/95)
A team of national geologists working with NASA scientists dropped a 700-pound weight on a jumbled mound of rock in Canyonlands National Park in Utah in an attempt to determine whether Upheaval Dome is a badly eroded salt dome or the remnants of a 5-mile-diameter meteorite impact crater. Earlier studies of shattered rocks and quartz crystals had already convinced many researchers that an asteroid or comet fragment slammed into southeast Utah sometime between five and 100 million years ago. Impact craters such as Upheaval dome are common in the solar system, so the geologists were attempting to learn how such craters form. (Salt Lake City Tribune, Jan 10/95)
A 600 pound, solar power aircraft named Pathfinder set a new altitude record of 50,500 feet. The remotely-controlled vehicle is being evaluated by NASA and industry for environmental sampling missions. (NASA Release 95-152; AvWk, Sep 18/95 & Sep 25/95)
A prototype of the Cockpit Weather Information Needs (CWIN) concept developed by Langley Research Center is being installed on a United DC-10-10. It will be operated for at least three months on scheduled, revenue flights to evaluate the cost and safety benefits. Initially the weather data will be limited to a nationaly radar summary and an air-to-ground lightning map. NASA has plans to add terminal forecasts and sruface observations. (AvWk, Jul 31/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope has provided pictures of a special type of newborn star emerging from dense, compact pockets of interstellar gas called evaporating gaseous globules (EGGs). Hubble found the EGGs, appropriately enough, in the Eagle nebula which is a star-forming region of the nearby constellation Serpens. Many EGGs are found at the tip of the two largest finger-like features protruding from the nebulas monstrous columns of cold gas, dubbed elephant trunks. Photos of EGGs at different stages of being uncovered provide an unprecedented look at how stars and their surroundings appear before they are truly stars. This process of forming stars from high-speed columns of hydrogen is quite different from the process of stars forming in isolation. The EGGs appear unable to form the disks that go on to become solar systems. (NASA Release 95-190; NY Times, Nov 3/95; W Post, Nov 3/95; W Times, Nov 3/95; USA Today, Nov/95; Fla Today, Nov 3/95; AP, Nov 3/95; Newsweek, Nov 13/95)
Large-scale conceptual models of the X-32 Common Affordable Lightweight Fighter are scheduled to begin at the Ames Research Center this summer and continue through the summer of 1996. The idea for the X-32, which could be introduced into service around 2010, is to have two versions. One would be a conventional take-off and landing aircraft. The second version would be much as the first, except configured for short take-offs and vertical landings. They would share a common fuselage and engine, while a powered-lift propulsion system would be used for vertical landings. (NASA Release 95-4)
Data collected from a NASA airborne observatory fitted with a 36-inch telescope helped astronomers estimate the size of the largest known comet, Chiron.  Chiron is between 100 and 187 miles in diameter, 20 times the size of Haley's comet. (AP, Jan 8/95)
A converted DC-9 aircraft, which will be used for microgravity experiments, was rolled out today at NASAs Lewis Research Center. The aircraft will provide investigators with a series of 18-22 second periods of near weightlessness by flying parabolic maneuvers. It will support research in the areas of biotechnology, combustion science, fluid physics and materials science. It also will support the development of equipment for use on the International Space Station and other orbital platforms. (NASA Release 95-79)
Saturns possible two new Moons sighted by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) on May 22 are thought instead to be orbiting clumps of icy rubble. Images from the August 10 ring plane crossing presented a new mystery. They seem to show at least three new objects, which are in different orbits than the two May objects. An explanation is that a shattered moonlet would be brighter and more visible, than when all of its mass was compressed into a single solid body. (NASA Releases 95-172; Science, Oct 20/95)
Scientists at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California said that they had developed a $14 million wing panel that would help them devise cheaper and more efficient ways to operate supersonic aircraft. The experimental panel was to be used in laminar airflow tests to search for ways to reduce aerodynamic drag and fuel consumption under NASA's High Speed Research program. Tests were scheduled on modified versions of the US Air Force's F-16XL and Russia's TU-144 supersonic transport. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan/95; Bakersfield Californian, Jan 25/95; Antelope Valley Daily News, Jan 29/95)
Veteran Space Shuttle astronauts Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr., Richard N. (Dick) Richards and Pierre J. Thuot have left the Astronaut Office. Ken Reightler will join Lockheed Martin, Houston, as the Program Manager for Engineering, Test and Analysis. Dick Richards remains at NASA, moving to the Space Shuttle Program Office to serve as the mission director for the second servicing mission for the Hubble Space Telescope. After three Shuttle flights, Thuot will teach astronautics courses at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 95-104; AvWk, Jul 10/95)
According to an article in "Space News," the fate of a proposed U. S. mission to Pluto rested on the ability of NASA engineers to cut the program's cost below the existing $580 million estimate, presumably by incorporating high-risk technologies. U. S. scientists said time was running out for a Pluto mission. The planet is currently moving away from the sun. Scientists predicted that by 2025, Pluto's atmosphere will be completely frozen for centuries, precluding any effort to view the planet's surface. The existing plan called for launching two probes in 2001 that would map the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon before flying off into deep space. Cost-cutting measures being considered included reducing the amount of fuel for maneuvers at Pluto and the type of power source the craft will utilize for the mission. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95)
NASA expected to begin wind tunnel tests of its newest jet fighter, the X-32, in the summer of 1995.  A lightweight, compact aircraft capable of maneuvering like a helicopter, the plane will employ the latest in stealth technology and will not need runway space for landings and takeoffs. Tests were to be conducted at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 95-4; San Jose Mercury News, Jan 8/95)
NASA scientists expressed concern about space trash from spent satellites and burned out rocket boosters that pose a hazard to functioning satellites and space shuttles. Instead of attempting to collect such debris, NASA has been concentrating on preventing its further buildup by programming satellites and boosters to spiral into the atmosphere and burn up harmlessly. In the future, however, NASA may take a closer look at the possibility of retrieving space debris. At that point, the research of Kumar Ramohalli, formerly of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who was attempting to develop a debris retrieving satellite, should be useful. (CSM, Jan 9/95)
A two-decade old cosmic mystery about hydrogen clouds in intergalactic space is being cleared up by recent Hubble Space Telescope data from 46 galaxies. The results suggest that the hydrogen clouds are vast halos surrounding galaxies and extending 20 times farther than the diameter of a galaxy. These findings confirm earlier Hubble data of more than a dozen hydrogen clouds within less than a billion light-years of our galaxy. (NASA Release 95-41; NY Times, Apr 18/95; Science, Mar 24/95)
NASA has selected four companies to enter into negotiations for the X-33 and X-34 reusable launch systems. Around the end of the decade, the results of the X-33 competition and subsequent flight demonstration could lead to a decision to develop an operational next-generation reusable launch system. The X-34 booster will demonstrate advanced technologies that may apply to reusable launch systems and provide significantly reduced mission costs for placing small payloads into low Earth orbit. The three X-33 selectees are: Lockheed Advanced Development Co.; McDonnell Douglas Aerospace; and Rockwell International Corp., Space Systems Division. The X-34 selectee is Orbital Sciences Corp., Dulles, Virginia. After tests are completed in 1999, it would be up to the aerospace industry to build and operate any new rockets. (NASA Release 95-23; NY Times, Mar 12/95 & Jun 19/95; Fla Today, Jul 2/95; AvWk, Mar 13/95, Mar 27/95 & Jun 19/95)
NASAs Office of Space Access and Technology selected 12 research proposals for negotiation. The proposals are for Phase II contracts in NASAs Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Pilot Program. The STTR program is similar to the Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIRP) but varies by requiring small business concerns to conduct cooperative research and development by partnering with a research institution. At least 40 percent of the work must be performed by the small business concern, and at least 30 percent of the work must be performed by the research institute. STTR and SBIRP comprise only some of the many research grants NASA awards each year. (NASA Releases 95-46, 103, 165, 174, 183, 199, 210 & 214)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent ShuttleMir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-79Press Kit, news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, Shuttle Arrives for Astronauts Long-Awaited Pickup, Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
NASA launched into space its unpiloted Mars Global Surveyor, the first in a series of missions to explore the Red Planet further. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission and vehicle embodied a shift in the United States approach to space exploration. With the expressed intent to make exploration as affordable and reliable as possible, NASA had developed the smaller Mars Global Surveyor, measuring 5 by 5 by 10 feet (1.5 by 1.5 by 3 meters) and designed to carry less fuel than Mars Observer. Mars Global Surveyor cost NASA US$150 million to develop, whereas Observer had cost nearly US$1 billion and had failed to reach Mars after its 1992 launch. Surveyors ability to function with less fuel than previous models heightened the chances that it would succeed in its mission. NASA predicted that after ascending to the desired 235-mile-high (378-kilometer-high) orbit, the robotic Global Surveyor would have to travel nearly halfway around the Sun before catching up with Mars in September 1997. The spacecraft would then begin mapping the Martian atmosphere and surface, a survey planned to last 687 days. Mission objectives included searching for evidence of life on Mars, gathering data about the Martian climate, learning more about the planets geology, and determining what resources were necessary to support future human missions to Mars. According to NASA, the search for water was the unifying theme of all missions to Mars. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission continued the exploration of Mars that NASA had begun with the Mariner and Viking missions of the 1960s and 1970s.(Associated Press, Mars Probe Heads for Mapping, 8 November 1996; Paul Hoversten, Surveyor Sets Off for Mars, USA Today, 8 November 1996; NASA, 1996 Mars MissionPress Kit, news release 96-207, November 1996.)
Lockheed Martin won the contract to design and build the X-33 test vehicle, a scaled-down model of the reusable launch vehicle (RLV) that NASA planned as an eventual replacement for the Space Shuttle. NASA set a budget of US$941 million for the project. In announcing the new contract, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed NASAs high hopes for the project: We want to develop technologies that will allow industry to build a vehicle that takes days, not months, to turnaround; dozens, not thousands of people to operate; reliability ten times better than anything flying today; and launch costs that are a tenth of what they are now. Our goal is a reusable launch vehicle that will cut the cost of sending a pound of payload to orbit from [US]$10,000 to [US]$1,000. Lockheed planned to invest US$220 million in the RLV project. The X-33 plan built upon the successful engineering of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA), launched from White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The agreement between NASA and Lockheed Martin split the risk between government and industry. Although NASA passed over Rockwell International for the contract, Rockwell designed the vehicles engine.(NASA, Lockheed Martin Selected To Build X-33, news release 96-128, 2 July 1996; Jeff Cole, Lockheed Wins $1 Billion Pact for the Shuttle, Wall Street Journal, 3 July 1996; Curt Suplee and Steven Pearlstein, Lockheed Martin Gets Spacecraft Project, Washington Post, 3 July 1996.)
For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.
NASA spacecraft managers reported the failure of two scientific satellites. NASA had designed the Scientific Applications Satellite-B (SAC-B), launched three days earlier from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility, to survey solar flares and gamma-ray bursts. The project was a cooperative effort between NASA and Argentina. NASA scientists had intended the second satellite, HETE (High Energy Transient Experiment), to remain dormant until it detected sunlight, at which time it would deploy, transmitting signals. Scientists doubted this would ever occur, because the satellite had fallen into a tumbling pattern. Officials hypothesized that the satellites had not deployed properly and, therefore, had orbited uselessly, lacking electrical power. NASA valued both satellites at more than US$20 million. The launch failure was the third miscue in two years for the Pegasus rocket program. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, developed and ran the program.(John Mintz, Orbital Sciences Fails in Another Launch, Washington Post, 5 November 1996; Associated Press, NASA Reports Failure of Scientific Satellites, 7 November 1996; NASA, SAC-B/HETE Spacecraft No Longer Operational, news release 96-231, 7 November 1996.)
NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tanks strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASAs External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests, news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite, news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
A NASA research team published in the Journal of Geophysical Research its findings on urban- like pollution over the tropical South Atlantic Ocean. The team used data gathered from an experiment called the Transport and Chemistry near the Equator of the Atlantic (TRACE-A), conducted with the Brazilian Space Agency and scientists from South Africa. The scientists suspected that the high concentrations of ozone, like those found in densely populated urban areas, resulted from seasonal burnings in South America and Africa. According to the NASA researchers, the presence of pollution over the tropical ocean confirmed that humans had extended their negative impact on traditionally pristine air far beyond reaches directly above land. According to one researcher, the results of TRACE-A greatly improved the scientific communitys understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of the Southern Hemisphere.(NASA, NASA Team Finds Urban-Like Pollution in Tropical South Atlantic, news release 96-220, 30 October 1996.)
NASA formed an independent panel to review the failure of the tethered satellite experiment and the loss of the satellite. NASA selected Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of Dryden Flight Research Center, to chair the panel. The formation of such an investigative body in the wake of a costly loss conformed to standard practice under NASAs Space Flight Operations Contingency Plan. In a NASA press release announcing the panels formation, Szalai stated, given the public investment in the tethered satellite, it is important that we find out what went wrong.(NASA, NASA To Form Independent Review Panel, news release 96-39, 26 February 1996.)
The Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation announced that McDonnell Douglas would merge with Boeing in a stock-for-stock transaction. The merger, the biggest in aerospace history, positioned Boeing to compete with Europes Airbus Industrie for nearly all commercial airline contracts. The merger also strengthened Boeings position as one of the most influential companies, both domestically and internationally, in the United States. The US$13.3 billion deal would place under a single umbrella nearly 200,000 employees, producing annual revenues in excess of US$48 billion. The Boeing Company also emerged from the deal with improved chances of winning major military contracts, whereas, previously, the company had few ventures involving the military aerospace industry. However, McDonnell Douglas had been the main supplier to the military of F/A-18 and F-15 Eagle-model fighter jets to the military. Thus, the merger brought together leaders in the commercial and military sectors of the aerospace industry, creating what one industry analyst called an 800-pound gorilla. McDonnell Douglas stock rose 20 percent on the first day of trading following the announcement.(The Boeing Company, McDonnell Douglas To Merge with Boeing, Combination To Be the Worlds Largest Aerospace Company, news release, 15 December 1996; Peter Kaplan, Mission Inevitable, Washington Times, 17 December 1996; David E. Sanger, A Giant in Jets and Foreign Policy, New York Times, 17 December 1996.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had purchased most of the aerospace and defense holdings of its competitor Rockwell International Corporation. The US$3 billion deal restructured the two companies in drastically different ways, permitting Boeing to increase significantly its potential to win government aerospace contracts, while Rockwell International turned its attention to the lucrative commercial market in automation. Whereas Boeing solidified its established dominance in the commercial jetliner construction business, Rockwell left behind its signature industrythe company had been nearly synonymous with NASAs piloted space program. However, in the face of dwindling government contracts, Rockwell had been concentrating for years on developing its commercial product lines. Although the merger was not a surprise, the sale of the company responsible for engineering the Apollo spacecraft and the B-(NASA, NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown, HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, Federal Employees Face Backlog Here, Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
Henry McDonald became Director of Ames Research Center (ARC) in Mountain View, California. NASA had selected McDonald for the position in January 1996 after the selection of former Director Ken K. Munechika as NASAs first Director of Moffett Federal Airfield. A former professor of mechanical engineering at Pennsylvania State University, McDonald brought to NASA both industrial and academic experience.(NASA, McDonald Named Director of Ames Research Center, news release 96-8, 19 January 1996. 37 Associated Press, Campus Takes Control of Shuttle Experiment, 5 March 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. OConnor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. OConnor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, OConnor had voiced some concerns about NASAs planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, OConnor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, OConnor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. OConnor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, OConnor To Leave NASA, news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns, Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Grahams design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes, news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
NASA introduced a new technology with the potential to make much smaller and more efficient electronic devices: the Thin-Layer Composite-Unimorph Piezoelectric Driver and Sensor (THUNDER). Researchers at Langley Research Center (LARC) recognized the potential of piezoelectric material, because of its well-known capability to generate movement when subjected to an electric current. NASA hoped that the THUNDER technology would improve devices in electronics, optics, jitter (irregular motion) suppression, noise cancellation, pumps, valves and a variety of other fields. LARCs interdisciplinary team had improved upon already available commercial-grade piezoelectric material, producing a more durable, cheaper, and more effective product. R&D Magazine announced that it would honor THUNDER as one of its top 100 most technologically significant new products of the year. Six companies signed agreements with NASA to develop THUNDER, and a dozen other companies expressed interest in negotiating similar pacts.(NASA, NASA Rolls Out Award-Winning Thunder, news release 96-197, 1 October 1996.)
Reuters News Service published an internal NASA memorandum written by an independent safety commission, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, cautioning NASA against cutting the budget for the Shuttle program too quickly. According to the panels analysis, NASAs attempts to reduce costs by conducting fewer Shuttle safety inspections and by transferring responsibility for day-to-day operations of the Shuttle program to United Space Alliance had demoralized NASAs workforce at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The memo made clear the opinion of the safety inspectors: Overall, it was the clear consensus of the team that a cooling off period is absolutely necessary if KSC operations are to continue safely . . . without this hiatus the safety risk is likely unacceptable.(Reuters, Warning Light for NASAs Shuttle ProgramMemo, 4 July 1996.)
NASA and Orbital Sciences Corporation signed a contract, which was not a cooperative agreement, whereby Orbital Sciences would build a new X-34 reusable launch vehicle, smaller than that originally planned. NASA had first made public the original X-34 program in 1994. NASA had intended the program, also known as the Reusable Small Booster Program, to stimulate the development of a reusable commercial launch vehicle to place smaller payloads in low orbit. In addition, NASA planned for the X-34 program to demonstrate that an industry-led partnership between NASA and the aerospace industry could accomplish this objective within 30 to 36 months and within a fixed government budget. On 12 January 1995, NASA released a final cooperative agreement notice for the X-34 program, and in March 1995, NASA selected Orbital Sciences Corporation as its industry partner. Over the next eight months, as design of the X-34 progressed, problems arose over the selection of an appropriate rocket engine, resulting in NASAs temporarily shutting down the program on 2 November 1995. In January 1996, Orbital Sciences Corporation suggested that NASA explore the potential of a smaller vehicle. Orbital Sciences then issued stop-work orders to all its X-34 subcontractors, effectively ending the program. Because NASA wanted to use remaining federal dollars to develop a smaller vehicle, capable of demonstrating various reusable launch technologies, it rebid the contract in March 1996. On 10 June 1996, NASA selected Orbital Sciences to build the new X-34.(NASA History Division, X-33 History Project, Fact Sheet #7: The Policy Origins of the X-33, Part VII: The X- 34, March 25, 2000, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/pao/History/x-33/facts_7.htm.)
Arianespace, the commercial arm of the European Space Agency, suffered a major setback in its bid to maintain control of the satellite-launching market in the face of competition from U.S. companies. Only seconds after the launch of Ariane 5, a huge rocket intended to launch satellites, Arianespace had to blow up the rocket when it veered severely off course. Arianespace had spent 10 years and more than US$7 billion to develop the 674-foot (205-meter), 821-ton (750,000- kilogram or 750-tonne) vehicle. Also lost in the explosion were satellites valued at more than US$500 million. Arianespace had projected a launch reliability of 98.5 percent for the rocket, considering failure so unlikely that the company had guaranteed a free launch to customers if the launch failed. A spokesperson for Arianespace acknowledged the disappointment of the failed test, but promised that the company would continue as the worlds leader in launching satellites. Aerospace industry analysts predicted that U.S. companies such as Lockheed Martin would likely gain an increased foothold in the market because of the European companys misfortune.(Kathleen Day, Losing a Rocket and a Satellite Edge? Washington Post, 5 June 1996; Craig Whitney, Costly Failure: Space Launch Is Aborted, New York Times, 5 June 1996.)
More than 200 experts met in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to plan the design and implementation of a new fleet of radar satellites. The group emphasized the recent geological discoveries made with data from radar satellites, especially from those satellites tracking the movements and shifts in Earths plates that have been impossible to track until recently. The U.S. Geological Survey and NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory sponsored the event. Geophysicist Howard A. Zebker described the satellites as a great leap forward. Its like suddenly having [x]-rays to see inside a body.(William J. Broad, Satellite Radar Unveils Subtle, Slow Wrinkling of the Planets Surface, New York Times, 3 September 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia conducted an overnight experiment on the effects of space travel on the bodys biological clock. Four astronauts slept with special caps equipped with electrodes to monitor their brain and muscle activity. Astronauts in space have no exposure to the once-daily rising and setting Sun, which helps trigger a regular sleep pattern on Earth. In space the Sun rises and sets more than a dozen times each day. NASA administrators planned the experiment because they recognized the value of restful sleep for astronauts working in space and were concerned that sleep loss would become a greater disadvantage the longer an astronaut stayed in space. With the ISS on the horizon, NASA researchers considered the possible effects on astronauts of record-setting stays in space a significant issue. Sleep disruption is something that has to be taken seriously, said Timothy H. Monk, the lead researcher on the project.(Reuters, Shuttle Mission Probes Body Clock, 24 June 1996.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASAs Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration, NASAs David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First, news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
NASAs analysts at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), who had investigated the causes of the Challenger explosion, joined the probe into the crash of TWA flight 800, which exploded near Long Island, New York, on 17 July 1996. NASA offered the services of its MSFC investigative team to analyze why the center fuel tank of the Boeing 747 had exploded. Officials from the National Transportation Safety Board led the investigation, with support from a variety of other agencies, including NASA, the U.S. Navy, and the FBI.(Robert Davis, Challenger Experts Aid in TWA Probe, USA Today, 23 August 1996; Eric Malnic, Experts at NASA Join Probe of TWA Crash, Los Angeles Times, 23 August 1996.)
NASA released its blueprint for the future, the NASA Strategic Plan 1996. The plan laid out NASAs vision for the United States space exploration; noted its history; and discussed possible changes in strategy, committing NASA to a threefold mission: scientific research, space exploration, and development and transfer of technology. Furthermore, the plan outlined NASAs quest to address sciences fundamental questions, such as, how did the universe, galaxies, stars, and planets form and evolve? and, does life in any form, however simple or complex, carbon-based or other, exist elsewhere than on planet Earth? NASA intended the document as the starting point for future decisions regarding the allocation of its resources.(NASA, NASA Strategic Plan 1998, NASA policy directive (NPD)-1000.1, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/nsp/ NSPTOC.html (accessed 5 February 2008); NASA, NASA Releases Strategy for the Future, news release, 14 March 1996.)
A malfunction in an unpiloted test plane forced NASA officials to detonate the plane high above Edwards Air Force Base in California. The lightweight plane, dubbed Theseus, veered out of control during a routine test flight. Aurora Flight Systems had developed the US$5 million plane for long-term flights to observe climatic conditions from altitudes as high as 60,000 feet (18,300 kilometers). A spokesperson for Aurora indicated that the company had insufficient data to determine the cause of the failure. NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Systems to develop the plane as part of its Mission to Planet Earth initiative. At the time of the forced detonation, NASA had not designated funds to develop any subsequent Theseus models.
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASAs budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former Presidents call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the faster, better, cheaper mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, White House Releasing New National Space Policy, Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, Space Policy, 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, Fact Sheet: National Space Policy, 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the companys plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCos Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. dAmore called space the ultimate frontier of global marketing. The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitors advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavours Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit, USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
Preparing to take over the administration of the Shuttle program from NASA, the Rockwell- Lockheed Martin joint venture, United Space Alliance (USA), named James C. Adamson as its chief operating officer. Adamson came to USA from Lockheed Martin, where he had served since 1994 as a group vice president and general manager of Lockheeds Engineering and Science Services. Adamson had served as an astronaut at NASA from 1984 to 1992, spending more than 334 hours in space as a part of Missions STS-28 and STS-43.
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) identified what they believed to be the most distant objects observed to date. Researchers based at State University of New York at Stony Brook found several dozen galaxies so far away that they might have existed when the universe was less than 5 percent of its present age. The team of astronomers made its calculations on the distances of the galaxies from the Earth by relying on the relationship between speed and distance in the expanding universe. According to the scientific understanding of the speed-distance relationship, the expansion of the universe causes the light from distant galaxies to be redshifted, meaning that, because of the expansion of space, light leaving a distant galaxy as blue arrives at the HST as red light. The redshifting phenomenon allows researchers to tentatively measure the distance the light has traveled. Noting that other factors, such as dust, also might make a galaxys light red, Mark E. Dickinson of the Space Telescope Science Institute categorized the study as enticing, but also clarified, its not a proof.(Associated Press, Hubble Scope Peers into Universes Past with Aid of Starlight, 27 June 1996; NASA, Findings from Hubble Deep Field Home in on Distant Galaxies, news release 96-123, 26 June 1996.)
DFRC test pilot Edward T. Schneider received the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Chanute Flight Test Award for his work testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle at extremely high angles of attack. The Institute honored Schneider at the World Aviation Congress and Exposition, held in Los Angeles, California. Schneider had participated in NASAs Attack Research Program, meant to improve the control and maneuverability of high- performance aircraft. He tested the thrust-vectoring control system installed in the F-18, which allowed pilots to make high-angle motions and still maintain control of their planes. Schneider spent nine years testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle during his distinguished 18-year career as a test pilot. Schneider had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal in 1996.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), Dryden Pilot Receives Flying Award, 25 October 1996, http://www.nasa.gov/lb/centers/dryden/news/Biographies/Pilots/bd-dfrc-p014.html (accessed 5 August 2007).)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planets surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars, New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
NASA announced the completion of a major benchmark in the development of its Advanced X- ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as engineers completed the delicate task of assembling the high-resolution, cylindrical mirrors needed for the facilitys telescope. Engineers aligned and cemented the mirrors into place at the facility in Rochester, New York. Unlike optical telescopes, the AXAF used a series of shallow mirrors shaped like cylindrical cones to produce its image. AXAFs mirrors were the largest set of such mirrors ever constructed.(NASA, Completion of Mirror Assembly Marks Milestone for NASAs Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, news release 96-212, 18 October 1996.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeremiah F. Creedon as Director of LARC. Creedon succeeded Paul F. Holloway, who had served for 36 years at LARC. With this appointment, Creedon moved up from his position as LARCs Director of the Airframe Systems Program Office to return to the research center where he had begun his engineering career 33 years earlier. During his career at NASA, Creedon had received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Executive in the Senior Executive Service, NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive in Senior Executive Service.(NASA, Dr. Jeremiah Creedon Named Director, Langley Research Center, news release 96-152, 31 July 1996.)
Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houstons Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown, HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, Federal Employees Face Backlog Here, Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rockets ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Marss atmosphere. The probes failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a terrible, terrible tragedy for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, Russians Mars Probe Crashes, Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy, Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking upon Mission STS-78. The Shuttle carried U.S. astronauts Terrence T. Henricks, Kevin R. Kregel, Richard M. Linnehan, Susan J. Helms, and Charles E. Brady Jr.; French astronaut Jean-Jacques Favier; and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thrisk. NASA planned to use an orbiting research laboratory to conduct a variety of experiments during the mission. In addition to its human cargo, the Shuttle transported the payload for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences, used to conduct research on musculoskeletal physiology and on the responses of living organisms to a low- gravity environment.(NASA, Life and Microgravity Science Research Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-78, news release 96-116, June 1996; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 103.)
With funding from NASAs Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, researchers at Utah State University successfully developed a strain of wheat suitable for growth in space. The space wheat, called USU-Apogee, produced a yield equivalent to 600 bushels of grain per acre (21,000 liters of grain per 4,100 square meters), a rate three times more than the rate achieved in previous experiments. Researchers had worked for more than a decade developing the wheat. During the tests, USU- Apogee had thrived under the difficult conditions of artificial sunlight and high levels of carbon dioxide. In conditions approximating the environment in space, the wheat grew on short stalks, produced an unusually large number of seeds, and maintained green leaf tips (reflecting proper calcium levels). Scientists hoped that astronauts would be able to grow the wheat in the future International Space Station, as a more economical means of providing food for long-term space residents than frequent Shuttle supply missions.(NASA, Utah State University Develops Space Crop, news release 96-75, 15 April 1996.)
NASA completed the first step in its transition to using a single contractor to conduct all Shuttle operations, signing two novation agreements with the newly formed United Space Alliance (USA). NASA had announced in 1995 that it would consolidate its Shuttle operations under a single contract with USA, on a noncompetitive basis. When Rockwell International Corporation and Lockheed Martin Corporation developed USA as a joint venture, the two companies already held nearly 70 percent of the dollar value of all Shuttle-related contracts. NASA officials expected that the move to a single contract would reduce costs by eliminating duplicative work and streamlining management.(NASA, Shuttle Contracts Take First Step Toward Consolidation, news release 96-73, 12 April 1996.)
A team of scientists from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia discovered new evidence that pushed back considerably the scientifically estimated date of the origin of life on Earth. The researchers projected that the Earths age might be 350 million years older than previously thought. The research team, led by Gustaf Arrhenius, published its findings in the 7 November issue of Nature. The scientists argued that the presence of apatite (basic calcium phosphate) in Earths oldest known sediment sequences suggested that life had emerged on Earth 3.85 billion years ago. The scientific community met these findings with both excitement and skepticism.(S. J. Mojzsis et al., Evidence for Life on Earth Before 3,800 Million Years Ago, Nature 384, no. 6604 (7 November 1996): 55; Malcolm W. Browne, Evidence Puts Date for Lifes Origin Back Millions of Years, New York Times, 7 November 1996.)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope identified 18 star clusters that they believed to be embryonic galaxies. According to the New York Times, because the clusters resided 11 billion light-years from Earth, essentially, the scientists had glimpsed back in time. The observations supported a theory that galaxies begin with stars grouping together. The astronomers from Arizona State University and the University of Alabama called the discovery the first page in an otherwise blank book.(Lee Bowman, Possible View of Galaxies Being Born, Washington Times, 5 September 1996; John Noble Wilford, Looking Back 11 Billion Light-Years, a Glimpse at Galaxy Birth, New York Times, 5 September 1996. 125 NASA, Lopez-Alegria To Replace Lawrence as NASA Manager to Russia, news release 96-182, 5 September 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station, news release, 21 May 1996.)
Former U.S. Representative Norman Y. Mineta received NASAs Distinguished Service Medal, the highest civilian honor awarded by NASA. Mineta had served 21 years in the U.S. Congress, representing Californias Silicon Valley in the House of Representatives. As chairperson of the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation, he had played a vital role in bolstering the nations transportation infrastructure and fostering technological research. Mineta remarked that serving over the long term as the senior member of the House Committee on Science and Technology had given him the opportunity to see firsthand NASAs significant achievements. When he accepted the award at a private ceremony, Mineta said, Im deeply honored to be recognized by NASA for any contributions I made furthering the mission of our nations space operations.
Paul F. Holloway, Director of Langley Research Center (LARC) in Hampton, Virginia, announced his retirement. Holloway had served at LARC for his entire aerospace career, beginning in 1960. He became the Centers Director in 1991, overseeing 4,500 employees and a budget of more than US$600 million. During his tenure, Holloway published 42 technical articles in the fields of hypersonic aerodynamics; boundary layer transition and flow separation; analysis of entry flight mechanics; and Earth orbital and planetary space missions. NASA awarded Holloway its Outstanding Leadership Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, Distinguished Service Medal, and Equal Employment Opportunity Medal. Holloway also received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Service and two Senior Executive Service Distinguished Presidential Rank Awards. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin summarized Holloways contributions to NASA, saying that his career spans almost the entire history of the Space Age, and his many achievements at Langley are a tribute to his talent, his professionalism, and his dedication to the importance of NASA aeronautical programs.(NASA, NASA Langley Director Paul F. Holloway To Step Down, news release 96-127, 2 July 1996.)
G. Porter Bridwell retired after nearly 40 years of service at MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Bridwell had served as Director of MSFC from 1994 until his retirement. He left the Center with an annual operating budget of US$2.5 billion and more than 3,000 employees. Bridwell had spent most of his career at MSFC, serving briefly as Acting Director of Stennis Space Center in 1987, and at NASA Headquarters from 1993 to 1994. Bridwell had also been a member of the space station redesign team. During his tenure, Bridwell had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal, the Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Exceptional Achievement Medal, attaining the rank of Meritorious Executive.3 NASA announced that J. Wayne Littles would take over as the new Director of MSFC.(NASA, Littles Named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, news release 96-3, 16 January 1996. 1)
Scientists announced the discovery of frozen water on the Moon, calling into question the long- held belief that the Moon lacked any form of hydration. The Clementine spacecraft had found the ice while using radar signals to examine the depths of the Moons craters. The discovery was the by-product of a US$75 million mission, co-sponsored by NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense, to test the Ballistic Missile Defense Organizations Star Wars sensors developed to detect and track missiles. The possible ice deposit, composed of the suspected ice crystals mixed with dirt and spread over a vast landscape, was termed a dirty lake. The scientists discovered the ice in a massive, extremely deep crater. One scientist described the crater as twice the size of Puerto Rico and deeper than the height of Mount Everest. Scientists discussing the significance of the discovery postulated that the presence of water on the Moon might be a boon to future space exploration, perhaps enabling the construction of a filling station on the Moon. Other scientists offered a more sober opinion of the findings, referring to reports that the presence of water on the Moon might someday allow for colonization as hyperbole.(John Noble Wilford, The Moon May Have Water, and Many New Possibilities, New York Times, 4 December 1996; Associated Press, Deep Within Lunar Crater, Small Frozen Lake Is Found, 3 December 1996; Joyce Price, Prospect of Ice on Moon Fires Hopes of Scientists, Washington Times, 4 December 1996; Curt Suplee, The Moons Dirty Lake Makes Waves, Washington Post, 4 December 1996.)
In a study released in the journal Science, Charles P. Sonett detailed the results of his research measuring changes in the motion of Earth. Sonett reported that tidal forces from the gravitational force of the Moon had caused the Earths rotation to slow gradually over a period of millions of years. About 900 million years ago, according to Sonett, the length of the Earths day was only about 18 hours. The gravitational pull of the Moon, Sonett explained, acts like a brake on the Earth.(C. P. Sonett et al., Late Proterozoic and Paleozoic Tides, Retreat of the Moon, and Rotation of the Earth, Science 273, no. 5271 (5 July 1996): 100104; Associated Press, Astrodynamics: A Brake on the Earths Spin, 8 July 1996.)
Scientists at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.
NASA returned the record-setting, solar-powered, research aircraft Pathfinder to flight-testing at Dryden Flight Research Center. Pathfinder had set an altitude record of more than 50,000 feet (15,000 meters) during a flight on 11 September 1995. Wear and tear during previous operations, as well as a ground accident inside a hangar, had damaged the craft. NASA had hired AeroVironment to repair the remotely piloted plane. AeroVironment made several improvements and rebuilt the damaged portions of the aircraft. The company installed stronger rib structure and higher-efficiency solar cells. NASA had adopted Pathfinder in the 1980s after the aircrafts release from a classified military program.(NASA, Solar-Powered Pathfinder Returns to Skies, news release, 25 November 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASAs Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight, New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77, news release 96-83, May 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nations oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASAs Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASAs final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbias launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttles mission.(Reuters, Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly, 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites, New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-80Press Kit, news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope, 20 November 1996.)
NASA scientist Benjamin F. Chao explained to the New York Times the results of his research on Earths orbit. A geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, Chao attributed the Earths slightly changed orbital pattern to the increased construction of dams. As the planets population has grown, people had attempted to maximize use of Earths limited water resources by building reservoirs. Using geophysics, international data, and theoretical calculations, Chao postulated that this increase in impounded water on the Earths surface had actually helped speed up the Earths orbit. Chao first made public his findings in the Geophysical Research Papers. Some members of the scientific community challenged his conclusions.(Malcolm W. Browne, Dams for Water Supply Are Altering Earths Orbit, Expert Says, New York Times, 3 March 1996.)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft discovered a giant iron core taking up half of the diameter of Jupiters moon Io, as well as a large hole in Jupiters magnetic field. Galileo Project Scientist Torrence V. Johnson of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) identified Io as the most geographically active body in the [s]olar [s]ystem. Galileo scientists also measured the intense heat Jupiter generates, noting that the planet has a massive gravity field. Galileo managed to come within 559 miles (900 kilometers) of Jupiter during its 1995 flyby, allowing scientists to locate the iron core and the hole in the magnetic field. Although they were still grappling with the significance of the completely unexpected finds, scientists reported their early analysis of the data in Science magazine.(J. D. Anderson, W. L. Sjogren, and G. Schubert, Galileo Gravity Results and the Internal Structure of Lo, Science 272, no. 5262 (3 May 1996): 709712; NASA, Galileo Finds Giant Iron Core in Jupiters Moon Io, news release 96-89, 3 May 1996.)
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) at Edwards Air Force Base in California commemorated its 50th anniversary with a celebration called Discovery Through Flight Research. The Center got its start when five aeronautical engineers from Langley Research Center arrived to explore flight beyond the speed of sound, in preparation for the X-1 tests, featuring pilot Charles E. Chuck Yeager at the controls. Researchers at DFRC contributed to a wide variety of aeronautical achievements, including breaking the sound barrier and helping launch the Space Shuttle program. At the age of 50, DFRC employed 900 government and civilian contractor employees.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), Dryden Marks Half-Century of Achievements, 25 September 1996. 136 Associated Press, Ancient Spacecraft, 1 October 1996.)
NASA released images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, revealing a dust storm on Mars nearly the size of the state of Texas. The storm appeared in the pictures of the planet as a 600- mile-long (965-kilometer-long), salmon-colored patch. Scientists believed this was the first time that one of the huge storms had neared the planets northern polar ice cap.(Reuters, Hubble Shows Texas-Size Dust Storm on Mars, 4 November 1996.)
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASAs Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as the first day of a new space program in America. Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve very good safety ratings.(Associated Press, NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry, 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact, 30 September 1996; United Press International, NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact, 1 October 1996.)
Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. Were looking to spark a constructive competition, Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the X Prize on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
NASA researchers at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) completed the testing of the F- 16XL at Edwards Air Force Base. The tests had taken more than one year to complete. Scientists were studying how the modified F-16 flew with US$14 million laminar-flow gloves on its wings. The data they collected demonstrated that the glove had reduced the turbulent layer of air that passes over an airplanes wing during flight. Project Manager Carol A. Reukauf called the tests successful. NASA hoped the results would provide manufacturers with a new technology that would improve aeronautical design, decreasing air drag on airplanes and, consequently, reducing the fuel required to fly.(Jay Levine, Laminar Flow Tests Successful, Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 10 October 1996. 143 NASA, The X-Planes: 50 Years of High Desert Right Stuff, news release 96-204, 10 October 1996. 144 Reuters, Russia Postpones Mir Supply Rocket Mission, 16 October 1996.)
Astronomers at California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of what they believed to be the most distant galaxy ever glimpsed from the Earth. The team of scientists, including Thomas A. Barlow, Limin Liu, Wallace L. W. Sargent, and Donna S. Womble, had stumbled across the unnamed galaxy while studying a quasar silhouetted by the galaxys light. The team used the W. M. Keck Observatory atop the Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii. In comparison to other documented galaxies, their find was a relatively young galaxyprobably formed less than 1 billion years after the Big Bang. The galaxy resides near the constellation Virgo. Ironically, since the galaxy lies 14 billion light-years away from Earth, the scientists had no way of knowing whether their discovery still actually existed. The scientists hoped that their discovery would offer new understanding of the period when stars began to congregate into galaxies.(California Institute of Technology, Astronomers Discover the Most Distant Galaxy, news release, 31 January 1996; Reuters, Scientists Discover Farthest Galaxy Yet, 1 February 1996; John Noble Wilford, New Galaxy May Shed Light on Universe, New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
The experimental DC-XA flight vehicle completed a successful test flight, flying nearly 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the desert of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico and landing safely. NASA researchers and administrators hoped that the rocket would one day replace the Space Shuttle as the primary means of space exploration. The reusable, unpiloted rocket, taking off and landing from a vertical position, would cut significantly the costs of delivering payloads into orbit. NASA announced that the vehicle had been renamed Clipper Graham, in honor of Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham. Graham, who died on 31 December 1995, had served as an advisor to President Ronald Reagan and had been an early proponent for the development of reusable rockets. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed optimism that NASA would be able to replace the Shuttle with the DC-XA flight vehicle: We are going to fly the [S]huttle safely until we can replace it. But, by God, we are going to replace the [S]huttle.(NASA, Revolutionary New Launch Vehicle Renamed for Space Pioneer, news release 96-114, 7 June 1996; Associated Press, Reusable Rocket Ends Flight, 7 June 1996.)
NASA and the scientific community celebrated the 15th anniversary of the Space Shuttle program. NASA had adopted the Shuttle as a means of controlling the costs of exploring space. However, NASA conceded that, since its deployment, the Shuttle had flown only nine times per year, compared with the 24 to 60 Shuttle flights per year anticipated. Furthermore, the cost of flying the Shuttle had reached almost US$500,000 more per mission than expected. During its first 15 years, the Shuttles had flown 76 missions, including 51 following the Challenger accident. The Shuttles had transported 545 tons (490,000 kilograms or 490 tonnes) of payloads to space, bringing back to Earth 18.5 tons (17,000 kilograms or 17 tonnes) of payloads. During the same period, 440 astronauts from 12 countries flew aboard the Shuttles. NASA experts predicted that the Shuttle would remain the primary vehicle of space exploration well into the 21st century.(Martin Burkey, A Lean, Mean Teen: Shuttle Turns 15, Huntsville Times (AL), 13 April 1996; Seth Borenstein, Costly History Dogs Shuttle on Anniversary, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 12 April 1996.)
At the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Adriana C. Ocampo, a geologist at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, announced the discovery of a chain of impact craters in Chad. According to a team of scientists, the presence of the craters suggested that a sizable comet or asteroid might have struck ancient Earth. Scientists discovered the craters using the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C), which flew on Shuttle Endeavours Mission STS-59 in 1994. The impact craters were only the second chain of large craters ever discovered on Earth and the first impact craters found using the SIR-C technology. Ocampo warned that scientists still needed to excavate the ground extensively before they could be sure that the craters were indeed impact structures.(NASA, Chain of Impact Craters Suggested by Spaceborne Radar Images, news release 96-55, 20 March 1996. 46 NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-76Press Kit, news release 96-46, March 1996; William Harwood, Shuttle Takes Off for Russian Mir Linkup, Washington Post, March 23, 1996.)
NASA disclosed the startling discoveries of Rice University astronomer C. Robert ODell and graduate student Kerry P. Handron, who had used images captured by the Hubble Space Telescope to pinpoint thousands of gigantic, tadpole-shaped objects surrounding a dying star, the first time that scientists had observed the forms in such abundance. The scientists hypothesized that the final outbursts of the dying star probably caused the gaseous knots, each several billion miles across. ODell concluded that if a dying star caused the gaseous knots, then trillions of these forms might litter the universe.(NASA, Hubble Finds Thousands of Gaseous Fragments Around Star, news release 96-74, 15 April 1996.)
A team of astronomers announced at the American Astronomical Society convention that they had discovered ordinary vinegar in a stellar cloud 25,000 light-years away from Earth. The presence of an organic molecule, which may have played a role in the formation of life, excited scientists. Acetic acid could have been one of the first steps toward the chemicals of life, explained Lewis E. Snyder, a member of the research team that made the discovery. Scientists had discovered complex molecules in space before, but formic acid, discovered in 1975, was the only other basic molecule detected before the discovery of the vinegar.(John Noble Wilford, Whiff of Organic Stuff Found Between Stars, New York Times, 11 June 1996; Associated Press, Vinegar Found in Far Away Space, 11 June 1996.)
Researchers at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center announced that tests aimed at improving the efficiency of Space Shuttle engines would likely translate into substantial savings for commercial airlines as well. Researchers had learned that locating an engines turbine airfoils in the optimum position could cut down the flow of fluttering wakes of gases. When wakes occur, an engine requires additional energy to run and generates higher temperatures. NASA researchers predicted that the findings would have special application for the Boeing 777. Improving efficiency by a half percent would save hundreds of gallons of fuel per flight. The researchers had based the new positioning of the turbines upon the simple principle evident when a bike racer drafts behind a competitorbecause the first rider takes the full brunt of the wind, the second can travel equally as fast with less exertion. The engineers found that by aligning turbines in the most efficient positions, the engine derived a similar drafting.(NASA, Applying NASA Shuttle Engine Test Findings May Save Airlines Millions in Fuel Costs, news release 96-254, 12 December 1996.)
Lockheed Martin announced its intention to cut 200 jobs at its facility for the production of external fuel tanks for NASAs Space Shuttle. NASAs budget reductions had caused the layoffs, according to Lockheed. Lockheed Martins facility in New Orleans employed more than 2,500 workers in 1996.
NASA and the ESA made available images taken of Comet Hyakutake as it approached the Sun. The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory had captured the pictures during the appearance of the comet in late April 1996. The Naval Research Laboratory had built a special instrumentthe Large Angle Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO)to record the images. Operating aboard SOHO, LASCO suppressed the glare of the Sun, exposing the comet and its tails. In addition, the instrument produced the equivalent of a time-lapse movie of Hyakutake, thereby documenting the comets tails as they changed direction in reaction to the Suns forces. LASCO also allowed scientists to observe coronal mass ejectionsthe expulsion of hot gases. Researchers used the data to learn more about how comets interact with the Sun and about the behavior of comet tails.(NASA, SOHO Images Comet Hyakutakes Close Encounter with the Sun, news release, 15 May 1996. 72 Paul Hoversten, A Space Race with a Lofty Goal: Cash, USA Today, 17 May 1996.)
In a postflight inspection, NASA engineers discovered that one loose screw had caused the hatch on Shuttle Columbia to jam, preventing the astronauts from taking their scheduled spacewalks. The screw had probably dislodged during takeoff, falling into the gears of the hatch. NASA had decided to cancel the spacewalks, rather than force the hatch open and risk damaging it permanently. With the Shuttle scheduled to launch again in one month, NASA faced the question of whether to remove and replace the gearboxes on all the hatches inside the Shuttle as a precautionary measure.(Associated Press, Loose Screw Caused Stuck Hatch on Shuttle, 12 December 1996; Associated Press, NASA Hatching Up Plan in Case Emergency Spacewalk Is Needed, 2 December 1996.)
In Marshall Space Flight Centers (MSFCs) underwater weightless simulator, NASA began testing a remotely controlled robot created by a team of researchers from the University of Maryland. Team leaders nicknamed the robot Ranger, predicting that it would one day assist astronauts aboard the Shuttle or the ISS. Project Manager Joseph Parrish pointed out that astronauts often use valuable spacewalk time completing mundane tasks, such as collecting tools, establishing footholds, and cleaning up. Scientists hoped Ranger could perform such tasks under the command of an operator located in space or even that of an operator at NASAs command center. The 8-foot-long (2.4-meter-long), 1,700-pound (770-kilogram) robot used gas thrusters, robotic arms, lights, and cameras. The academic project filled a void in experimental robot design, a program affected by NASAs budget cuts. Allowing university researchers and professors to design and test the robot cost NASA about US$8 million, far less than NASA would pay for similar projects contracted through an aerospace firm. During the tests, the University of Marylands team operated Ranger remotely from its campus hundreds of miles away from MSFCs facility in Huntsville, Alabama.(Martin Burkey, Ranger Gets a Workout, Huntsville Times (AL), 13 September 1996.)
NASA released Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images revealing much of the surface of Pluto for the first time. The Pluto imaging team declared the quality of the pictures better than they had expected. Hubble has brought Pluto from a fuzzy, distant dot of light, to a world which we can begin to map, and watch for surface changes, remarked Marc W. Buie, a member of the team. The HST took snapshots of nearly the entire surface of the planet during 6.4 days of its rotation. The pictures showed Plutos complexity, revealing nearly a dozen distinct provinces, and confirming the existence of a polar ice cap, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to verify. NASA officials were optimistic that the images would pave the way for a proposed Pluto flyby mission in the coming years. Pluto remained the only planet not yet visited by a spacecraft.(NASA, Hubble Reveals Surface of Pluto for First Time, news release 96-43, 7 March 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission, 10 March 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers funds on NASAs research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy. The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame, news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbeys distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management. Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbeys superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center, news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the stations air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISSs air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test, news release, 10 May 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space ShuttleMir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttles three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
The Russian-built Tu-144LL supersonic passenger jet, which U.S. and Russian aerospace industries and NASA had modified for commercial purposes, performed well in its first test flight after refurbishment. The aircraft took off from the Zhukovsky Airfield south of Moscow. During the Tu-144LL flight, researchers studied the impact of excessive speeds on the aircrafts internal and exterior surfaces, engine temperature, and handling. The aircrafts body, constructed primarily from light aluminum alloy, held up well during the initial test. The Tu-144LL project supported NASAs High-Speed Research Program, which had begun in 1990, to encourage the development of technologies supporting supersonic commercial travel. The Boeing Company had led the U.S. industry involvement in the project, with support from McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, Rockwell International Corporation, Pratt & Whitney, and General Electric Company. The projects aim was to prepare flight-research facilities to adapt to market demands of the future. Aviation experts predicted that a commercial market for advanced supersonic transport would evolve early in the 21st century.(NASA, First Flight of U.S.-Russian Supersonic Testbed Scheduled for Nov. 29, news release N96-78, 26 November 1996; Russian Tu-144LL SST Joint NASA Flying LaboratoryFlight November 29, 1996, http://nix.larc.nasa.gov/info;jsessionid=1f4kro1asktqm?id=EC96-43859-2&orgid=7 (accessed 1 August 2007).)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft completed a flyby of Jupiters largest moon, Ganymede, passing only 519 miles (835 kilometers) above the moons surface. NASA had equipped Galileo with 10 scientific instruments to gather data from the expedition. The instruments began making measurements on 23 June, as the probe approached Ganymede. Images revealed an icy surface, with bright, clean ice covering part of the moon and darker, dirty ice covering the rest. This was the first data gathered during a collection mission planned for 1996 and 1997, in which Galileo would pass Ganymede before completing 11 orbits of Jupiter and surveying the planets other moons. NASA monitored Galileos progress through its Deep Space Network, using control stations in California, Spain, and Australia. Scientists and engineers at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory had built the Galileo spacecraft.(NASA, Galileo Readies for Close Flyby of Jupiters Biggest Moon, news release 96-122, June 1996.)
The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 2A rocket, a satellite aimed at serving the burgeoning European television market. The satellite Hot Bird 2 cost US$100 million to develop and was powerful enough to beam television images throughout Europe and the Middle East. Eutelsat led a consortium of co-owner companies from the 45 different countries that co-own the satellite. Eutelsat assumed responsibility for operating Hot Bird 2, calling it the most powerful commercial satellite launched to date.(Todd Halverson, Atlas Sends $100 Million Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 1996.)
NASA reported that a team of scientists from Johnson Space Center and Stanford University had found evidence that strongly suggested that primitive life existed on the planet Mars. During a two-year study, the researchers discovered what they believed to be organic molecules of Martian origin on a potato-sized meteorite, which members of the National Science Foundations Antarctica Meteorite Program had found in 1984. Scientists estimated that the meteorite was about 4.5 billion years old. According to the teams report, published in Science magazine, the remnants on the meteorite shared several mineral characteristics indicating biological activity, possibly even containing microscopic fossils of primitive, bacteria-like organisms. The minute scale of the evidence required the careful research of the team of specialists in the fields of microbiology, mineralogy, and chemistry. The largest of the possible fossils measured about 1/100th the diameter of a human hair. Only with recently developed technological instruments, including a dual-laser mass spectrometer, were the scientists able to make any substantial observations.112 The announcement generated immediate excitement in the scientific community and in the mass media, although some scientists responded with a multitude of critical questions. The researchers carefully qualified their report, stating, It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let alone on Mars.113 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make samples of the meteorite available to scientists throughout the world, to encourage a full scientific investigation.(McKay et al., Search for Past Life on Mars, 924930; NASA, Meteorite Yields Evidence; Sawyer, NASA Releases Images.)
At a conference of the American Astronomical Society in San Antonio, Texas, a team of U.S. astronomers announced the discovery of two new stars with the characteristics to sustain life within their solar systems. The astronomers identified the bodies, both visible to the naked eye, as star 70 Virginis in the constellation Virgo and a star orbiting 47 Ursae Majoris in the Big Dipper. Geoffrey Marcy and Paul Butler, researchers affiliated with the University of California at Berkeley and San Francisco State University, spent nine years monitoring 120 Sun-like stars in order to discover the two stars.
Joseph B. Gurman of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHOs scientists were excited and surprised to find that movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun. The scientists observed that the Suns plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found, news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASAs Distinguished Service Medal, 2 May 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Forced to remain in space an additional day because of bad weather, Columbia and its crew had set an endurance record of nearly 18 days in space, only one day short of the previous record of 17 days. Heavy fog in Florida was the cause of the landing delay.(Associated Press, Space Shuttle Sets a Record for a Mission, 7 December 1996.)
NASA announced the completion, on time and on budget, of the first major component of the ISS. Russias Khrunichev Industries and the Boeing Company had combined efforts to construct Functional Cargo Block (known by its Russian abbreviation FGB), a 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18-tonne) pressurized module. Members of the international space team planned to launch the spacecraft from Russia in November 1997. FGB formed the initial building block of the ISS, featuring computer equipment, thermal controls, fire detection tools, and navigational apparatus. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center and Boeing Defense and Space Group received US$190 million for developing and building the craft. According to the plan, the ISS team would add many other components to FGB.(NASA, Stations First Module Assembled; Ready for Testing, news release 96-253, 9 December 1996.)
Without holding any subcommittee hearings on the matter, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology voted to trim NASAs budget for 1997 by US$450 million. NASA operated under a US$13.8 billion budget in 1996. Most of the cuts were from the budget of the initiative Mission to Planet Earth.(Brett Davis, Panel Sets $450 Million NASA Budget Cut, Huntsville Times (AL), 25 April 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour made a smooth sunrise landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bringing to its close a fruitful 10-day research mission. The Shuttle crew celebrated their record achievement of 21 hours flying in close proximity to the satellites they had released. NASA planned to move Endeavour to Palmdale, California, for refurbishing.(Stefanie Asin, Welcome Back, Endeavour, Shuttle Lands at Kennedy Space Center After 10-Day Mission, Houston Chronicle, 30 May 1996.)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) scientists began the most comprehensive testing to date on how plants produce food and oxygen in space. The experiment, part of NASAs development of a Controlled Ecological Life Support System, called for the analysis of 128 potato plants and 6,500 wheat seeds. NASA scientists planned for the study to last from one to three years. NASA agricultural engineer John Sager, praising NASAs earlier success in producing crop species for space, explained the experiments significance: If we plan to live in space . . . we must determine if this system will be as successful over longer periods of time. Scientists were using KSCs Biomass Production Chamber to test the crops in a space-like environment. NASA had begun in 1987 to test strains of crops and plants for their ability to produce oxygen and food in space.(NASA, NASA Begins Study on Reliability of Space Life Support System, news release 96-120, 12 June 1996. 86 Rowan Scarborough, Engen To Head Air and Space, Washington Times, 13 June 1996.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttles appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans, 21 October 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldins efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldins mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers, HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston, 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, Goldins Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
Columbia astronauts set a series of small fires inside the Shuttle to help NASA scientists improve their design of smoke detectors and fire extinguishers for use in a weightless environment. The fires spread quickly within the enclosed vehicle. Astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman marveled at the behavior of the flames, which was completely different in a weightless environment from that typically observed on Earth. The fires scattered quickly and burned much more intensely than on Earth. NASA had never before tested the fire-detection equipment in a space environment. The fire equipment worked properly, and the crew put out all fires without incident.(Associated Press, Shuttle Astronauts Set Fires To Check Safety Equipment, 3 March 1996.)
An international team of researchers announced that, while tracking Comet Hyakutake in March 1996, they had discovered x-rays emitting from the comet. German scientists working at Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had collaborated on the project with NASA scientists based at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Konrad Dennryl, who had directed the use of Germanys ROSAT (Rontgensatellit) for the project, called the discovery of the x-rays a thrilling moment. The comet emitted far stronger radiation signals than the scientists had expected, about 100 times brighter than anticipated. The scientists could not explain why the comet gave off such intense x-rays, but offered two preliminary hypotheses: 1) the gaseous molecules surrounding the comet absorbed x-rays from the Sun before reemitting the same x-rays; or 2) violent collisions between the comet material and the supersonic wind and particles from the Sun produced the extraordinarily strong x-rays. The scientists vowed to ascertain conclusively why the comet x-rays behaved as they did.(NASA, First X-rays from a Comet Discovered, new release 96-66, 4 April 1996; John Noble Wilford, Scientists Seek Explanation for X-rays Seen from Comet, New York Times, 5 April 1996.)
NASA announced the recipients of the 1996 Software of the Year Award, honoring those individuals who had created software enhancing NASAs mission and the U.S. aerospace industry. Linked Windows Interactive Data System, developed by NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Tetrahedral Unstructured Software System, developed by LARC, won the 1996 awards. The former system allowed scientists to examine geophysical and climatological data gathered from satellites, and the latter aided researchers in studying problems with spacecraft, rotorcraft, automotive, turbomachinery, and medical analysis and design.(NASA, NASA Announces 1996 Software of the Year Award Recipients, news release, 9 July 1996.)
bombers marked the end of an era in the aerospace industry. The Wall Street Journal estimated that Boeings share of aerospace and defense revenues would increase to US$89 billion annually.(The Boeing Company, Boeing To Acquire Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Units, news release, 1 August 1996; NASA, NASA Comment on Boeing Corporation Acquisition of Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Businesses, news release N96-51, 1 August 1996; Associated Press, Boeing To Buy Rockwell Internationals Aerospace Holdings, 1 August 1996; James F. Peltz, Rockwell To Sell Space and Defense Divisions to Boeing, Los Angeles Times, 2 August 1996; Jeff Cole and Steven Lipin, Boeing Deal Will Strengthen Company, Wall Street Journal, 2 August 1996.)
NASA released time-lapse photographs taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), making the images immediately available on the Internet. Based on these images, lauded as the deepest images of the universe ever taken, scientists raised their estimate of the number of galaxies in the universe from 10 to 50 billion; Suddenly, Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies, the New York Times reported. Using a narrow keyhole view and focusing the HST on a portion of the sky only the width of a dime, telescope operators probed deep into the universe. The images revealed the process of a stars death, as well as new information about how galaxies evolve. HST astronomer Howard E. Bond estimated that the Sun would die out in about 5 billion years.(John Noble Wilford, Suddenly Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies, New York Times, 16 January 1996; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Takes Portrait of Universe, Washington Post, 16 January 1996; NASA, New Hubble Images Available, news release N96-2, 17 January 1996.)
Continuing its efforts to cut costs by using private contractors, NASA awarded McDonnell Douglas Aerospace a US$500 million, eight-year contract to provide fixed-price medium-light (Med-Lite) class expendable launch vehicle services.31 NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program, and the Orbital Sciences Corporation served as the major subcontractor. At the time of the agreement, NASA had planned three Med-Lite missions launching from both the East Coast and the West Coast.
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakovas record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucids stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran, video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavours launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavours flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay, Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs, 16 January 1996.)
NASAs Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panels findings against NASAs risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chretien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, Panels Give Astronaut a Go for Launch to Mir, news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission, news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off, USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir, 26 September 1997.)
NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference, news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earths ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASAs trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, one word for our mission would be diversity. With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch, news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study, USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair, Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-Francois Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth ShuttleMir Mission, news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, Space Shuttle, 15 May 1997.)
The Astronauts Memorial Foundation recognized Major Robert H. Lawrence Jr. as the first black astronaut in NASA history, exactly 30 years after his death during a U.S. Air Force training mission. A ceremony adding Lawrences name to the Astronauts Memorial Foundations Space Mirror at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) ended a long bureaucratic debate over whether Lawrence qualified as an astronaut. Lawrence had never met the Air Force requisite that an astronaut must have flown at an altitude of least 50 miles (80 kilometers) above Earth, because, although he had received his appointment to the U.S. Air Forces Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program, he had died before flying in space. Therefore, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation had repeatedly refused to include his name on the Space Mirror at KSC. However, in 1996 U.S. Representative Bobby L. Rush (D-IL) had persuaded the Air Force to verify Lawrences status as an astronaut. Thereafter, the Astronauts Memorial Foundations board of directors voted, immediately and unanimously, to include Lawrences name on the Space Mirror.(Associated Press, Crash Victim Recognized as 1st Black Astronaut, 8 December 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foales tenure in space was among the longest in NASAs history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucids 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earths gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station, Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
During the terminal countdown of a demonstration test of the Titan IV-B rocket designed for the Cassini mission to Saturn, engineers noticed liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen leaking from the Centaur stage of the rocket. NASA had scheduled Cassinis launch for early October 1997. NASA officials delayed the launch until they could complete further tests, offering no immediate estimate of how long that might take. Interested scientists and engineers, however, predicted that the problem could postpone the mission by months or even years. Under the missions original timetable, NASA had expected Cassini to launch in October 1997, reaching Saturn in July 2004. Because of the length of the journey from Earth to Saturn, the scientific community expected that NASA would find it difficult to reschedule the flight. Moreover, experts warned that the alignment of planets providing an ideal launch date, such as that in October 1997, would not occur again for 12 to 14 years. At US$3.2 billion, Cassini was one of the last of NASAs high- stake, multibillion-dollar missions, drawing considerable attention during the climate of steady cost reductions that characterized the 1990s.(NASA, Countdown Test Reveals Fuel Leaks on Cassini Mission Centaur Upper Stage, 7 August 1997; Associated Press, Rocket Leak Could Postpone Landing on Saturn by Years, 8 August 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 12-day mission devoted to environmental research. The crew hoped that the atmospheric data gathered during the mission would help scientists understand the ozone damage and climate change affecting Earth.(Mark Carreau, Were Very, Very Happy, Shuttle Crew Says of Flight, Houston Chronicle, 20 August 1997.)
For the first time, NASA turned over control of a satellite project to a group of non-NASA scientists, placing the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) under the control of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at Harvard University. Harvard scientists had designed and built the satellite, but in previous NASA-university collaborations, NASA had always maintained control over implementation projects that it had funded. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA hoped the move would embolden non-NASA scientists: What we wanted to do is get the scientists closer to their spacecraft and close to their sources of data. NASA intended the AXAF, which had cost US$1.4 billion to develop, to study black holes and collisions between stars and galaxies.(Jules Crittenden, X-ray Tour of the Universe To Begin in Cambridge Lab, Boston Herald, 13 September 1997; Peter J. Howe, Putting the Universe into Focus, Boston Globe, 13 September 1997.)
NASA announced that, in one week, engineers had completed repairs to the damaged insulation of the Huygens probe, a part of the Cassini Mission to Saturn. Some scientists had feared that the tears to the insulation would set back the ambitious mission indefinitely. NASA engineers, however, had worked rapidly to disassemble the probe, completely inspect the damage, and make the appropriate repairs. Additionally, during the repair period, the project had received a welcome voice of support from the National Space Society, an independent space advocacy organization. The Society had issued a statement expressing its full confidence in NASA and in the mission, offsetting the protests against the missions use of nuclear fuel. The National Space Society declared, saying no to Cassini would be saying no to knowledge, defending the use of nuclear power as the only safe and viable option for such a lengthy mission: Cassinis Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) . . . have proven their safety and capability in 23 prior missions, including human missions. RTGs are the only realistic option for sending probes great distances from the Sun and will certainly play a part in future human missions.(NASA, Repair Work on Cassini Huygens Probe Completed Successfully, news release 97-198, 12 September 1997; Associated Press, National Space Society Adds to Support for Saturn Mission, 9 September 1997.)
In celebration of the 50th anniversary of his most historic achievement, Charles E. Chuck Yeager broke the speed of sound once again, flying an F-15 fighter jet in Californias Mojave Desert. NASA aired the recreation on NASA TV as part of its celebration at Edwards Air Force Base. Some historians call Yeagers 1947 feat the greatest achievement since the first successful flight of the Wright Brothers. The U.S. Postal Service observed the anniversary by unveiling a commemorative stamp, the 50th Anniversary of Supersonic Flight. The ceremonial jaunt was the 74-year old Yeagers last official U.S. Air Force flight.(Jay Levine, Yeager Bids Farewell to 800,000-Plus, Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997; NASA, Breaking the Sound Barrier Reenactment on NASA TV, news release N97-72, 9 October 1997.)
As the public anticipation of the appearance of Comet Hale-Bopp heightened, NASA announced that NASA-supported researchers would use its vast resourcesincluding spacecraft and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST)to study the comet. Scientists hoped that studying Hale-Bopp would lead to a greater general understanding of comets. Because comets are composed of loosely packed dirt and ice, experts consider them the best-preserved remnants of the early solar system. NASA disclosed that the Wallops Flight Facility would launch four rockets using ultraviolet wavelengths, to study Comet Hale-Bopp. In addition, the Ulysses spacecraft, the joint project of NASA and the ESA, which was already in orbit at the time, would chart the effects of solar-wind conditions on comets. However, scientists also disclosed that the close proximity of Hale-Bopp to the Sun posed a danger to HSTs sensitive detectors; therefore, they had determined to wait until a few months after the comets approach to Earth before tracking it with the telescope. JPL planned to host a public event, called Comet Chasers: On the Trail of a Comet, to bring scholars and the public together to discuss the significance of Comet Hale- Bopp.(NASA, NASA Plans Comet Hale-Bopp Observing Campaign, Activities, news release N97-17, 13 March 1996.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. I dont think the increased risk is worth the benefit, Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mirs safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASAs ShuttleMir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenners comments, I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself. The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldnt Board Mir, 19 September 1997.)
NASA researchers announced the discovery of wildly oscillating weather patterns on Mars. In yet another use for the HST images, scientists tracked much colder, cloudier, harsher weather conditions than they had expected. R. Todd Clancy of the Space Science Institute attributed Marss chaotic weather to a combination of factors, including the planets thin atmosphere and elliptical orbit and the ice and dust clouds surrounding it. When the planets orbit places it closest to the Sun, large windstorms push dust into the atmosphere; the dust absorbs sunlight, causing the air to heat, and Marss temperature to rise as high as 30F (-1C). HST images seemed to demonstrate further that, when the planet is farthest from the Sun, the dust storms remain at low altitudes, and ice clouds surround the planet, causing temperatures to plunge precipitously. The findings were of particular importance to NASAs ongoing Mars Pathfinder Project, with Pathfinders entrance into the Martian atmosphere planned for July 1997.(Warren E. Leary, Hubble Space Telescope Finds Big Shifts in Weather on Mars, New York Times, 21 May 1997; Paul Hoversten, Kaleidoscopic Mars Shows Its True Colors, USA Today, 21 May 1997; Associated Press, Hubble Finds Climate on Mars Harsher than Scientists Thought, 21 May 1997.)
NASA announced that lighting technology developed to grow plants in space might help treat cancerous brain tumors in children. According to a series of trials, some tumor-fighting drugs performed more proficiently when illuminated with the light-emitting diodes (LEDs) created for NASAs Shuttle plant experiments. To gauge further the effectiveness of LEDs in assisting cancer-fighting drugs, Dr. Harry Whelan of the Medical College of Milwaukee obtained permission from the Food and Drug Administration to use the LEDs on a limited number of children with cancer. Whelans method involved injecting his patient with cancer-fighting drugs and then placing an LED probe near the affected area. Whelan believed that the light focused the drugs on the dangerous tumors only, leaving the rest of the patients brain unaffected. NASAs Small Business Innovation Research program, allowing small businesses to adapt NASAs technologies for extended public uses, initiated the trial of LEDs to fight cancer.(NASA, Space Research Shines a Light on Tumors To Save Lives, news release 97-259, 6 November 1997.)
Educators, scientists, and politicians gathered to celebrate a new nationwide observanceSpace Daymeant to carry on President John F. Kennedys call to the nation for space exploration. On 25 May 1961, Kennedy had urged the United States to commit itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth, sparking NASAs successful development of human space travel. Advocates of Space Day argued that a day of celebrating previous achievements and calling for further advances would inspire future space explorers, particularly children. More than 1,900 schools across the nation participated in Space Day activities.(Martha Woodall for Knight-Ridder News Service, Space Day Today To Renew Interest in Outer Space, 22 May 1997.)
-50F (-6C), had excited scientists and public alike. Mars Pathfinder Web sites had received more than 565 million hits during the missions tenure. Using the treasure trove of information Pathfinder had gathered, scientists had concluded that Marss surface had many similarities to that of Earth. Perhaps the most compelling was the evidence compiled during the mission in support of the theory that, at one time, Mars had water on its surface. In addition, the missions research team concluded that water and wind had played crucial roles in shaping the planets surface. Mission controllers spoke of their gratitude for the data gathered, which would keep scientists busy for years, as well as about their excitement at the possibility of building upon Mars Pathfinders success in future missions.(Paul Hoversten, Mars Pathfinder Comes to Quiet End Today, USA Today, 4 November 1997; Reuters, NASA Announces End of Mars Pathfinder Mission, 5 November 1997.)
Astronaut F. Story Musgrave retired from NASA after 30 years of service and six Shuttle flights. During his more than 1,200 hours in space, Musgrave had flown on the first voyage of Challenger and had been a member of the first crew to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Flying aboard STS-80 in 1996, Musgrave became the oldest person to fly in space. NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations David C. Leestma said of Musgrave, throughout the Shuttle program, from its earliest stages to the present, Story has been instrumental in developing the techniques crew members use to perform spacewalks.(NASA, Astronaut Story Musgrave Retires from NASA, news release 97-188, 2 September 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a once-in-a-career opportunity for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94, news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission, Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April, New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission, 1 July 1997.)
NASA announced that astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had identified the most luminous star ever charted. The celestial mammoth, large enough to fill the diameter of the Earths orbit, reportedly releases up to 10 million times the power of the Sun. The team from the University of California at Los Angeles estimated that the star, possibly as old as 3 million years, weighs up to 200 times the mass of the Sun. The team nicknamed it the Pistol Star because it has a pistol-shaped nebula. Despite the stars mass and brightness, it was not visible to the naked eye because of the interstellar dust clouds between Earth and the center of the Milky Way. Therefore, astronomers had used infrared technology to observe the star. Team researcher Mark R. Morris argued that the discovery of the massive star near the center of the galaxy would force scientists to rethink their conceptions of how stars formed in the first place.(Associated Press, Space Monster, 8 October 1997; NASA, Hubble Identifies What May Be the Most Luminous Star Known, news release 97-227, 7 October 1997.)
NASA announced the completed construction of the Lunar Prospector spacecraft, scheduled for launch in September 1997. Engineers had designed the craft to obtain the first compositional and gravity maps of the Moon. G. Scott Hubbard, NASAs Lunar Prospector Mission Manager at Ames Research Center, praised contractor Lockheed Martin for its efficient construction and for keeping project costs at forecasted levels. NASA projected that the total cost to build Lunar Prospector and send it to the Moon would be about US$63 million. Scientists explained the need to return to the Moon, even though it was conquered decades ago, reminding the public that many important questions about the Moons history and its fundamental composition remained unexplored. Researchers hoped that Lunar Prospectors planned one-year mission orbiting the Moon would create a detailed map of the Moons surface composition and gravitational and magnetic fields. Lunar Prospector itself was compactonly 4.5 feet (1.37 meters) high, 4 feet (1.22 meters) in diameter, and weighing 660 pounds (300 kilograms). Even before its launch, scientists hailed Lunar Prospector as a new type of pathfinder, which had made history in terms of management style, technical approach, cost management, and focused science. Prospector used a gamma-ray spectrometer to provide maps of the composition of the Moon, thereby allowing scientists to understand better the elements present in the surface layer of the Moon.
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the crafts hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the stations safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenners suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel, New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station, Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past, 25; David Hoffman, U.S. Questions on Mirs Safety Anger Russia, Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky, USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
Software magnate James W. Benson announced the formation of SpaceDev, a new company focused on launching a robotic craft to an asteroid. Benson argued that space is a place, not a government project, claiming that his company would gather new scientific data for a fraction of the money NASA spent annually on space exploration. Specifically, Benson stated that his Near Earth Asteroid Prospector would land on an asteroid, gathering images and scientific readings. He estimated that his company could complete such a feat for under US$50 million, about US$200 million less than NASAs budget for a comparable mission. Benson and SpaceDev entered the realm of space exploration with overtly capitalist intentions. Benson planned to sell the data the company gathered to NASA and to universities for profit. Additionally, SpaceDev consultants estimated that asteroids might contain significant deposits of gold and other precious metals, worth US$14 trillion, which would become the property of whoever succeeded in accessing it. Of his overall theory on space and science, Benson clarified: When we deliver science, we expect to get paid. We expect a profit. We offer more science for the dollar.(Associated Press, Company Promotes First Private Launch to Asteroid, 10 September 1997.)
The famed Comet Hale-Bopp made its closest approach to the Sun, accelerating the comets process of shedding the gargantuan ice shards that, scientists hypothesized, might contain the basic ingredients necessary for life to begin. Based on data gathered by researchers during the 20 months between the discovery of the comet and its approach to the Sun, scientists theorized that the outer layers of Comet Hale-Bopp probably contained methanol, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen sulfide, and other carbon compounds. Because of its proximity to the Sun, many telescopes, most significantly the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had to stop tracking the 25-mile-wide (40-kilometer-wide) comet to avoid damage to their sensitive instruments. The approach of the comet was a scientific opportunity occurring once every 200 years or so, according to Brian G. Marsden of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Comet sightings thrilled amateur and professional astronomers alike, as well as causing some paranoia. In one tragically irrational response to its approach, 39 members of the Heavens Gate religious community committed suicide, under the delusion that they were about to catch a ride on a spaceship hidden behind the comets tail.(William J. Broad, The Comets Gift: Hints of How Earth Came to Life, New York Times, 1 April 1997.)
NASA announced that it had granted Hitco Technologies exclusive rights to use a NASA- developed, heat-resistant material to produce high-performance pistons. NASA had developed the carbon-carbon composite in the 1960s, for use as a heat shield for missile applications. Researchers speculated that pistons composed of carbon-carbon, a material with virtually no thermal expansion, would allow engines to perform more efficiently, holding their shape and rigidity in temperatures well above 2,500F (1,370C). According to G. Burton Northam of Langley Research Center, the carbon-carbon composite was the material of choice for the most demanding applications. Allowing industry to use one of NASAs patented technologies continued the trend of government-industry collaboration that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had fostered.
NASA released images taken from Galileo as it soared just 430 miles (690 kilometers) above the surface of Jupiters moon Europa. The images revealed the apparent traces of massive ice volcanoes. According to early analysis of the pictures, ice volcanoes and the movement of tectonic plates had reshaped the surface of Europa, one of the bodies in the universe that scientists believed might once have hosted life. The presence of water, organic compounds, and adequate heat, all of which would be present if ice volcanoes existed on the moon, had led scientists to focus on Europa as a location for possible development of life. According to Galileo team member Robert J. Sullivan, the apparent traces of ice volcanoes supported the even more significant possibility that an ocean might exist below the surface of Europa. Because NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) managed the Galileo Mission, the scientific community credited JPL with providing the vital new images of the surfaces of Europa and Jupiter that had led to further discussion about the possibility of life beyond Earth.(NASA, Ice Volcanoes Reshape Europas Chaotic Surface, news release 97-12, 17 January 1997.)
Representatives of NASA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services signed an agreement to enlist NASA technologies in the fight against breast cancer and other womens illnesses, creating a cooperative framework for the exchange of research information between the two agencies. According to Carolyn A. Krebs of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center, the technology allowing HST to map distant galaxies also had the potential to scan human tissue for malignant masses.(NASA, NASA/Heath and Human Services To Join Forces To Fight Womens Illnesses, news release N97-74, 20 October 1997.)
NASAs AeroVironment Pathfinderdistinct from Mars Pathfinderbroke the record for highest-flying, propeller-powered aircraft in a flight from the U.S. Navys Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, Hawaii. After climbing for nearly 7 hours, AeroVironment Pathfinder reached its record altitude, maintaining its height for about 13 minutes. Even at its peak distance from Earth, a span of more than 67 nautical miles (124 kilometers), AeroVironment Pathfinder transmitted data without any problems. The successful test was part of the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Program at NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center.
Abe Silverstein received the Guggenheim Medal, honoring his significant contributions to the advancement of flight. Silversteins 40-year career at NASA had included a period as the Director of Lewis Research Center. The citation praised him for his leadership in the Mercury and Gemini programs and for advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance, as well as crediting him with proposing the name Apollo for the lunar landing mission. Previous winners of the Guggenheim Medal included Orville Wright, William E. Boeing, and Charles A. Lindbergh.(NASA, Former NASA Official Receives Guggenheim Medal, news release 97-177, 14 August 1997.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASAs more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlightnot enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecrafts instruments from freezing. NASAs policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the missionthe first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planetas NASAs boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.(NASA, Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet, news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission, news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, Protestors Set Stage, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
The embattled effort to launch the Cassini spacecraft suffered a setback when NASA engineers discovered ripped insulation in its Huygens probe, while the craft was sitting on the launchpad in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Investigators concluded that a ground-air-conditioner malfunction had caused the tears. The possibility of a launch delay, even for only a few days, concerned scientists, because Saturn was moving farther and farther from Earth. A longer journey to Saturn would require the spacecraft to use more fuel for transport, leaving less for scientific exploration. The Cassini Mission to Saturn had received significant public criticism because 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of plutoniumthe largest amount of radioactive material ever rocketed into spacepowered the probe. Although protesters had organized marches and petitioned government officials to stop the launch, NASA spokesperson Douglas Isbell had pointed out NASAs perfect record of using nuclear fuel safely. Scientists from the European Space Agency and NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had planned and engineered the building of the 23rd nuclear-powered Cassini for the 11-year mission. Experts from both sides of the Atlantic were optimistic that engineers would repair the insulation damage quickly.(John Noble Wilford, Delay Expected for Spacecraft Going to Saturn, New York Times, 4 September 1997; John Kennedy and Seth Borenstein, Nuclear Launch Draws Protest, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 30 August 1997; Sharon K. Spry, Danger of Cassini Accident Too Great, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 August 1997; Associated Press, Mishap May Delay Mission to Saturn, 4 September 1997.)
Discoverys crew released the HST from the Shuttles cargo bay after nearly a week of maintenance and refurbishing work. The astronauts had conducted a fifth spacewalk, one more than NASA had originally planned, to place a makeshift patch on the HSTs peeling insulation. Its not the Hubble Space Telescope. Its really Hubble Space Telescope II, remarked NASAs chief Hubble scientist upon releasing the telescope. NASA deemed the mission a complete success.(Associated Press, Hubble Released To Search Universe, 20 February 1997; Associated Press, Looking for Answers, 19 February 1997.)
At the fourth Compton Symposium on Gamma Ray Astronomy and Astrophysics, scientists from Northwestern University and the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory announced the unexpected discovery of two clouds of antimatter in the Milky Way Galaxy. The researchers termed the material antimatter annihilation radiation. The team of researchers used NASAs Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to discover the clouds, which scientists could not fully explain. The origin of this new and unexpected source of antimatter is a mystery, William R. Purcell of Northwestern University explained. The scientists postulated that the clouds might have resulted from starbursts, jets of material from a nearby black hole, or from the merger of two neutron stars. Attempting to explain the startling nature of the discovery, Charles D. Dermer of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory said, It is like finding a new room in the house we have lived in since childhood. And the room is not emptyit has some engine or boiler making hot gas filled with annihilating antimatter.(NASA, Antimatter Clouds and Fountain Discovered in the Milky Way, news release 97-83, 28 April 1997; Malcolm W. Browne, Enormous Plume of Antimatter Alters View of the Milky Way, New York Times, 29 April 1997.)
U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN) sent a harshly worded letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, decrying NASAs chronic cost overruns and promising investigative hearings before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Although McCain and Frist both expressed support for NASA, and for space exploration in general, they wrote that continual, unabated overruns undermine the public faith in the space program.(Sean Holton, Senators Blast NASA for Program Overruns, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1997.)
Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced the agencys support for a film company to shoot a Hollywood-style movie aboard Mir. Russian director Yuri Kara had submitted a proposal to bring actors and film crews to Mir to shoot the film, entitled Space Flight Has a Price. Although the Russian Space Agency had not officially approved the project, the cash-strapped agency welcomed the unique opportunity to earn money. The biggest obstacle to the project seemed to be finding financial backers willing to pay to send Karas crew into space. The prospect of filming a movie aboard Mir raised some concerns in the space community, but Kara noted that Russian cosmonauts already had acting experience, having filmed commercials aboard the space station for products, including Pepsi-Cola, Omega watches, and Israeli milk.(Associated Press, Mirthe Movie, 5 November 1997.)
Astrophysicists William P. Blair, Robert A. Fesen, and Eric M. Schlegel presented to the American Astronomical Society the first images ever recorded of two supernovas colliding. The team used the Hubble Space Telescope to capture the images of the supernovas, more than 17 million light-years from Earth. Astronomers had suspected that collisions occurred between exploding stars, but had been unable to capture an image of the process, because it was so short- lived. Although the scientific community would continue to debate the implications of the image, Blair offered this assessment of its significance: It indicates that not only is there a lot of star formation going on, but a lot of those stars are massive. They are evolving quickly, and they are exploding as supernovas.
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linengers first spacewalk and Tsibliyevs third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk, news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, American, Russian Take a Spacewalk, 30 April 1997; Associated Press, Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk, 29 April 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discoverys Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as replacing 1970s technology with 1990s technology. In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discoverys crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to a whole different kind of science.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-82Press Kit, news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission, New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe, 8 February 1997.)
NASA announced the retirement of veteran astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman, who had flown on five Shuttle missions. Hoffman planned to continue his NASA service, becoming NASAs European representative in Paris. Hoffman was one of the four astronauts to take part in the spacewalking mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in 1993. In total, Hoffman had spent more than 1,200 hours in space and traveled more than 21.5 million miles (35 million kilometers).(NASA, Jeff Hoffman Retires from Astronaut Corps, new release 97-151, 9 July 1997.)
NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) selected Scientific and Commercial Systems Corporation of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide support services for its Huntsville, Alabama, facilities. The US$66 million contract included transportation and equipment services, as well as publishing, mail, and food support. MSFC arranged the contract as a cost-plus-incentive-fee, performance-based contract, to provide NASA with cost savings, as well as with flexibility to reorganize services as necessary.(NASA, Virginia Firm Chosen To Provide NASA Institutional Services, news release C97r, 10 October 1997.)
A team of scientists from the University of California at Riverside announced that NASAs orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had enabled them to discover a vast halo of gamma rays surrounding the Milky Way Galaxy. The astronomers clarified that the discovery of the halo did not make clear how or why the gamma rays encircled the galaxy. NASAs orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory uses gamma rays to expose highly energetic particles that would otherwise be invisible because of their absorption in the atmosphere. The scientific community greeted the discovery with interest and questions.(K. C. Cole, Halo Around Milky Way Reported, Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1997; Reuters, Gamma Rays Found Surrounding Milky Way, 5 November 1997.)
NASA released images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealing more clearly than ever the final blaze of glory of aging Sun-like stars. Scientists had long hypothesized that stars gradually dimmed and died out as they cast off a shell of glowing gas. However, the HST revealed instead that dying stars create in space an intricate series of glowing patternspinwheels, lawn sprinkler style jets, elegant goblet shapes, and even some that look like a rocket engines exhaust. Astronomers speculated that the new images would lead them to reanalyze stellar evolution. According to Howard E. Bond of the Space Telescope Science Institute of Baltimore, Maryland, the images made old ideas about the death of stars seem simplistic. Hubble scientist David S. Leckrone of NASA Headquarters, referring to the eventual burning out of the Sun, went so far as to say, In a very real way, these images show us our own destiny. Scientists believed that the images portrayed a complicated but very organized sequence of events, which experts might understand after further study.(NASA, Hubble Witnesses the Final Blaze of Glory of Sun-Like Stars, news release 97-287, 17 December 1997; Paul Hoversten, Hubble Observes Stars Swan Songs, USA Today, 18 December 1997; John Noble Wilford, Hubble Takes Gaudy Photos of Dying Stars, New York Times, 18 December 1997; Associated Press, Hubble Previews Death of Earth in 6 Billion Years, 18 December 1997.)
Mars Global Surveyor passed a critical test on its journey toward the Red Planet, when it successfully opened valves allowing high-pressure rocket propellant to enter its fuel lines. The same task had thwarted the 1993 Mars Observer at a similar juncture during its trip to Mars. Mars Global Surveyor had traveled for 10 months and for more than 435 million miles (700 million kilometers) to reach Mars. According to Glenn E. Cunningham of NASAs JPL, the process of transforming Global Surveyor from a high-speed-travel spacecraft into a slow-moving craft subject to Marss gravitational pull was a nail-biter. Without the powerful propellant, the transition could not occur, which would have ended any hope of the missions gathering data. With the opening of the valves complete, NASA scientists were optimistic that the US$250 million probe would descend slowly into a tight orbit of Mars, yielding new information about the planet.
Lockheed Martin Corporation announced a joint satellite venture with the Moscow-based Intersputnik consortium. Financial analysts estimated the pact could produce more than US$1.5 billion in annual revenue, capitalizing on the increasing demand for satellite transmission services for telecommunication signaling. The agreement, which cemented ties between the U.S. corporation and Russian space interests, combined Lockheeds capital resources with Intersputniks rights to prime satellite positions. Lockheed assumed responsibility for constructing and launching the satellites, whereas Intersputnik took the lead in marketing and sales. The Intersputnik group represented Russia and 21 other nations. The newly formed Lockheed Martin Intersputnik Ltd. Company planned to focus on providing services to South Asia and Eastern Europeburgeoning markets with great potential for technological and economic growth.(Jeff Cole, Lockheed To Unveil Intersputnik Satellite Venture, Wall Street Journal, 2 June 1997; Associated Press, Lockheed Planning Russia Venture, 2 June 1997; Greg Schneider, Lockheed To Link Ex-Soviet Markets, Baltimore Sun (MD), 3 June 1997.)
NASA announced the start of a month-long research endeavor to explore the levels of radiation present at high altitudes, using a refitted ER-2 aircraft. The project focused on altitudes between 52,000 and 70,000 feet (15,900 and 21,300 meters), where radiation typically occurs because of cosmic and solar rays. The project had both scientific and public policy applications; researchers intended to use the data gathered to assess the safety of public, supersonic travel. The campaign, funded by NASAs High-Speed Research Program, specifically investigated the plausibility of the High-Speed Civil Transport, still in the conceptual stage of planning, a commercial jetliner that would carry passengers at 2.4 times the speed of sound and at altitudes above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). According to NASA Project Manager Donald L. Maiden, the speed of supersonic flight could mitigate any ill effects of high altitudes on passengers, because Even though the exposure levels are higher at the higher cruise altitude, the typical flying public will actually receive less radiation exposure than on todays subsonic transports because of the higher speed of the High-Speed Civil Transport. NASA, the U.S. Department of Energys Environmental Measurements Laboratory, the Boeing Company, and the space agencies of Canada, Germany, and the United Kingdom collaborated on the project.(NASA, NASA Studies High Altitude Radiation with Upgrade ER-2, news release 97-118, 3 June 1997.)
NASA announced the selection of four industry partners to study and develop a new Earth- imaging radar system. The proposed LightSAR system would use advanced technologies to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of radar-based satellites, which gather scientific data and provide commercial remote sensing. Project Manager Steven Bard of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pointed out the unique team approach planned for the project. NASA intended to work with industry partners from the start, to assess the potential commercial market for LightSAR products and services and to share the cost of developing the expensive new technology with private companies. The four primary contractors selected were DBA Systems Inc., Lockheed Martin Astronautics, Research and Development Laboratories, and Vexcel Corporation.(NASA, Teams Selected for Studies of Potential Partnership with NASA To Develop New Earth Imaging Radar System, news release 97-35, 6 March 1997.)
Astronomers using the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii announced the discovery of the most distant object ever observed from Earth. The discovery team comprised researchers from the University of Groningen in the Netherlands and the University of California at Santa Cruz. The scientists calculations indicated that the distant light they had discovered was an infant galaxy, approximately 13 billion light-years from Earth. Formally named Red Arc in CL1358-62, the discovery gave astronomers a glimpse into the universe as it had existed when only 7 percent of its present age. Lead researcher Garth D. Illingworth described the images as a pathfinder for deciphering what is happening in young galaxies.(Malcolm W. Browne, Astronomers Discover Most Distant Object, New York Times, 31 July 1997.)
NASA unveiled a new facility, called the Chemical Crib, at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). Officials hoped the new facility would reduce chemical waste by as much as 50 percent in three years. Waste disposal had become an increasingly expensive problem for NASA. For every dollar spent to buy chemicals, NASAs Hazardous Materials Officer reported, we spend three dollars to dispose of them. The Chemical Crib would use a variety of techniques and technologies to compress waste, such as breaking down photographic-waste chemicals into a sludge, possessing as little as 5 percent of the mass of the original waste. NASA planned to construct similar facilities at its other sites. Staff of DFRCs Safety, Health, and Environmental Office believed that the new facility would not only benefit the environment, but also the Centers budget.(NASA, New NASA Facility To Reduce Chemical Wastes; May Provide Better Storage for Hazardous Materials, news release 97-102, 19 May 1997.)
Two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, returned to Earth after spending more than six months aboard the Mir space station. The New York Times echoed the feelings of many in the space community, calling the six months the Russians had spent in space, six of the least glorious months in the history of manned space flight. During their departure from Mir, Tsibliyev and Lazutkin continued to experience the same type of problem that had characterized their tenure on board the space station. The two cosmonauts, scheduled to disengage from Mir in the Soyuz spacecraft and then to circle the space station, cancelled the exercise because of concern that the two spacecraft would collide. After the cosmonauts landed in the desert of Kazakhstan, Tsibliyev recounted to an international press corps the difficult mission that he and Lazutkin had endured aboard Mir, remarking that the two cosmonauts should not become the scapegoats for Russias problems in space. The collision
NASA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a joint memorandum of agreement providing guidelines for commercial spaceports. The agreement was the culmination of a long debate over how the federal government could encourage private companies and state governments to use available federal launch sites. The White House Office of Science and Technology initiative had proposed the agreement, which sought to limit the regulatory steps a private company would have to take to become a launch-site operator. The measure continued the federal governments trend of encouraging private industry to explore space.(NASA, NASA, DOD, and FAA Sign Joint Agreement on Spaceports Launch Guidance, news release 97-194, 11 September 1997.)
NASA researchers announced that data from the Galileo probe indicated that Jupiter has distinct wet and dry regions similar to the Earth. The finding refuted the previous supposition that Jupiter was mostly dry. When it descended to Jupiter in December 1995, Galileo landed in an extremely dry and hot portion of the planetan area one member of the team called the Sahara Desert of Jupiter. Scientists assumed that the area was representative of the entire planet, until they were able to analyze more long-range images taken by the probe. The Galileo team concluded that Jupiter was remarkably similar to Earth, with wet, dry, hot, and cold regions, as well as rain, snow, and thunderstorms. Before the creation of Galileo, scientists had been unable to observe much of the planet because of surface clouds of frozen ammonia. According to Robert W. Carlson of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASAs most fundamental conclusion was that There is weather on Jupiter. However, scientists pointed out that, in contrast to Earth, Jupiter faces weather developments that are far more extreme and long lasting. Storms on the planet can last for years or even centuries.(NASA, Galileo Finds Wet Spots, Dry Spots and New View of Jupiters Light Show, news release 97-123, 5 June 1997; K.C. Cole, Scientists Detect Rain on Jupiter, Los Angeles Times, 6 June 1997; Associated Press, Jupiter Wet and Dry, 6 June 1997.)
NASA announced its plan to compensate for the failure of Japans Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS) with NASAs weather instruments aboard, admitting that the loss of the spacecraft was a real blow to NASAs science program. Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) had declared the ADEOS lost on 30 June 1997. NASA scientists had been using the satellite to gather data about weather patterns and climate change. NASA resolutely pledged to continue working with NASDA despite the setback, highlighting plans to send up a second scatterometer aboard ADEOS II in 1999. Michael B. Mann, Deputy Associate Administrator of the Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise, qualified the failure saying, The collaboration between NASDA and NASA on this mission has been outstanding . . . space operations is a risky business; those of us involved in the business strive to limit the risk but sometimes mishaps do occur.(NASA, NASAs Earth Science Program Adjusts to Loss of Data from Japanese ADEOS Satellite, news release 97-149, 2 July 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russias successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to serve as a bridge to Americas future in space. In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttles launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83, news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire, 5 April 1997.)
In the first study to observe directly a change in the growth cycles of a large swath of the Northern Hemisphere, scientists reported that spring was arriving a full week earlier in the Earths coldest regions than only a decade earlier. The report contributed to growing concern over the prospect of global warming. Using images obtained from NOAA satellites, a team of five scientists from Boston University demonstrated that plants budding in early spring had used 10 percent more carbon than previously, indicating the springs earlier onset. The scientific community reacted to the report with interest, although most scientists cautioned that understanding climate change would be a long and difficult process.(Joby Warrick, Spring Sprouting Earlier than a Decade Ago, Washington Post, 17 April 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report on the threat of space debris to the planned International Space Station (ISS). According to the report, Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan, NASAs surveillance capabilities, relying on the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) network of radar and optical sensors for information about possible collisions, had not provided enough information to prevent collisions in space. GAO surmised that DOD had focused most of its attention on military objects, missing many of the smaller pieces of debris that could have caused significant damage to NASAs Shuttles or the ISS. GAO recommended that NASA, DOD, and the CIA collaborate to upgrade the space surveillance system. According to estimates, more than 110,000 pieces of debris, most measuring about 0.5 inches (1.3 centimeters) in diameter, were floating in space. With a closing velocity of 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour, even such a small object would do significant damage to the ISS, when the station was in a prograde orbit. GAOs report noted that the fully completed ISS would be 10 times larger than any Shuttle flying in space, and that it would be in orbit for at least 10 years, increasing the chance of a collision occurring. Although they acknowledged the possibility of a collision, NASA scientists argued that the odds favored the ISSs avoiding such an occurrence. As NASAs expert, Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris, Nicholas L. Johnson, explained, The odds are certainly in your favor that nothing will happen at all in those 10 years [of planned space station operation].(U.S. General Accounting Office, Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan (report no. NSIAD 98-42, Washington, DC, 1 December 1997); Sean Holton, Worries Rise over Junk in Space, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 December 1997.)
Frank L. Culbertson Jr., NASAs Manager for the Space ShuttleMir research program, announced that in the future NASA would likely require astronauts to have training in spacewalking. The announcement coincided with reports in the New York Times and other U.S. newspapers that David A. Wolf had replaced astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as the next NASA representative aboard Mir. NASA had replaced Lawrence because of her small stature. At 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 meters) tall, she was too small to fit into the bulky Russian Orlan spacesuits worn on Mir. In addition, she had received no training in spacewalking. Previously, NASA had planned for Wolf to replace Lawrence aboard Mir following her research stint. NASA and the Russian Space Agency addressed the sensitive issue of replacing Lawrence because of her size, explaining the need for flexibility aboard Mir during significant repairs to the station. Lawrence reacted professionally, despite the disappointment of her replacement less than two months before her planned once-in-a-career mission.(Warren E. Leary, Future Astronauts Must Walk Before They Fly, New York Times, 1 August 1997; Todd Halverson, Mir Prerequisite: Spacewalking, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 August 1997; United Press International, U.S., Russia Cite Logic of Replacing Female Astronaut, 1 August 1997; Associated Press, NASA: Decision To Replace Astronaut Difficult but Necessary, 31 July 1997.)
NASA announced that Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space Company had won the contract to develop and deliver solar-imaging instruments for U.S. weather satellites. The US$54 million contract provided funding for the creation of a model instrument and two flight instruments. Scientists believed that the solar x-ray images captured by the instrument would improve the ability of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Air Force to forecast special weather events. The proposed imager also had applications for civilian companies dependent upon predicting weather patterns.(NASA, Lockheed Martin Selected To Build Solar X-ray Imaging, news release C97-g, 18 June 1997; Grant Jerding, NASA Brings Its X-ray Vision to the Universe, USA Today, 17 June 1997.)
A panel of scientists at the National Research Council issued a report warning NASA of the slight possibility that a mission to Mars might actually bring microbes back to the United States. Although their report clearly stated that the so-called Microbe Peril was unlikely, the panel argued, nevertheless, that a probe returning from an exploratory mission to Mars could possibly serve as a conduit to bring Martian germs back to Earth. The panel issued its warning because of NASAs plan to send a mission to Mars to obtain samples of substances on the planet, and because NASA scientists had recently identified signs of possible microscopic life on a meteorite. The panels report stated, If life forms ever existed on Mars, either by having been formed in an independent origin or having been transferred there from Earth, it is possible that they could have continued to exist up to the present time.
Johnson Space Center (JSC) awarded BRSP Inc. a US$128 million, five-year contract to provide base-operation support services, including plant maintenance and operations, logistics support, and security services for JSCs Houston, Texas, facility. BRSP, a joint venture of Brown and Root Services and Pioneer Contract Services, had formed to bid for the JSC contract.(NASA, BRSP Chosen for JSC Base Operation Contract, news release C97-b, 16 January 1997.)
The Los Angeles Times reported that the students of Glassell Park Elementary School had sold an astonishing 32,000 candy bars, to pay the way for all 115 of its fifth graders to attend the U.S. Space Camp at NASAs Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. Most of the schools 951 students participated in selling candy to send their older classmates to the educational camp. Principal Beatrice LaPisto said proudly of her students, This is a poor neighborhood. Most children here, for example, are on the free lunch program. But these are the brightest, best, most motivated students youll find anywhere. This year was the first in which the nonprofit U.S. Space Camp Foundation had expanded its operations to the California site.(Bob Pool, Space Race, Los Angeles Times, 4 June 1997.)
New support emerged for NASA scientists claim that a meteorite discovered in August 1996 held fossil evidence of primitive Martian life. In an article in Science, a group of researchers from California Institute of Technology and McGill University used magnetic studies to demonstrate that the findings on the meteorite were not, as some critics had contended, the result of a high-temperature environment that would have made life impossible. What we are able to show from the magnetic studies is that these things [the fossil remnant that had excited the interest of Johnson Space Center geologists] couldnt have been heated even to the boiling point of water. Although the scientists did not explicitly support NASAs earlier claim that the remnant provided evidence for bacterial life, the teams discovery opened the intriguing possibility that remnants of primitive life could migrate from one planet to another.(Joseph L. Kirschvink et al., Paleomagnetic Evidence of a Low-Temperature Origin of Carbonate in the Martian Meteorite ALH84001, Science 275, no. 5306 (14 March 1997): 16291634; Mark Carreau, California Scientists Back NASAs Theory of Life on Mars, Houston Chronicle, 14 March 1997; John Noble Wilford, Study Backs Idea that Meteorite Hints of Life on Mars, New York Times, 14 March 1997.)
President William J. Clinton released his budget proposal, which included a request for US$75 million to develop the Space Infrared Telescope Facility. NASA had argued that the infrared telescope would aid scientists in answering some of the universes most fundamental questions including, what is the energy source for the universes brightest stars? and, where is the universes missing dark matter? Presidential support for the initiative led NASA to hope that it might finally receive the funding necessary to begin building the last of four space-based telescopes proposed as a part of the Great Observatories program. In addition to the highly publicized Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had successfully placed in orbit the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and had immediate plans to launch the nearly completed X-ray Astrophysics Facility. NASA expected the four telescopes, using various kinds of cosmic radiation to survey the atmosphere, would provide an unprecedented view of the universe. The four telescopes operating together would allow us to look at the universe at all ages at once, explained Michael Werner, a scientist at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Upon the programs conception in 1991, the National Academy of Sciences had called the Great Observatories the highest priority for any major new program in space-based astronomy, but a steady stream of budget cuts had made it increasingly difficult to realize the project.(Paul Hoversten, NASA Seeks $75 Million for Another Eye in the Sky, USA Today, 6 February 1997.)
NASA announced that planned major modifications of Space Shuttle Atlantis, as well as routine inspections, would take place at the Boeing Companys facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. United Space Alliance, the company contracted for the maintenance and operation of the Shuttle program, had recommended the changes. According to estimates of the U.S. General Accounting Office, completing the renovations in California, rather than in Florida, would cost NASA an additional US$20 million because of higher labor costs. NASA explained that if the engineers had done the work in Florida, the launch schedule at KSC, along with the need for Atlantis to make a prolonged stay for extensive modifications, would have threatened future Shuttle flights. The changes planned, including rerouting the Shuttles fuel lines, involved more than routine maintenance. NASA also pointed out that its most experienced engineers worked at the Palmdale facility, and that workers at the facility had already made similar modifications to Shuttles Discovery and Endeavour. Moreover, NASA maintained that permitting KSC to focus on Shuttle launches and missions would be the most efficient use of its resources. Nevertheless, immediately after the announcement, some observers criticized NASAs continued use of Boeings private facility in preference to that of the government-owned KSC. NASAs previous intimation that the Palmdale facility would be mothballed for Shuttle repair and maintenance intensified critics reaction to the announcement.(Seth Borenstein, Despite Boost in Cost, Atlantis To Get Tuneup in California, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 January 1997; NASA, Space Shuttle Atlantis Modification Work To Be Performed at Palmdale Facility, news release 97-11, 16 January 1997; Todd Halvorson, Atlantis Overhaul To Be Done Out West, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 January 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, we dont need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. Its called the International Space Station. GAOs report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, Space Station, 11 June 1997.)
U.S. Senator D. Robert Bob Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Grahams plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Grahams plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, Graham: Lets Make Money in Space, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
NASA and the Boeing Company unveiled a new stitching machine that experts believed would change the method of fabricating aircraft wing structures. The demonstration took place at Boeing Stitched Composites Development Center in Huntington Beach, California. The project team of engineers had replaced the large metal structures used in airplanes with strong, but light, composite materials. By reducing the weight of an airplane, engineers hoped to decrease fuel usage, with the eventual result of cost savings for consumers. Rather than using rivets to hold together an airplanes wings, the NASA-developed stitching machine sewed together precut fabric layers in the shape of a wing. Next, the machine added braided stiffener materials to the wing, before setting the wing skeleton with resin. The process created a wing as strong as one built with metal structures, but at a fraction of the weight.(NASA, New Manufacturing Method Could Lower Air Travel Costs, news release 97-176, 13 August 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue. NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASAs announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, I told you so. Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved 15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers, keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module, New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day, 11 April 1997.)
NASA dedicated a plaque in memory of Ellison S. Onizuka, celebrating his record of achieving the highest altitude for propeller-driven aircraft. Onizuka had been Hawaiis first astronaut and a member of the Shuttle crew aboard Challenger when it exploded in 1986. NASAs recognition of Onizukas achievement, more than a decade later, occurred during the same year that the remotely controlled AeroVironment Pathfinder broke a distance record for unpiloted space travel, topping 71,000 miles (114,000 kilometers) during its 7 July 1997 flight. NASA honored Onizuka for his part in reaching for the heavens and striving for excellence, noting that his achievement had contributed to that of Pathfinder. NASA dedicated the plaque honoring Onizuka at the U.S. Navys Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, where the record-setting Pathfinder plane had set flight on its historic mission.(NASA, NASA Solar-Powered Altitude Record To Be Dedicated to Challenger Astronaut, news release N97- 087, 3 December 1997.)
The New York Times reported a soon-to-be released study by Research Policy, providing strong evidence that publicly funded scientific research often fueled industrial advancements in the United States. According to the study, prepared for the National Science Foundation, 73 percent of all American industrial patents filed during the two-year study cited scientific advancements made possible by government funding. The report had particular relevance because the Clinton administration and its congressional allies, both Democratic and Republican, had considered paring down the nations science outlays to balance the federal budget. The Council of Scientific Society Presidents called the report a wake-up call for [f]ederal investment policies. The study joined an ongoing debate over exactly what contribution general scientific research made to the national economy. The National Science Foundation and NASA were two of the agencies most cited in industrial patent requests.(William J. Broad, Study Finds Public Science Is Pillar of Industry, New York Times, 13 May 1997. 249 NASA, NASA Earth Science Research Aircraft Soars to New Heights, 13 May 1997.)
At Baltimores Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA scientists described the long-duration- exposure pictures taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) as the best picture we have yet of the early universe, announcing that, approximately 12 billion years ago, the universe had been completely barren of galaxies. Richard S. Ellis of Englands Institute of Astronomy emphasized the significance of sciences new ability to use the HST to view a time before galaxy formation. The HST had opened its lens for many hours of exposure, focusing on a tiny wedge of the sky to capture its most probing picture ever, known as the Hubble Deep Field Survey. Focusing only on a small speck of the sky had enabled astronomers to look deeper into the universe than ever before. Mario Livio of the Space Telescope Science Institute estimated that the HST had captured a view of the universe at only about 10 percent of its present age.
NASA announced that it would join an international consortium of space agencies to support the launch of a Japanese satellite designed to create the largest astronomical instrument ever. The launch of the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) Space Observatory would create a radio telescope more than twice the diameter of the Earth, giving astronomers their sharpest view yet of the universe. Astronomers praised the Japanese-led launch as a significant advance for space research. VLBI satellites would allow radio astronomers to link together widely separated radio telescopes, so that they would function as a single instrument with extraordinarily sharp resolving power. The farther apart the telescopes, the greater would be the images resolution. NASA equated the power of the new tool with the ability to see a grain of rice in Tokyo from Los Angeles. Scientists hoped that the new tool would allow for further exploration of active galaxies with massive black holes. Researchers also hoped that the instrument would foster understanding of the mysterious quasars, which pour out tremendous amounts of energy and host or create black holes. Creating the enormous VLBI network involved 40 radio telescopes from 15 nations. Japans Institute of Space and Astronautical Science led the international consortium of science agencies, including NASAs JPL, the U.S. National Science Foundations National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the Canadian Space Agency, the Australia Telescope National Facility, the European VLBI Network, and Europes Joint Institute for VLBI.(NASA, Launch Will Create a Radio Telescope Larger than Earth, news release 97-24, 7 February 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 25.)
Hubble scientists released their first reviews of the newly upgraded HST, concluding enthusiastically that the refurbished space telescope offered exciting new possibilities. The upgrades to the HST significantly improved the range and precision of the instrument. Scientists reported peering approximately 50 million light-years away and zeroing in on previously undetectable black holes. According to Edward J. Weiler, the head of NASAs Hubble team, the added Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, installed in February 1997, reduced the length of time it took to confirm the presence of black holes in the universe. Weiler called the HST a census bureau for black-hole hunting, allowing researchers to survey these objects as a population rather than as individual phenomena. Another new instrument installed in February, the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS), enabled the HST to capture near-infrared wavelengths, beginning to penetrate the dusty veil that had prevented astronomers from studying the birth and death of stars. NASA engineers also disclosed that an early focusing problem with one of the three cameras used by the NICMOS system seemed to be correcting itself. Although the flaw could limit the life of the system, scientists were confident that NICMOS would still be able to gather and preserve all scientific data. During early testing of the NICMOS system, scientists had uncovered a region of the universe in which young stars eject material into a molecular cloud, a process that researchers had long hypothesized but had been unable to observe.(NASA, Hubbles Upgrades Show Birth and Death of Stars; Discover Massive Black Hole, news release 97-93, 12 May 1997; Kathy Sawyer, Improved Hubble Telescope Gets Rave Reviews at NASA, Washington Post, 13 May 1997; Reuters, Hubble Captures Star Birth, 13 May 1997; Associated Press, Upgrade Hubble Telescope Dazzles Astronomers, 12 May 1997.)
NASA launched an unpiloted Delta rocket carrying the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), a US$100 million solar-observatory satellite bound on a 1 million-mile (1.6 million-kilometer) journey. The launch took place one day later than expected because, on the original launch date, a commercial fishing boat had come within range of the launch danger zone. Scientists launched ACE toward an imaginary point 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth and 92 million miles (148 million kilometers) from the Sun, a point at which scientists believe that the gravity of the Earth and Sun balance each other. NASA planned for ACE to orbit for as long as five years, analyzing particles streaming from the Sun. In keeping with NASAs focus on improved efficiency, NASA engineers collaborated with the Boeing Company to build ACE and launch the mission, at a cost of US$200 millionmore than US$30 million under budget.(Associated Press, After 1-Day Delay, NASA Launches Bargain-Priced Solar Observatory, 25 August 1997; Associated Press, Launch Delayed by Errant Shrimpers, 25 August 1997.)
NASA announced that a plan for collaborative research and development between NASA and five other government agencies might result in the creation of an Internet connection a million times faster than home computer modems. The Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative dedicated US$300 million and three years to developing the NGI, to fulfill the promise President William J. Clinton had made in his State of the Union address: We must build the second generation of the Internet so that our leading universities and national laboratories can communicate at speeds one thousand times faster than today; to develop new medical treatments, new sources of energy, new ways of working together. NASA sites designated for early trials of NGI connections included Ames Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, Lewis Research Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
NASA announced that, through its Small Business Innovative Research program, researchers had successfully used recycled plastic milk bottles to create a more effective, lightweight insulation for clothing and blankets. The material had the same honeycomb structure as that of the metal heat barriers used in spacecraft. According to the principal investigator, Steven D. Miller of S. D. Miller and Associates, The blankets are better than wool or fleece because they are non-allergenic, and they dry five times faster. The new material is also four times warmer than wool in cold and damp conditions. The research team hypothesized that agencies such as the Red Cross, or other emergency medical personnel, eventually would be able to use the new material to warm patients more quickly. After developing the product for space and commercial uses, NASA planned to allow Millers company to pursue further commercialization opportunities without NASA funding.(NASA, NASA Technology Creates Market for Recycled Milk Bottles, news release 97-39, 13 March 1997.)
Sojourner, the roving vehicle carried to Mars aboard Pathfinder, began prospecting the surface of the Red Planet approximately two days after Pathfinders safe landing. NASA engineers and enthralled scientists described the scene of the six-wheeled, microwave-sized Sojourner, slowly descending the ramp of Pathfinder, as similar to Neil A. Armstrongs giant leap in 1969. Richard A. Cook, managing the mission from JPL, set off a raucous celebration of NASA engineers when he announced, The rover is on the surface of Mars. Weve got some great images back, and all the scientists are in heaven. Weather reports gathered by the Pathfinder reported that Sojourner was working in temperatures as high as 8 below 0F (-22C), as well as in wind and dust storms. Sojourner, named for black abolitionist Sojourner Truth, headed for a dark rock near Pathfinder, as its first object of close study. NASA scientists, who had named the rock Barnacle Bill because of its craggy appearance, used similarly whimsical terms to keep track of the various geological objects studied by Sojourner. Sojourners success, after some minor complication upon landing, encouraged mission scientists and drew wide acclaim from the media. Scientists began to speculate almost immediately, about whether the mission could possibly confirm or deny the existence of life on the planet.(John Noble Wilford, On the Surface of Mars, Sojourner Rolls to Work, New York Times, 7 July 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, Data from Mars Indicate It Could Have Supported Life, 7 July 1997; Peter N. Spotts, Tiny Land Rover Begins Relaying Detailed Data About Surface of Red Planet, Christian Science Monitor, 7 July 1997. 280 Michael A. Dornheim, Pathfinder Aircraft Hits 71,500 Ft., Aviation Week and Space Technology 147, no. 3 (21 July 1997): 40; NASA, Solar-Powered Pathfinder Sets New Record; Prepares To Monitor Deforestation of Hawaiian Island, news release 97-153, 14 July 1997.)
NASA researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, announced a plan to collaborate with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California, to explore the potential of the substance Aerogel, which has tremendous insulating capabilities. Scientists said that they were optimistic that they could manipulate the material, rendering it transparent and, therefore, especially useful in constructing energy-efficient windows for homes and automobiles. During the 1930s, a researcher at Stanford University had discovered Aerogel, often called frozen smoke because of its hazy appearance. NASA engineers had used Aerogel as an insulating agent aboard Mars Pathfinder in 1996. Although the substance is the lightest solid knownonly three times the density of air, a block of Aerogel weighing less than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) can support 0.5 tons (450 kilograms or 0.45 tonnes). Aerogels large internal surface area, which disperses heat throughout its structure, causes the materials extreme insulating capabilitya 1-inch-thick (2.5-centimeter-thick) Aerogel window would offer the same insulation value as 15 panes of glass. John M. Horack, Assistant Laboratory Director for Space and Science Communications at MSFC, called the development of Aerogel a great example of how NASA space research generates scientific knowledge that can be used to improve the quality of life on Earth.(NASA, NASA Research in Space May Redesign Household Windows, news release 97-34, 6 March 1997. 215 Warren E. Leary, Microbe Peril from Mars Is Possibility, Panel Warns, New York Times, 7 March 1997; Associated Press, Scientists Warn on Mars Bugs, 7 March 1997; Mark Carreau, Fear of Martians, Houston Chronicle, 7 March 1997.)
An international team of astronomers announced the discovery of three black holes in three nondescript galaxies, suggesting that nearly all galaxies may in fact have massive black holes. Using NASAs Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the researchers took a census of 27 galaxies to find a series of black holes massive enough to consume millions of Sun-like stars. The findings, which the scientists presented in full at the 189th meeting of the American Astronomical Society, provided insight into the origin and evolution of galaxies, as well as clarifying the role of quasars in the galaxy. Douglas O. Richstone of the University of Michigan, who led the research team, stated that two of the black holes had weighed in at 50 million and 100 million solar masses, respectively. Scientists remained divided on why black holes exist so abundantly in space. One theory suggested was that, at the center of most or all galaxies, supermassive black holes exist, where gases ignite to the hottest temperatures known, sending nearby stars spiraling in new directions. Ralph Narayan of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics called the black holes the ultimate victory of gravity.(Paul Recer, Astronomers Find Stronger Evidence of Massive Black Holes, Huntsville Times (AL), 14 January 1997; NASA, Massive Black Holes Dwell in Most Galaxies, According to Hubble Census, news release 97-9, 12 January 1997.)
NASA announced that the construction schedule for the International Space Station (ISS) remained on target to begin delivery launches in December 1998. All 15 nations participating in the building of the ISS had traveled to Johnson Space Center (JSC) to finalize the stations construction sequence and compare progress updates. The international consortium agreed on a 45-flight sequence for delivering the already-assembled portions of the station from Earth to their orbiting home. To assemble the colossal station completely, NASA and its partners planned five years of steady launch-and-construct missions, expecting to send the U.S.-constructed Node 1 into space sometime during June 1998.(NASA, Control Board Reports International Space Station Launch on Target, Finalizes Assembly Sequence, news release 97-222, 1 October 1997.)
NASA announced that John C. Mather, a senior astrophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, had been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, often considered the highest recognition possible for scientists and engineers. Mathers work at NASA had begun in 1974, specifically, on the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft. He had served as a project scientist when NASA launched the spacecraft in 1989, and in 1992 he had participated in the COBE project, which effectively mapped primordial hot and cold spots in the cosmic microwave background radiation. The map demonstrated that radiation from the Big Bang conformed to theoretical predictions, providing new evidence for the long-standing Big Bang theory. Mather received his PhD in physics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1974.(NASA, Goddard Scientist Selected for National Academy of Sciences, news release 97-88, 2 May 1997. 245 NASA, Heat-Resistant Material Licensed for High-Performance Pistons, news release 97-91, 6 May 1997. 246 Associated Press, Hubble-Look Back, 9 May 1997.)
NASA announced the establishment of a National Microgravity Center, formed in conjunction with Case Western Reserve University and the Universities Space Research Association. NASA selected Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, to lead its research efforts in the project. Plans for the nations first center dedicated exclusively to microgravity research focused on five areas: 1) research and technology development; 2) science program outreach and development; 3) scientific support; 4) technology transfer to industry; and 5) public education initiatives. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the endeavor, stating, The National Center for Microgravity Research on Fluids and Combustion represents a commitment to our goal to strengthen the partnership between NASA and our nations research community in universities and industry so that together we can increase the scientific and economic payoffs from NASAs Microgravity Science Program. NASA selected Simon Ostrach, a distinguished professor of engineering at Case Western University, as Director of the National Microgravity Center. As Director, Ostrach would be responsible for managing the Centers staff of more than 30 people and for shaping an agenda of research that would take advantage of opportunities aboard the ISS.(NASA, NASA Establishes New National Microgravity Center, news release 97-40, 13 March 1997. 225 Reuters, Japan Unveils Experimental Docking Satellites, 20 March 1997.)
After widespread speculation concerning the possibility of an indefinite delay of the Cassini Mission to Saturn, NASA announced that it would be able to repair a fuel leak in the spacecraft in time to meet an October 1997 launch date. NASA had enlisted U.S. Air Force engineers to make the repairs. The spacecrafts need for repairs increased the tension surrounding the ambitious and expensive mission. Lieutenant Ken Hoffman of the U.S. Air Force, who supervised the repairs, attempted to reassure the public that the problem was a correctable condition. Nevertheless, opponents of the missionparticularly those opposed to the spacecrafts use of radioactive plutoniumworried that the rockets launch might release hazardous materials. Michio Kaku, a City University of New York physics professor, said that, despite NASAs announcement that it could quickly correct the problem, the leak was just one more indication that NASA does not have things under control.(Robyn Suriano, Cassini Wont Be Delayed, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 August 1997.)
Henry C. Ferguson, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, announced the discovery of stars residing outside of any defined galaxy. Scientists had long suspected that such stars existed, but Ferguson and his team were the first to confirm the theories. They did so using images captures by the HST, which revealed as many as 600 stars in the seemingly blank spaces among the Virgo cluster of galaxies, approximately 60 million light-years away from Earth. Ferguson suspected that many more starsperhaps as many as 1 trillion Sun-like starsare adrift in the galaxies of Virgo. The astronomers theorized that galactic mergers, or the tidal forces of nearby galaxies, had displaced the stars from their home galaxies.(John Noble Wilford, Hubble Detects Stars that Belong to No Galaxy, New York Times, 15 January 1997.)
The Clipper Graham (DC-XA) Incident Investigation Board released its final report concerning the explosion of the vehicle at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The Board, chaired by former astronaut Vance Brand, determined that a disconnected brake line on the secondary landing gear had prevented the gear from fully extending. The DC-XA, a prototype developed by McDonnell Douglas for NASA, had flown successfully in its fourth test flight on 31 July 1996, before failing on landing. NASAs director of space transportation noted that the failure, which occurred as part of ongoing research into reusable launch vehicles, had strengthened NASAs resolve to reduce costs and to achieve efficient reusability, safety, and reliability, ideally using a combination of automation and human control.(NASA, Clipper Graham Incident Report Release, news release 97-3, 7 January 1997.)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston, astrophysicists Alexander G. Kosovichev of Stanford University and Valentina V. Zharkova of the University of Glasgow in Scotland presented evidence confirming their solar-bomb theory. Using sequential images that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft had captured, the two scientists explained that, 20 minutes following the rupture of a solar flare from the surface of the Sun, a seismic wave front surges across the [S]uns face like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond. The SOHO images proved that solar flares not only release energy into the Suns atmosphere, but also trigger huge waves of seismic energy that ripple through the [S]un like earthquakes.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, Solar Flares Trigger Sunquakes, 27 May 1998; A. G. Kosovichev and V. V. Zharkova, X-ray Flare Sparks Quake Inside Sun, Nature 383, no. 6683 (28 May 1998): 317.)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discoverys drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery, Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, NASA Mission Archives: STS-95, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
Due to arrive at Mars in October 1999 after a period of orbiting Earth, Japans Planet B spacecraft launched from Kagoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu. The Japanese Education Ministrys Institute of Space and Aerospace Science developed the probe, nicknamed Nozomi, or Hope. The probe carried 14 scientific instruments developed by Canada, Germany, Japan, Sweden, and the United States. NASA provided two instruments for the probe: the Neutral Mass Spectrometer, designed to measure the gas composition of Marss upper atmosphere for the first time; and the Ultra Stable Oscillator, deployed to support a radio science experiment, also involving analysis of the Martian atmosphere, and to guide the spacecraft in its orbit around Mars.(NASA, NASA Instruments on Japanese Planet-B Spacecraft Will Aid Studies of Martian Upper Atmosphere, news release 98-119, 1 July 1998; United Press International, Japan Launches First Mars Mission, 4 July 1998.)
Kenneth J. Szalai ended his 34-year NASA career to join IBP Aerospace Group Inc. as the companys president and chief operating officer. In his last position at NASA, Szalai was Director of Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Szalai had directed DFRC since December 1990. Before becoming the Centers director, Szalai had been head of the research engineering division at DFRC for eight years. NASA had awarded Szalai, an internationally recognized expert on flight control and flight systems, the Exceptional Service Medal in recognition of his work on the first Digital Fly-by-Wire aircraft. He had also received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal during his NASA tenure. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Kevin L. Petersen Acting Director of DFRC, effective 1 August.(Jim Skeen, Dryden Director To Leave NASA for Private Sector, Los Angeles Daily News, 11 July 1998.)
NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that the ion engine responsible for the Deep Space 1 probes primary propulsion was back in operation after its unexpected shutdown two weeks earlier. Scientists believed that metallic grit or another type of contaminant located between two high-voltage grids had caused the engine to shut down after running for 412 minutes.(NASA, Deep Space 1 Ion Propulsion System Starts Up, news release 98-215, 25 November 1998; Associated Press, Spacecrafts Troubled Ion Engine Restarts, Washington Post, 26 November 1998.)
On NASAs 40th anniversary, President of the Space Frontier Foundation Richard N. Tumlinson and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about space exploration and the possibility of privatizing space ventures. Tumlinsons organization advocated limiting NASAs role to supporting technology and research programs. He proposed commercializing the Shuttle fleet and privatizing NASA field centers, to reduce the costs of space exploration and eventual colonization. Goldin advocated reducing costs as well, but did not respond to Tumlinsons proposals. He also outlined new technologies that NASA was developing, to cut the cost of rockets and satellites. Goldin remarked that NASA would form partnerships with industry for cutting-edge research development, also emphasizing NASAs support of government loans to fuel the growth of the space industry in the United States.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, UPI Science News, 2 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, NASA Urged To Sell Shuttles, 1 October 1998.)
Aerojet announced it had won a US$485,000 contract to build a rocket injector for NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) that would help JPL scientists develop propulsion technologies for NASAs Mars Sample Return Vehicle.(Sacramento Bee (CA), Aerojet Lands Contract, 11 June 1998.)
As part of an overall restructuring, the Boeing Company announced plans to reduce its workforce by 12 percent over the next 18 months, through the layoffs of as many as 28,000 workers. Much of the restructuring plan focused on the companys commercial airplane business, affecting those workers who were once part of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which Boeing had purchased in 1997. In contrast, the company reported it was making strides in its defense and space work.(Tim Smart, Boeing To Retool, Lay Off Thousands; Condit Cites Need To Reduce Costs, Washington Post, 14 August 1998.)
NASA partially cancelled the Clark satellite program, keeping only the US$13 million launch vehicle service portion of the contract with Lockheed Martin. As reasons for the cancellation, NASA cited cost overruns, an uncertain launch schedule, and questions concerning the effectiveness of Clarks instruments in orbit, because its primary instrument had been sitting on the ground two years longer than planned. The intended mission of the program was to take black-and-white stereo images, showing detail as small as 10 feet (3 meters) across, for NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise (formerly the Office of Mission to Planet Earth), as well as for commercial customers. NASA had paired the Clark satellite with the Lewis satellite. However, after its August 1997 launch, the Lewis satellite had gone into a spin, which controllers were unable to repair. Consequently, the Lewis satellite plunged into the atmosphere where it burned up.(NASA, NASA Terminates Clark Earth Science Mission, news release, 25 February 1998; Justin Ray, NASA Cans Clark, an Imaging Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 February 1998.)
The European Southern Observatory (ESO) successfully tested the first of four linked, identical telescopes of 8.2-meter (27-foot) diameters, comprising the Very Large Telescope (VLT). The VLT is the worlds largest and most advanced Earth-based telescope, with a collective diameter equal to16 meters (52 feet). The telescopes first light images (its first astronomically useful images) met the design goals. Exposures lasting up to 10 minutes confirmed that the telescopes tracking was very accurate and stable. The ESO had built the new telescope in the Atacama Desert in northern Chile, where a dry atmosphere and stable climate guaranteed clear skies 350 nights of the year.(Financial Times (London), Staring Out Across 14 Billion Light Years: Technology Very Large Telescope: The Earth-Based VLT Brings a Twinkle to a European Astronomers Eye, 4 June 1998.)
James L. Elliot, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues, together with Lowell Observatory and Williams College, published findings in the journal Nature based on data obtained from NASAs HST. The data indicated that Neptunes largest moon, Triton, had warmed up significantly since the Voyager spacecrafts visit in 1989. Tritons temperature had risen from 37 K (-393F or -236C) to 39 K (-389F or -234C), a 5 percent increase. The astronomers traced the warming trend to seasonal changes in Tritons polar ice caps attributed to an extreme southern summer, a cyclical phenomenon occurring every few hundred years. Other possible explanations included a changing frost pattern on Tritons surface, which could have caused the surface to absorb more of the Suns warmth; or changes in the reflectivity of Tritons ice, which could have caused it to absorb more heat. Because of the warming, Tritons frozen nitrogen surface was turning into gas, making its thin atmosphere denser. The scientists hoped their study of the changes on Triton would provide insight into global warming on Earth, which has a more complicated environment than Triton. HSTs detection of an increase in the moons atmospheric pressure, measured with one of the space telescopes three fine guidance sensors, had provided the clue to the increased surface temperature.(NASA, Hubble Space Telescope Helps Find Evidence that Neptunes Largest Moon Is Warming Up, news release 98-110, 24 June 1998; J. L. Eliot et al., Global Warming on Triton, Nature 393, no. 6687 (25 June 1998): 765767.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planets polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyors data; the Arizona researchers believed that a concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes. The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, Mars Discovery, 28 May 1998; Washington Times, Minerals Suggest Life in Mars Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers, 28 May 1998.)
S. George Djorgovski, an astronomer at California Institute of Technology; Dale A. Frail, an astronomer with the Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico; and their colleagues issued a notice to fellow astronomers regarding a gamma-ray burst (GRB) detected on 2 July. Frail and Djorgovski had combined the resources of the VLA and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to pinpoint the source of the burst, which they calculated to be a galaxy, alive with new-forming stars, billions of light-years away from Earth. Although scientists did not yet know the cause of GRBs, Frail remarked, the fact that this burst happened in a hot galaxy where new stars are being rapidly formed is probably the death knell for the theory that collisions between old, dying neutron stars are responsible for the gamma-ray bursts.(John Fleck, N.M. Scientists Track Galaxy Blast: Explosion Is Billions of Light Years Away, Albuquerque Journal (NM), 9 July 1998.)
NASA officially opened its new communications terminal on Guam, to provide global, full- time and real-time communications support for NASAs Space Network customers. The Guam ground station replaced the interim ground terminal in Canberra, Australia, established to provide continuous, full-time, real-time communications support for NASAs Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after it had suffered an on-board tape recorder failure in March 1992.
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer. As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program, 26 March 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASAs US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight, 9 January 1998; NASA, Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director, news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFCs previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFCs Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center, revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait, 1420 September 1998.)
NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced the hiring of Space Gateway Support of Herndon, Virginia, to run base operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Patrick Air Force Base, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Johnson Controls and EG&G Florida at KSC had previously held base-operations contracts at the military bases. The new joint base-operations- support contract was worth US$1 billion for five years, with the option to renew for another five years. In consolidating the contracts, the agencies intended to cut costs. According to officials, continuing separate base-operations contracts would have cost 30 percent more. Other primary customers under the contract included government contractors for NASA and U.S. Air Force spaceflight operations, payload ground operations, life sciences, expendable vehicles, and launch operations and support.(NASA, SGS Awarded NASA and Air Force Joint Base Contract, contract announcement C98-m, 21 August 1998; Joni James, Base Operations Under 1 Contract, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 August 1998.)
NASAs Ames Research Center awarded a six-year, US$90 million contract to Logicon Syscon Inc. of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide operations, development, maintenance, and modification of the Centers aeronautical simulation facilities. The contract included the operation and maintenance of the worlds largest motion-base simulator, the Vertical Motion Simulator, designed to aid in the study of helicopter and vertical short takeoff and landing issues, as well as the Crew-Vehicle Systems Research Facility, designed for the study of human factors in aviation safety.(NASA, NASA Awards $90 Million Contract to Virginia Firm, news release c98-s, 2 November 1998.)
NASA awarded Aerojet, a GenCorp Inc. company, a US$16.4 million contract to provide a de- orbit propulsion stage for the X-38 technology demonstrator vehicle. The contract for design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of one propulsion stage for the first X-38 spaceflight test included a second option for five operational propulsion units for the crew return vehicle (CRV), if NASA selected the X-38 design for the CRV. Engineers at Dryden Flight Research Center were flight-testing the X-38, a prototype spacecraft intended to lead to the development and construction of a CRV for the ISS.(Defense Daily, Aerojet Wins $16.4 NASA Contract for X-38 Propulsion, 20 August 1998.)
NASA awarded its combined space operations contract to Lockheed Martin, covering operations at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida; Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama; and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The contract, worth US$1.9 billion for the first five years, with a five-year renewal worth an additional US$1.5 billion, covered the cost of directing, monitoring, and downloading data from spacecraft. NASA estimated that the contract, consolidating work previously done under 17 separate contracts, would save US$1.4 billion over 10 years.(NASA, Lockheed Martin Space Operations Co. Awarded Contract To Manage NASAs Space Operations, contract announcement c98-p, 25 September 1998; Peter Behr, Lockheed Team Wins NASA Contract; $3.4 Billion Big Beats Out Boeing, Washington Post, 26 September 1998; Anna Wilde Mathews, Lockheed Group Wins NASA Pact for $3.44 Billion, Wall Street Journal, 28 September 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
Astronomers announced that pictures from a new camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) supported the theory that a new planet was forming around Beta Pictoris. Images focusing on the disc (the halo of dust and gas rotating around the star) revealed that, instead of a smooth flow, one quadrant has a large bulge, indicating the orbital path of a planet that could be many times larger than Jupiter. No actual planet was visible in the images, only the effects of its gravitational pull. Nevertheless, this was the strongest evidence to date in visible light, of the presence of a possible planet. Beta Pictoris is younger (20 million to 100 million years old compared to the Suns 4.5 to 5 billion years) and about eight times brighter than the Sun. The formation of planets around a young star suggested that planets form very early in the life of a solar system.(Washington Post, Images Support Theory of New Planet: Hubble Photos Show Bulge in Stars Halo Dust63 Light-Years from Sun, 9 January 1998.)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced the winners of the 1998 National General Aviation Design Competition, in which undergraduate and graduate students, enrolled at U.S. engineering schools participating in a major national effort to rebuild the U.S. general aviation sector, compete individually or as teams. A 27-member undergraduate team from Virginia Polytechnic Institute won first place for its design, called VicTor, a single-engine, four- seat, high-performance aircraft. VicTors special design elements included an ergonomic cockpit with adjustable, side-control sticks and dual airbags; a choice between two high-performance engines; and advanced technology instrument displays. The design also included an upgrade option, to allow autonomous flight if it becomes a reality. A 15-member, Pennsylvania State University team won second place for their high-performance, two-person, single-engine, composite-fuselage, tractor-prop light airplane. Third place went to 13 undergraduate students from the University of Virginia for their computer program predicting drag in the design of new small passenger airplanes.(NASA, NASA and FAA Announce Design Competition Winners, news release 98-140, 1 August 1998.)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs, 22 January 1998.)
Boeing Company announced plans to cut an additional 8,200 jobs by the end of the year 2000, to streamline facilities, to focus on manufacturing and assembly operations, and to eliminate redundant laboratories. The job cuts, affecting work sites in Arkansas, California, and Texas, included planned product phaseouts of the MD-80 and MD-90, and brought into question the future of the MD-11. As it shut down selected facilities, including an electronic manufacturing facility and the Site 9 modification center, Boeing planned to transfer thousands of employees involved with aircraft and missile systems, reusable-space-systems support, and satellites.(United Press International, Boeing Cuts 8,200 Jobs, 20 March 1998.)
NASA modified its contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation in order to produce a second flight vehicle for the X-34 program. The modified contract expanded test objectives, allowing US$7.7 million in additional funds for the purchase of hardware and another US$2 million for additional testing and analysis, wind tunnel testing, and a second leading-edge thermal protection system.(NASA, NASA Commits to Second Vehicle for X-34 Program, news release 98-11, 21 January 1998.)
Controllers at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun. Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHOs mission was to track major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space. The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Suns atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted, news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears Its Lost, USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
NASA announced its selection of Litton/PRC of Mclean, Virginia, to perform work under NASAs sounding rocket operations contract, consolidating several previous contracts. The four- year contract, an indefinite deliveryindefinite quantity contract worth between US$11.9 million and US$211.8 million, included two three-year options worth up to an additional US$572.5 million. Goddard Space Flight Centers (GSFCs) Wallops Flight Facility, at Wallops Island, Virginia, was to provide services, including design, fabrication, integration, testing, and performance of mission operations for sounding rocket missions. NASA considered the contract an integral part of the Wallops 2000 strategic plan, initiated in 1997 to ensure the facilitys future stability and vitality.(NASA, NASA Selects Litton/PRC for NASA Sounding Rocket Program, contract announcement C98-t, 1 December 1998.)
NASA successfully tested a fuel tank made of a new metal mixture, aluminum lithium, never before used in major U.S. manufacturing. The tank made of the new alloy was 30 percent stronger and 5 percent lighter than the aluminum magnesium tanks in use since the days of the Apollo program. The tank showed no leaks, pressure bulges, or other problems, when loaded with 537,000 gallons (2,033,000 liters) of liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel. Lockheed Martin had developed the new fuel tank to help ensure that NASA would be able to haul large sections of the ISS into orbit.(Seth Borenstein, Shuttles New Fuel Tank Test a Success, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 May 1998.)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA planned to reserve an additional US$750 million of federal funds over the next two years, enabling Lockheed Martin to continue work on a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Lockheed Martin and NASA had signed an agreement in 1996 to develop the X-33 suborbital test craft. At that time, the federal government had pledged to dedicate US$900 million to develop the craft and fund 15 suborbital test flights, beginning in the spring of 1999. Goldin explained that if the test program exceeded the original ceiling of US$900 million, the US$750 million funding pool would be available, beginning in the year 2000, to develop the X-33 replacement vehicle.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, "More NASA Money for Shuttle Replacement, 3 February 1998.)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. Rick Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 412 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Station, 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday, 3 December 1998; NASA, Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) and ranking Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA) submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton requesting that he supply a plan within 30 days, detailing how the [a]dministration expects to resolve the dire problems surrounding the International Space Station. The two members of Congress asked President Clinton to intervene with President Boris N. Yeltsin to ensure full Russian compliance with its stated commitments to the space station. In the aftermath of the announcement of the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Forces findings on the ISS, the members of Congress were attempting to rectify the inadequate budget submission. They asked the President to direct the Office of Management and Budget to deliver a workable plan to Congress . . . so that the relevant [c]ongressional committees can consider OMB numbers when crafting NASA appropriations and authorization bills.(Federal Document Clearing House, Committee Asks Clinton for Space Station Plan, government news release, 24 June 1998.)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that Europes Infrared Space Observatory, which had been orbiting Earth for two and one-half years, had located water in unexpected places. The most intriguing of these was the water vapor detected in the atmosphere of Saturns largest moon, Titan. ESA Director of Science Roger M. Bonnet remarked, the moon may duplicate the conditions that led to the creation of life on Earth . . . and the only thing you need is a little heat to heat up Titan, maybe [the] birth of life may be seen. Chairperson of ESAs Astronomy Working Group Reinhard Genzel said that the Observatory had enabled scientists to see water throughout the universe, and that the water was likely brought to the icy outer planets by comets. He explained further that comets might have deposited the water on Earth during the early formation of the solar system, when many comets constantly collided with the Earth.
NASA announced that a long-exposure, infrared image, taken with a camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had uncovered the most distant galaxies ever seen. HSTs Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) had detected galaxies that might be over 12 billion light-years away, depending on which cosmological models scientists used. NASAs Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science, Edward J. Weiler, deemed the discovery a major step toward fulfilling one of HSTs key objectives: to search for the faintest and farthest objects in the universe.(NASA, Hubble Goes to the Limit in Search of Farthest Galaxies, news release 98-179, 8 October 1998.)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russias inability to pay its share of the programs costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays. NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Station, 1 June 1998; New York Times, Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay, 1 June 1998.)
NASA released images recorded by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft, showing the Cydonia region of Mars in 10 times more detail than that provided in the images recorded more than 20 years ago by one of the U.S. Viking space probes. In the new images, the Sun was shining from the opposite direction than in the images recorded by the Viking probe. Vikings images had revealed a surface formation in the hilly desert area, Cydonia, which some members of the public believed to be a monumental sculpture of a humanoid face, in spite of NASA scientists insistence that the face was only a common geological formation called a mesa. Some of those people who believed the structure to be a sculpture had accused NASA of manipulating data in a conspiracy to keep the origins of the face a secret. Surveyors new images confirmed NASAs previous analysis of the formation. However, in an effort to counteract the conspiracy rumors, NASA posted on the Internet the raw data sent by Mars Global Surveyor and took no official position regarding what the images did or did not reveal. Several planetary scientists remarked that the new image contained no surprises and no evidence of artificial origin.(Robert Lee Hotz, California and the West Alien Face Recedes into Martian Myth Space: NASA Photo Appears To Show a Naturally Weathered Mesa, Los Angeles Times, 7 April 1998; Kathy Sawyer, With Mars Images, NASA Says: Face It, Its a Mesa, Washington Post, 7 April 1998.)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagons National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 112 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center. NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac, the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test, news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight, Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
NASA officials announced that the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, which had operated the science program for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1983, would also manage the science operations for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST). As one of the cornerstone missions of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems, a major project within its space science program, NASA expected the NGST to provide a critical follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope. With capabilities unavailable in existing ground- based or space telescopes, the NGSTs purpose was to observe the first stars and galaxies in the universe, to understand better how the universe formed after the Big Bang. After consulting advisory committees, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Space Science, had decided that the most cost-effective and scientifically sound way to proceed would be to expand the [Space Telescope Science] Institutes responsibilities to include the management of the new telescope.(NASA, NASA Selects Home for Next Generation Space Telescope, news release 98-96, 8 June 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Ghassem R. Asrar as the new Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise. Before this appointment, Asrar had served as Chief Scientist for the Earth Observing System in the Office of Earth Science Enterprise at NASA Headquarters. He led an international team in developing scientific priorities and measurements to be obtained from a series of advanced Earth-orbiting satellites that promise fundamental new insights into the connections between Earths land, oceans, atmosphere, ice, and life.(NASA, Asrar Named Associate Administrator for Earth Science, news release 98-19, 2 February 1998.)
NASA announced the establishment of a Near-Earth Object Program Office at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), responsible for coordinating NASA-sponsored efforts to detect, track, and characterize potentially hazardous asteroids and comets that could approach Earth, and with facilitating communication between scientists and the public, were NASA to discover any potentially hazardous objects. NASA selected JPL to host the new program, because of its expertise in tracking precisely the positions and predicted paths of asteroids and comets.(NASA, NASA Establishes Near-Earth Object Program Office at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, news release 98- 123, 14 July 1998.)
Phillip Z. Tapper, emergency coordinator for NASAs GSFC, announced that exposure to smoke and water during the previous days fire had damaged parts of two spacecraft. Tapper said that engineers had not yet determined the exact damage to the heat protection panels, which they were planning to install in the Hubble Space Telescope and another spacecraft.(Associated Press, NASA Fire Damages Spacecraft Parts, 21 August 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronauts error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawlas efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttles robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawlas crewmates could have helped her verify the command but did not do so because such vigilance was not part of the plan. The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the boards findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage. The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASAs decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAOs report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division, testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says, 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, Space Stations Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task forces findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the projects cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrows report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his teams figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russias participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner chastised the Clinton administration, remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected the low priority the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, Space Plans Costs Increase amid Delays, New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
The Boeing Company announced the creation of a new subsidiary called Boeing Space Operations, based in Houston, Texas, at the Johnson Space Center, which would provide various services for government and commercial space operations. Rick Stephens, the president of the new subsidiary, stated that the goal of Boeing Space Operations was to make Boeing the global provider of low-cost, reliable, commercially based space operations services.(James Wallace, Boeing Forms a New Unit To Boost Its Space Business, Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 3 June 1998.)
Shuttle operator United Space Alliance (USA) cut 363 jobs at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), one of the largest cutbacks in decades. Combining the layoffs with 194 voluntary resignations, USA eliminated 557 jobs at KSC. In implementing the cutbacks, the company hoped to trim $100 million from the current [S]huttle budget, thereby reducing costs, improving efficiency, and attracting new payload customers without compromising safety.(Richard Burnett and Seth Borenstein, 363 Lose Jobs at Space Center, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1998.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, out of contact with ground controllers since 25 June, responded to signals sent by NASAs Deep Space Tracking Network antennas in Canberra, Australia. Although the signals contained no data, SOHO transmitted a series of short radio bursts, indicating to space scientists that the craft was still able to receive ground commands and, therefore, that they might still have a chance of salvaging it.(NASA, SOHO Spacecraft Contacted, news release 98-145, 4 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Contact Re-established with Wayward Satellite, 4 August 1998.)
George W. Lewis Jr., NASA aeronautical engineer and son of George W. Lewis, former research director of NASAs predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, died at his home at the age of 81. He had worked for 30 years in Cleveland, Ohio, at Lewis Research Center, which NASA had named for his father.(Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), George W. Lewis, 81, Was An Engineer at NASA, 9 October 1998.)
After two delays, one because of mechanical problems, the other because of strong winds, a Japanese H-2 rocket blasted off from Tanegashima Space Center, carrying a US$370 million communications satellite intended to conduct a three-year series of communications and broadcast tests. However, an engine breakdown prevented the satellite from entering a geostationary orbit; instead, the launch left the satellite floating in space, useless for its intended mission. Engineers were looking for ways to rescue the mission.(Mari Yamaguchi for Associated Press, Japan-Satellite, 21 February 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASAs new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency, and part to the fact that NASAs primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.
The Russian Space Agency announced that the first module of the ISS was completed and ready to ship to the launchpad. Under a contract with Boeing Company, Khrunichevs Moscow factory had designed and built this first module to hold cargo. The new module was similar to two existing modules in the Mir space station. Russia had originally scheduled the module for launch in November 1997, but fell behind in the production of the second unit. Despite the delay, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev emphasized the importance of the day during a news conference: This event symbolizes the fact that Russia was, is, and shall be a space nation, capable of realizing large-scale projects penetrating into space. The ISS project, a joint effort of Russia, the United States, the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan, was especially significant to Russia since the ISS would replace Mir as the only piloted element of Russias space program.
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASAs purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russias failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASAs proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, NASA Defends Space Station Plans, 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, NASA Chief Concedes Space Station DelaysHas Contingency Plans If Russia Cant Do Its Part, San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
Two scientific teams, independently studying HR 4796, a star in the southern constellation Centaurus, announced they had captured the strongest evidence yet of a new group of planets forming around the star. The teams used the 10-meter (33-foot) W. M. Keck II Telescope on top of the extinct Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii, and the National Science Foundations 4-meter (13-foot) Blanco Telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile. Using both of these sensitive new instruments, the research teams believed they could see clearly, through the glare of the star, a planet-forming disc of gas and dust. A third international team of British and American astronomers released the first images of the huge discs, which appeared to be forming around two other stars, Fomalhaut and Vega, the star made famous in the novel and movie Contact. The third team used the 15-meter (49-foot) James Clerk Maxwell Telescope, also atop Mauna Kea. Scientists considered the discoveries of the discs around the stars a missing link in the study of planetary system formation, offering them clues about the formation of rocky planets like Earth.(Kathy Sawyer, Oh, Baby! Telescopes Show the Birth of a Solar System; New Imaging Sharpens Delivery Room View, Washington Post, 22 April 1998.)
NASAs Ames Research Center awarded a five-year, US$99.3 million contract to Sverdrup Technology Inc. of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to provide testing and facility operation, including wind tunnels and arc-jet testing.(NASA, NASA Awards $99 Million Contract to Tennessee Firm, contract announcement C98-q, 27 October 1998.)
NASA announced that Colorado State University would lead a US$145 million study of clouds, to better understand global warming and to dramatically improve weather forecasts. The five- year project would use a satellite named CloudSat to capture three-dimensional global images of clouds.
Chryssa Kouveliotou of the Universities Space Research Association led a team of astronomers at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center in confirming the existence of magnetars, a special class of neutron stars with a magnetic field one thousand trillion times the strength of Earths. The team calculated the strength of SGR1806-20, first discovered in 1979, by combining data from NASAs Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer satellite and the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics.(UniSci Science and Research News, Magnetar Generates Most Intense Magnetic Field in Universe, 21 May 1998; C. Kouveliotou et al., An X-ray Pulsar with a Superstrong Magnetic Field in the Soft Gamma-Ray Repeater SGR1806-20, Nature 393, no. 6682 (21 May 1998): 235237; NASA, Strongest Stellar Magnetic Field Yet Observed Confirms Existence of Magnetars, news release 98-87, 20 May 1998.)
NASA announced the change in name of one of its four strategic enterprises. NASAs Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise was renamed Earth Science Enterprise. Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise had originated 10 years ago, based on the concept that NASA should observe the Earth in the same way that it studies other planets. NASA said that the new name reflected the enterprises reformulated goals. NASAs Earth Science Enterprise would seek to answer key questions about land-surface cover, near-term and long-term climate change, natural hazards, and atmospheric ozone.(NASA, Mission to Planet Earth Enterprise Name Changed to Earth Science, news release 98-12, 21 January 1998.)
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the crafts fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Solar Probe Back Under Control, 17 September 1998.)
NASA announced it had renamed the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility the Chandra X-ray Observatory, in honor of the late Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. NASA chose the name Chandra because it was the late scientists preferred name among friends and colleagues, and because it means moon or luminous in Sanskrit. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented that Chandrasekhar had made fundamental contributions to the theory of black holes and other phenomena, which the Chandra X-ray Observatory would study. NASA also announced that it had set a new launch date for the observatoryno earlier than 8 April 1999.(NASA, NASA Renames Telescope and Sets New Launch Date, news release 98-225, 21 December 1998. 644 Bill Scanlon, CSU Will Lead NASA Cloud Study $145 Million Project Is Designed To Improve Weather Forecasts, Study Global Warming, Rocky Mountain News (Denver), 30 December 1998.)
During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The programs original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASAs commitment to achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost, saying that the plan would meet a legitimate need within the science community.(Warren Ferster, NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals, Space News, 814 June 1998.)
SPACEHAB Inc., a Virginia-based, commercial space company with a staff of 85, purchased the Johnson Engineering Corporation, a 400-person firm contracted to support NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. SPACEHABs chairperson said the company would expand the use of Johnson Engineerings larger technical staff to support its plans for expansion into the commercial space arena. Investors had incorporated SPACEHAB in 1984, to develop a commercial research module that could accommodate small, private, as well as government- financed science experiments and engineering tests during [S]pace [S]huttle mission[s]. However, when the anticipated commercial market had failed to develop, SPACEHAB changed its strategy, winning NASA contracts. NASA used SPACEHAB modules, stored in the Shuttles payload bays, as cargo containers for storing tons of food, clothing, and other gear that was ferried to Russias Mir space station aboard a series of recently concluded U.S. [S]huttle flights.(Mark Carreau, Spacehab of Virginia Acquires NASA Contractor, Houston Chronicle, 5 July 1998.)
Frances Aerospatiale, British Aerospace, Germanys Daimler-Benz Aerospace, and Spains CASA, partners in the Airbus Industrie airplane-manufacturing consortium, announced their intention to merge into a unified civilian and military aerospace conglomerate that would compete in the world market with U.S. aerospace giants Lockheed Martin Corp[oration] and Boeing Co[mpany] The partners provided no details regarding how the merger would take place, but the public statement represented another move toward a unified European aerospace industry, an idea that had been elusive because of the competing national interests of the various countries.
An international team of researchers announced that observations of U.S. satellites orbiting Earth had proven one of physicist Albert Einsteins theories correct. In his general theory of relativity, Einstein had predicted that a spinning body could curve space, because the spin of a body must change the geometry of the universe by generating space-time curvature. Einstein had called the phenomenon frame dragging, but scientists came to refer to it as the Lense-Thirring effect, naming it for two Austrian physicists who wrote that rotating celestial bodies, such as the Sun, create a force that pulls space toward them. Ignazio Ciufolini, a physicist at Sapienza University of Rome, and his colleagues used lasers to measure changes in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellite I, or LAGEOS, a NASA spacecraft, and LAGEOS II, a satellite belonging to NASA and the Italian Space Agency. The research team observed changes that they could not account for by the laws of gravity or tidal forces, concluding that the Lense-Thirring effect exists. The satellites, launched in 1976 and 1992, were passive satellites dedicated exclusively to laser ranging. In this process, scientists had send laser pulses to the satellite from ranging stations on Earth, measuring the round-trip travel time of the pulses. The research team had analyzed data collected over a four-year period beginning in 1993.(NASA, Earth Dragging Space and Time as It Rotates, news release 98-51, 27 March 1998; Reuters, Einstein Proved Right Yet Again, 26 March 1998.)
The joint committee of NASA and the European Space Agency investigating the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) incident issued a preliminary report. The committee found that several errors had led to the loss of the satellites signal. First, Mission Control had unknowingly activated two preprogrammed sequences, which lacked commands to reorient the spacecraft properly. The resulting anomalies had caused SOHO to enter into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR). A rapid decision to turn off one of the crafts gyroscopes had ultimately triggered two more ESRs, sending the spacecraft flailing out of control. Controllers also discovered that undetected failures, which had occurred sometime earlier in the year, had taken out three of the four batteries.(NASA, Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Investigation Board Focuses on Most Likely Causes, news release 98-125, 16 July 1998; James Glanz, Chain of Errors Hurled Probe into Spin, Science 281, no. 5376 (24 July 1998): 499; United Press International, UPI Science News, 28 July 1998.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had found the youngest cluster of stars ever observed in a galaxy near the Milky Way. The baby stars were enveloped in a cloud of luminous gases, in the galaxy known as the Small Magellanic Cloud, about 200,000 light- years from Earth. The HST had discovered the 50 new stars, each 300,000 times as bright as the Sun, concentrated in a region only 10 light-years across in a cloud known as N81. Before the capture of the HSTs high-resolution images, astronomers had referred to the area as The Blob.(NASA, Nearby Star Cluster Yields Insights into Early Universe, news release 98-132, 23 July 1998; Washington Times, Hubble Telescope Finds Family of Stars, 24 July 1998; New York Times, Genesis in a Cosmic Firestorm, 28 July 1998.)
NASA researchers released images and temperature readings collected by Mars Global Surveyor. The images revealed that the Martian moon Phobos is covered in a layer of dust at least 3 feet (0.9 meters) deep, the result of the impact of meteoroids, occurring over millions of years. Surveyors thermal emission spectrometer revealed that, on Phobos, the temperature changes from -170oF to -25oF (-112oC to -32oC) between night and day. Scientists explained that dust accounts for some of the moons drastic temperature change, because Phobos does not have an atmosphere enabling it to trap heat. Therefore, the surfaces small particles have only 7 hours to absorb heat from the Sun, losing heat rapidly after sunset. Images of landslides on steep crater slopes indicated that Phoboss gravity, even at just 1/1,000th of that of Earth, is sufficient to pull objects downward.(NASA, Martian Moon Phobos Hip-Deep in Powder, news release 98-164, 11 September 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, Martian Moon, 12 September 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttles mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The days temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the hottest launch day anyone could remember. The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the ShuttleMir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2, news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final ShuttleMir Docking, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, Cosmonauts Fix Mirs Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed, 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Discovery Soars on NASAs Last Voyage to Mir, 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission, 1 June 1998.)
NASA officials at Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, announced the new five- year collaborative program of LERC and Case Western Reserve University. The programs name, the Glennan Microsystems Initiative, honored the late T. Keith Glennan, the first NASA Administrator, who had served from 1958 to 1961. Glennan was also President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology, forerunner of Case Western Reserve University. Backed with US$16 million in federal funds and US$4.5 million in state funds, the initiative planned to develop and apply the technology known as microelectricomechanical systems for industry and for NASA. LERC planned to develop systems for use a decade into the future, including power systems for the next space station.(Jennifer Arend, Lewis Research Launches Effort To Develop Technology, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 20 June 1998.)
The European Science Foundation and the U.S. National Research Council published a joint study analyzing 13 projects in astrophysics, planetary science, space physics, earth science, and microgravity research. The report advised the United States and its international partners to set aside a specific part of their annual space budgets to plan for future critical joint exploration projects, highlighting factors hampering cooperation within the projects analyzed. Hampering factors included cultural differences, poorly defined objectives, and lukewarm support from the scientific community for projects undertaken more for political than research reasons. The report set forth recommendations for successfully pursuing cooperative space projects within tight budget constraints.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Study: Space Projects Need Good Science, 30 June 1998; European Space Foundation, Transatlantic Study Identifies Keys to Success in International Space Collaboration, news release, 30 June 1998, http://www.esf.org/media-centre/press-releases/ext-single-news/article/transatlantic- study-identifies-keys-to-sucess-in-international-space-collaborations-220.html (accessed 27 September 2007).)
A fire that started in a shed containing an air compressor spread to another building of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), causing extensive damage. No one was injured, and firefighters were able to stop the blaze before it reached laboratories containing hazardous and flammable materials. Fire investigators had not determined the cause of the fire. NASA did not permit the investigators to survey the damage immediately, because of sensitive material housed in the affected building.(Associated Press, NASA Fire, 20 August 1998.)
NASA successfully launched Deep Space 1, a spacecraft that could think for itself. Driven by ion propulsion, Deep Space 1 was the first craft to rely on this technology for its primary propulsion. The crafts destination was an asteroid 120 million miles (193 million kilometers) away from Earth. Although tracking stations encountered initial difficulties receiving signals from the spacecraft, Deep Space 1 communicated 2 hours after liftoff that it was on the right course and in good shape. NASA scientists expected the spacecraft to travel 450 million miles (724 million kilometers) to catch up with the moving asteroid. Without the ion-propulsion technology, it would have required 10 times more fuel to reach its target. The craft was also flying with 10 other futuristic technologies, such as lens-covered solar arrays to generate additional power, and a radio beacon to communicate with ground controllers without their prompting the probe from Earth.(New York Times, U.S. Launches a Spacecraft That Thinks for Itself, 25 October 1998.)
NASA announced the arrival of international astronaut candidates at Johnson Space Center, where they began training as members of the 1998 astronaut class. The international candidates, from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, and Italy, were Leopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, Hans W. Schlegel, and Roberto Vittori of the European Space Agency; Bjarni V. Tryggvason of the Canadian Space Agency; and Marco C. Pontes of the Brazilian Space Agency.
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, Station Cost Overrun.)
NASA announced that JSC had modified its contract with United Space Alliance, awarding the contractor more Shuttle work. Three other NASA contractors had previously performed the more than US$900 million of work on the Space Shuttles solid rocket booster and other elements. USBI Company at Kennedy Space Center had worked on the boosters; Lockheed Martin Corporation in Houston, Texas, had designed and produced the primary Shuttle avionics software; and Boeing Aerospace Operations in Houston had processed flight equipment.(NASA, NASA Awards More Shuttle Work to USA, news release c98-h, 7 July 1998.)
NASA awarded contracts to Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems; Kelly Space and Technology; Lockheed Martin Astronautics; and Orbital Sciences Corporation Space Access. The five contracting companies would study ways that NASA could meet its requirements for human spaceflight at a lower cost. The studies would examine three scenarios: 1) keeping the Shuttle operational until 2020, 2) replacing the Shuttle when it was cost-effective to do so, and 3) developing an alternative plan in case NASAs funding remained at FY 1999 levels.(NASA, NASA Contracts for Future Space Transportation Studies, news release c98-n, 4 September 1998; Defense Daily, NASA Awards Future Space Transport Study Contracts, 8 September 1999.)
At the request of the United States, Israeli officials arrested Ehud Tenenbaum, the eighteen-year- old computer hacker who called himself The Analyzer, along with two other Israeli teenagers. Tenenbaum was ringleader of a group called Israeli Internet Underground. Prosecutors accused the teenage hackers of breaking into U.S. government and military computer systems, including NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), as well as into Israeli government computers and commercial and educational computer systems in the United States. The FBI said that all three had admitted their involvement, stating that they had worked in tandem with two juveniles in Cloverdale, California.
NASAs Inventions and Contributions Board announced the winners of its 1998 Software of the Year Award. The first winner, Tempest, a breakthrough technology originally developed to support the science experiments on the ISS, had spawned new markets, and NASA predicted that the technology would continue to do so. NASAs Ames Research Center had designed the second winner, Center TRACON Automation System Software, a set of three software tools for managing air-trafficcontrol systems at major airports, to optimize flight operations. Analyzing and predicting aircraft paths, the software created visual representations of arriving traffic flow, providing controllers with up-to-the-second advisories of information for pilots, thus reducing time between landings to a minimum. The Federal Aviation Administration had chosen the software for immediate implementation at all major airports.(NASA, Space Flight, Aviation Programs Receive NASA Software Award, news release 98-124, 15 July 1998. 543 NASA, New NASA Facility Will Complete Worldwide Communications Coverage, news release 98-122, 13 July 1998.)
At a NASA press conference, Ethan J. Schreier of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and his colleagues discussed new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images. The new images showed in greater clarity an old galaxys black hole feeding on a smaller, younger galaxy that collided with it. The scientists explained that the new images revealed young stars in the midst of an obviously old galaxy, suggesting that a collision had occurred. The merged galaxy complex, known as Centaurus A, was about 10 million light-years away from the Milky Way. The images, taken with HSTs newest infrared camera, also showed gas and dust feeding an apparent large black hole. An inner disc of gas, swirling around the black hole, was behaving in a manner opposite to scientists expectations, based upon the behavior of other galaxies. Hans- Walter Rix of the University of Arizona theorized that the collision could explain the difference, postulating that the HST may have caught Centaurus A in the midst of trying to realign itself after its spiral companion plowed into it. Schreier offered an alternative explanationthat the mass of the merged galaxies was greater than the mass of the black hole, causing the gravitational pull to warp the inner disc.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, Hubble Reveals Feeding Black Hole, 14 May 1998; NASA, Hubble Provides Multiple Views of How To Feed a Black Hole, news release 98-71, 14 May 1998.)
At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had apparently outshone all the rest of the universe for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and pinpointed the position of the rays source. The United States Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang, New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories, news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshalls X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFCs X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded, 21 February 1998.)
At a ceremony marking its official opening, Virginia Governor James S. Gilmore III announced that Reston-based DynCorp was the first major investor in the Commercial Spaceport Launch Pad at Virginia Space Flight Center on Wallops Island, the nations third commercial spaceport. The Virginia Commercial Space Flight Authority, a collaborative effort of the state, the Center for Innovative Technology at Old Dominion University in Virginia, NASA, and private industry, had developed the communications facility, located at one end of NASAs Wallops Flight Facility. The spaceport was one of 18 sites competing to launch the VentureStarTM, a privately owned space plane still in development, which could eventually carry construction materials to the ISS.(Sonja Barisic, Firm Gives a Big Boost to Spaceport, Roanoke Times (VA), 15 September 1998; Karen Jolly Davis, $4.5 Million Contribution Gives Wallops Island Spaceport a Boost, Virginian Pilot and the Ledger-Star (Norfolk, VA), 15 September 1998.)
NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billionlight-yearlong corridor, the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a core sample of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a small patch of space near the Big Dipper.(NASA, The Universe Down Under Is the Target of Hubbles Latest Deep-View, news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)
Ghassem R. Asrar, NASA Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about budget concerns and delays associated with the Earth Observing System program. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) had called the hearing to discuss numerous delays in NASAs Earth Science Enterprise missions. Asrar explained the reasons for the delays, indicating that NASA would work with Raytheon Systems to deliver a scaled-back data system within budget, in time to support two delayed missions. Subcommittee member, Representative David Weldon Jr. (R- FL), questioned the legitimacy of NASAs ownership of the Earth Science program, suggesting that a different agency, such as the National Academy of Sciences or the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), should manage the program. Weldon also questioned whether scientists would be able to make use of the vast amount of data they expected the program to generate. Robert S. Winokur, NOAAs Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, assured subcommittee members that scientists would be able to use the information. Winokur was responsible for coordinating NOAAs joint efforts with NASA to archive and retrieve environmental data.(Brian Berger, Earth Science Faces Hurdles: NASA To Forfeit Data Capabilities To Put Key Program on Track, Space News, 1420 September 1998.)
NASAs Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, opened a new Collaborative Engineering Center equipped with virtual reality, teleconferencing, and cutting-edge technology. Using a combination of a joystick and computerized voice commands, engineers could control the three-dimensional, virtual space station, which included a docking Space Shuttle orbiter.(Akweli Parker, NASA Reshaping the Way It Works, Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, VA), 16 January 1998.)
NASAs ER-2 aircraft, a close relative of the U-2 spy plane, officially broke the altitude record for medium-weight planes when it flew to 68,700 feet (20,900 meters), nearly twice the cruising altitude of commercial airliners, during a mission to measure components of the atmosphere. A Canadian P-42 aircraft had set the previous record of 62,500 feet (19,050 meters) in 1988. NASA officials said the craft had flown at such altitudes in the past, but this flight was the first time that scientists had documented its altitude and made it public.(Agence France-Presse, NASA Airplane Flies High into Sky: ER-2 Able To Break Record for Altitude, Washington Times, 23 November 1998.)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had selected Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California, and TRW Inc. Space and Electronics Group of Redondo Beach, California, as industry team members for the Space Interferometry Mission. The Interferometry Mission would measure the precise location of stars and search for planets orbiting nearby stars. The two contracts, which together exceeded US$200 million, included mission formulation and implementation.(NASA, Contractors Chosen for Space Interferometry Mission, news release 98-162, 10 September 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science, news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive Drizzle, USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The studys principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Womens Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenns Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenns crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenns disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight, New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
The investigation board of engineers and officials from NASA and the European Space Agency released their final report, determining how controllers had lost communication with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite on 24 June. The boards findings, presented at a joint news conference held in Washington, DC, and Paris, concluded that no anomalies existed on the spacecraft; the loss of SOHO was a direct result of operational errors, a failure to monitor the status of the spacecraft adequately, and the use of insufficiently tested rescue procedures. However, the board emphasized that no single cause or particular person was responsible for the incident.(Warren E. Leary, Satellite To Study Sun Is Reviving from Dead, New York Times, 4 September 1998.)
Jeremy Lin of Taiwans Academia Sinica Institute and colleagues at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico, reported in the journal Nature that measurements taken with the worlds largest radio telescopesthe Very Large Array (VLA) had detected peculiar bulges in the atmosphere of a giant star. Huge plumes of gas thrust from beneath the surface of the red supergiant star, Betelgeuse, had likely caused the bulges. Betelgeuse is located in the shoulder of the constellation Orion, about 430 light-years from Earth. The research team used the Y-shaped, 22-mile-wide (35-kilometer-wide) cluster of 27 huge antennas of the VLA telescopes to capture the most detailed radio image ever taken of a star other than the Sun. The team discovered that some of the gas in the stars atmosphere was much cooler than previously believedabout 5,750F (3,200C). The discovery of the lower temperatures enabled astronomers to understand how huge amounts of dust are constantly blown away from the star. Before the lower temperatures were identified, scientists had not been able to explain how the stellar dust formed, because at higher temperatures the dust could not condense from the hot gas expelled from the stars interior. Astronomers believe that dust created and expelled by stars like Betelgeuse is distributed throughout the universe and provide[s] the raw materials that gave rise to life on Earth.(Malcolm W. Browne, Atmosphere Bulges on None-Too-Distant Star, New York Times, 21 April 1998.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula, the site of a gas cloud generating enough water to fill the Earths oceans 60 times a day. The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula. The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time the vital role that water plays in star formation, may provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem. Michael Werner of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, that water is prevalent in space and plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth, 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns, Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
As part of the Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA officials chose more than 300 research proposals to share US$23 million in funding. Out of 28 award categories, 21 focused on space-based applications, such as achieving routine space travel, exploring and settling the solar system, and developing new technologies in astrobiology. The range of topics indicated that research associated with high-profile space transportation and exploration efforts, curtailed because of cuts in NASAs 1999 budget, would continue on a smaller scale.(Anne Eisele, Small Business Grants Span Range of NASA Goals, Space News, 23 February1 March 1998.)
Mark H. Thiemens, professor of chemistry at the University of California at San Diego, and a team of researchers published a study in the journal Science disputing NASAs theory that a rock from Mars contained evidence of life. NASA scientists had studied the rock, found in the Allen Hills ice field in Antarctica, concluding that some carbonate mineral structures in the rock were evidence that microbes had lived in the rock before it blasted away from Mars, during the collision of Mars with an asteroid millions of years ago. By contrast, Thiemenss researchers concluded that the chemical characteristics of oxygen inside the rock originated from the carbon dioxide and ozone of the Martian atmosphere. The team explained that, if a microbe had deposited the oxygen, the chemical signature of the minerals would have matched that of oxygen in water, not oxygen in the atmosphere. According to the team, this finding did not provide final proof that the rock had never contained life. However, it provided a significant argument against NASAs theory, controversial since its first proposal in August 1996.(James Farquhar, Mark H. Thiemens, and Teresa Jackson, Atmosphere-Surface Interactions on Mars: 17 Measurements of Carbonate from ALH84001, Science 280, no. 5369 (June 5, 1998): 1580; Los Angeles Times, New Meteorite Study Casts Doubt on Theory of Martian Life, 5 June 1998.)
Astronomers at the University of Manchester in England and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) announced that six radio telescopes, in concert with the HST, had captured the first image ever recorded of an unbroken Einstein ring, a circle of light created by the gravitational warping of space between a very distant galaxy and the earth. Physicist Albert Einsteins general theory of relativity had predicted that light from a distant object would travel a curving path if it passed close to a massive object along the line of sight from Earth. The radio image showed a fragmented group of bright arcs, but the HST showed that the galaxys infrared emission region was perfectly in line with the gravitational lens and Earth, confirming the existence of the Einstein ring.(Malcolm W. Browne, Einstein Ring Caused by Space Warping Is Found, New York Times, 31 March 1998. 127)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASAs request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not go along with NASAs request to start bailing out the Russian space program, stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, would make good use of the money.(Paul Recer, Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money, San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) launched into orbit, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, a new weather satellite, the NOAA-K, aboard a 34- year old converted Titan II nuclear missile. The satellite was an Advanced Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS-N) weather satellite, able to see inside clouds, a feature that scientists expected would greatly increase our knowledge of how hurricanes develop and move. The TIROS-N was the latest model of TIROS satellite in four generations. Lockheed Martin had last built a TIROS satellite for NASA and NOAA in 1960. After the launch of the TIROS-N, the satellite would undergo a series of tests by NASA, followed by a round of tests by NOAA, before becoming fully available in time for next years hurricane season.(Justin Ray, New NOAA Weather Satellite Will Keep a Better Eye on Hurricanes, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 1998; Business Wire, Nations Newest Advanced Weather Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully, 14 May 1998.)
John S. Lewis, Codirector of the Space Engineering Research Center at the University of Arizona in Tucson, testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics concerning the potential danger of nearby asteroids. His testimony supported the idea that any asteroid colliding with Earth in the next 100 years could only be an asteroid not yet known to scientists. Lewis argued that, since an international scientific effort could identify such an asteroid easily, he advocated a systematic, globally-coordinated search and characterization program that costs less than a single small space mission. Such a search, he argued, would give us adequate warning of a threatened asteroid impact, so that we would have ample time to design, build, test, and deploy an effective defense against the threat.(Federal Document Clearing House, Asteroids: Perils and Opportunities, government news release of testimony of John S. Lewis before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Washington, DC, 21 May 1998.)
The data transmission system of Galileo malfunctioned during its fifth flyby of Jupiters moon Europa when it went into safe mode. Although NASA engineers activated a backup system, the transmission system had lost all data collected when the craft passed within 1,141 miles (1,835 kilometers) of the moon. NASA was investigating the malfunction. NASA had launched Galileo in 1989, and the probe had entered Jupiters orbit in 1995, collecting data from moons Io, Europa, and Callisto during its initial two-year mission, completed in December 1997. NASA had extended the mission for two additional years.(Agence France-Presse, Galileo Probe Suffers Malfunction in Jupiter Moon Flyby, 22 July 1998; Associated Press, Spacecraft Galileo Working Again, 24 July 1998.)
NASA announced that two of its research pilots had been the first Americans to fly a modified Russian Tu-144 supersonic jetliner, participating in three evaluation flights over a two-week period during mid-to-late September, at Zhukovsky Air Development Center near Moscow. Pilots Robert Rivers of Langley Research Center and C. Gordon Fullerton of Dryden Flight Research Center had flown the jetliner as part of a jointly funded activity under the auspices of NASAs High-Speed Research Program and the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group. The purpose of the test flights was to gain operational experience and experimental flight data to develop an environmentally friendly, second-generation, supersonic transport in the United States.(NASA, NASA Pilots Fly Russian Tu-144LL Flying Laboratory, news release 98-186, 13 October 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as chief of American rocketry efforts, died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimers disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germanys defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects. In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agencys Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89, New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
NASA announced that Raytheon STX Corporation of Lanham, Maryland, would provide routine data operations, research, and development support for the Space Science Data Operations Office and the National Space Science Data Center at GSFC, under a two-year contract with three one- year options. Valued at more than US$33 million, the contract covered the processing of space- science data and the acquisition, modeling, analysis, archiving, and dissemination of NASAs archival data to the scientific community, educators, and the public.(NASA, NASA Selects Raytheon STX To Provide Goddard Support, contract announcement c98-v, 2 December 1998.)
Eighteen members of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton, urging him to abandon plans to reach an agreement in China on expanding space cooperation because of Beijings weapons transfers and human rights abuses. The letter was the Houses response to a 29 April report in the Washington Times, disclosing a plan to conclude a space cooperation agreement at the Beijing summit. The article discussed a draft agreement calling for the free and unrestricted exchange of scientific data between NASA and the State Science and Technology Commission of China, a key developer of weapons-related technology. The lawmakers, warning that the pact would increase the likelihood of Chinas sharing technology with rogue states, referred to a CIA report stating that China had aimed 13 of its 18 long-range strategic missiles at the United States. These comments emphasized the concern of members of Congress that China constituted a direct threat to the United States. Many opponents of the agreement insisted that the United States should not share with China technologies or applications that enemies of the United States might use against the American people or U.S. interests.(Bill Gertz, House Science Panelists Oppose Space Pact with China, Washington Times, 24 June 1998.)
Elizabeth H. Moore, Head of the Art and Archaeology Department of the School of Oriental and African Studies, the University of London, and Anthony Freeman, a radar scientist at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), discussed new radar imagery of Angkor, Cambodia, during a press briefing at JPL. The researchers announced that the Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (AIRSAR), developed by JPL to produce radar maps, had helped them to detect and locate a distribution of prehistoric mounds and undocumented temples to the northwest of Angkor. The three-dimensional maps, created using radar interferometry, revealed evidence of temples and earlier civilization that were absent or incorrectly marked on modern topographic maps and early twentieth-century archaeological reports. These discoveries brought into question long-standing ideas about the urban evolution of Angkor. The 1996 AIRSAR Pacific Rim Deployment on board a NASA DC-8 jet was a follow-up to a 1994 study of Angkor that used Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR) on board Space Shuttle Endeavour during Mission STS-59, producing the radar images used to create the three- dimensional maps. Unlike SIR-C/X-SAR, AIRSAR had P-band with a longer wavelength, able to penetrate the forest canopy. AIRSAR also flew in a mode that allowed it to measure topography and create three-dimensional images of the surface.(NASA, New Insights into Ancient Angkor by NASA Radar To Be Subject of Press Briefing, news release N98-11, 5 February 1998; NASA, NASA Radar Reveals Hidden Remains at Ancient Angkor, news release 98-28, 12 February 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, Unseen Angkor, 12 February 1998.)
Lockheed Martin and its Russian business partners announced the appointment of Wilbur C. Trafton as President of International Launch Services (ILS); Trafton had been Acting President since the previous December. Lockheed Martin, Russias Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia had established ILS in 1995, as a joint venture to market commercial launch services on Russian Proton rockets and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. Before joining ILS, Trafton had been Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Space Flight. In that position, he had headed NASAs Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. Ray Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, remarked that Trafton had brought to ILS years of experience working on joint space programs with Russia. Colladay said that Traftons background, together with his knowledge of the Atlas product line, made him particularly well suited to lead ILS.(Lockheed Martin, Wilbur Trafton Named President, International Launch Services, news release, 26 March 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/WilburTraftonNamedPresident Internat.html (accessed 21 December 2007).)
Soyuz TM-29 launched on a mission to Mir with Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Ivan Bella. Jean-Pierre Haignere of the European Space Agency was also on board Soyuz.(NASA, U.S. and Russian Human Space Flight 1961September 30, 2000, in Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2000 Activities (Washington, DC, 2001).)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles OBrien, Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station, CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches, 28 October 1999.)
The Federal Laboratory Consortium appointed Donald J. Campbell, Director of Glenn Research Center (GRC), as the 1998 Laboratory Director of the Year for Technology Transfer. The Consortium honored Campbell, NASAs first African American center director, for his exemplary contributions to the overall enhancement of technology transfer for economic development. Industries had created at least 20 new products from GRC-developed technologies in the previous five years. Campbell had also led the Center in establishing the Lewis Incubator for Technology, to help entrepreneurs and start-up companies commercialize NASA-developed technologies, as well as the Garrett Morgan Commercialization Initiative, to help small businesses in Ohio and the Great Lakes region use NASA technologies to become more competitive.(NASA, Campbell Named Laboratory Director of the Year, news release 99-32, 4 March 1999.)
At the American Geophysical Unions fall meeting in San Francisco, NASA presented images from the Galileo spacecrafts close flyby of Jupiters moon Io on 25 November, showing a curtain of lava erupting within a giant volcanic crater. Because of the intense heat and height of the lava fountains, NASAs Infrared Telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was also able to observe them. NASA scientists hoped to determine the temperature of the extremely hot lava on Io, by combining data from the telescope and from Galileo observations. Galileo scientist Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson remarked that capturing images of the fountains was a 1-in-500-chance observation. NASA announced that engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratorys (JPLs) Measurement Technology Center had been able to repair images damaged by radiation during Galileos 10 October flyby using LabVIEW software from National Instruments. JPLs Torrence V. Johnson compared the work to unscrambling a television cable signal: JPL engineers had to break the code that was inadvertently introduced by the radiation near Io.(NASA, Galileo Sees Dazzling Lava Fountain on Io, news release 99-148, 17 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-148.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the missions failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASAs interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named, news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Kevin L. Petersen, who had been serving in an acting capacity since August 1998, as Director of NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Petersen had joined Dryden as an aerospace engineer in 1974 and had worked on flight-research projects, including the F-8 Digital Fly-by-Wire, the HiMAT (the Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology), and the X-29 forward-swept wing projects. He had served as Chief of the Vehicle Technology Branch, Chief of the National Aerospace Plane Projects Office, and, since January 1996, as DFRCs Deputy Director.(NASA, Petersen Named Dryden Director, news release 99-14, 8 February 1999.)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASAs first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agricultures Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASAs new space-grant program, Rasmussens primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension workusing the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information systemas precision agriculture, because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work, Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that the plutonium-powered Cassini spacecraft, en route to Saturn, had entered safe mode on 11 January. The craft, NASAs largest and most complex interplanetary probe, had detected a possible error in its orientation, which prompted it to halt all non-critical activity, while maintaining its communications link with Earth.(Associated Press, Saturn-Bound Spacecraft Develops Problem, JPL Says, Los Angeles Times, 14 January 1999. 651 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Cunningham, Cook Named to Mars Posts, news release 99-03, 13 January 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/marsappts.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the companys spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade. Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the crafts enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earths surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earths surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit, San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmospheres density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, covered with 878 small, circular mirrors that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had popped from its canister in the Shuttles cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discoverys crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
President of the Aerospace Industries Association John W. Douglass testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space that the nation needed an enlightened national space program, combining public and private investment in synergistic ways. Douglass stated that the government needed to remove barriers to the growth of commercial space. He said that the most critical action needed for the industrys growth was renewal of the indemnification provisions of the Commercial Space Launch Act, because without such provisions, U.S. companies are unable to compete with the government-backed programs of foreign competitors. Douglass also testified that U.S. launch ranges lacked modern facilities, causing launch delays. Such delays wreak havoc in the commercial world, because launch sites require more time to reconfigure a launch than convenient for commercial enterprises. He cited the export licensing process as a serious problem, because it was causing the U.S. commercial space industry to lose market share in both satellite and launch services. Additionally, Douglass called the dramatic drop in funding for aerospace research and development over the last two decades a serious structural problem, which the United States should correct, to remain competitive in the world market.(AIA Urges Congress To Remove Barriers to Commercial Space Industry, Aerospace News, 20 May 1999.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) published a report critical of the X-33 program jointly sponsored by NASA and Lockheed Martin, concluding that the program was unlikely to meet its original cost, schedule, and performance goals because of increased costs, delayed testing, and revised objectives. However, NASA and Lockheed Martin responded that they expected the program to achieve technical requirements, such as demonstrating the feasibility of building large liquid hydrogen fuel tanks made of graphite composite material. The purpose of the X-33 Program was to develop and demonstrate advanced technologies for use on future reusable launch vehicles, such as the companys VentureStarTM.(U. S. General Accounting Office, Space Transportation: Status of the X-33 Reusable Launch Vehicle Program (report no. NIASD-99-176, Washington, DC, 11 August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99176.pdf (accessed 4 March 2008).)
At the 14th Annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented the George M. Low Award, NASAs highest honor for quality and technical performance, to four U.S. companies: 1) Barrios Technology Inc. of Houston, Texas, for its small-business product; 2) Kay and Associates of Edwards, California, for small-business service; 3) Raytheon Support Services Company of Annapolis Junction, Maryland, for the large-business service category; and, 4) Thiokol Space Operations of Brigham City, Utah, for the large-business product category. NASA had evaluated the recipients for performance, delivery according to agreed cost and schedule, innovation, management leadership, alignment of organizational goals with NASAs strategic plans, customer orientation, and adherence to the Total Quality Management philosophy. Thiokol Corporation, which had won the Low Award in 1991 and Marshall Space Flight Centers Contractor Excellence Award in March 1999, had manufactured the reusable solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, as well as providing launch support and refurbishment services for the motor. Over the past seven years, Thiokol had never delayed its delivery of hardware. Its cost reduction efforts had saved NASA US$152 million.(NASA, Four Aerospace Firms Win NASAs Highest Honor for Quality, news release 99-53, 22 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-053.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); Cordant Technologies Inc., Thiokol Propulsion Wins NASAs Highest Honor for Quality, news release, 3 May 1999.)
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASAs four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a long-overdue tune-up. The orbiters overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbias fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, Shuttle Tuneup, 25 September 1999.)
NASA researchers at MSFC unveiled an experimental 50-foot (15-meter) track using magnetic levitation (maglev) technology to propel a 30-pound (13.6-kilogram) model of a spacecraft, at a speed of 60 miles (97 kilometers) per hour, in 0.5 seconds. MSFC researchers had sought to reduce launch costs, as well as to reduce space-vehicle size with the development of a maglev launch-assist system. The maglev track was theoretically capable of propelling and releasing a spacecraft at 600 miles (965 kilometers) per hour; wing design would then lift the craft and give it a kick start before the ignition of the rockets engines. MSFC Manager of Launch Technologies Sherry Buschmann commented that the researchers believed the use of maglev technology could cut launch vehicle size by 20 percent. NASAs industry partner in the experimental technology was PRT Advanced Maglev Systems Inc. of Park Forest, Illinois.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, New NASA Track Races Toward Cheaper Trips to Space, news release 99-260, 4 October 1999; Kent Faulk, NASA Spacecraft Float to Future: Researchers Test Levitation as Way To Boost Launches, Birmingham News (AL), 7 October 1999.)
Analyzing data from NASAs Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) spacecraft, researchers proved for the first time that smoke from forest fires inhibits rainfall. TRMM, a mission of the United States and Japan and part of NASAs Earth Science Enterprise, had been producing continuous data since December 1997. Daniel Rosenfeld of the Institute of Earth Sciences at Hebrew University in Jerusalem had studied the data, finding that clouds polluted with heavy smoke significantly inhibit warm rain processes. When smoke pollutes them, cloud tops must grow considerably above the freezing level to produce rain through a different process. Rosenfeld remarked that the results of his research had validated earlier studies, which showed that urban air pollution inhibits rainfall. Christian D. Kummerow, a TRMM scientist at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) commented that such findings were making the first inroads into the difficult problem of understanding humanitys impacts on global precipitation.(NASA, Spacecraft Provides First Direct Evidence: Smoke in the Atmosphere Inhibits Rainfall, news release 99-110, 5 October 1999.)
A team of astrophysicists at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only seen the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole. However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a strange feature buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an astronomical Doppler effect, because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretchedredshiftedmoving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory, Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASAs Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiters moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data. James K. Erickson of NASAs JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileos instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, If we didnt have the automatic restart software, we wouldnt be getting any data at the encounters.(Michael A. Dornheim, Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo, Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Irans missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russias cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilmans legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was assisting Irans programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles. If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction. An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency, Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
China confirmed that it had fired its new Dong Feng-31 (DF-31) missile during a test launch on 2 August, publicizing details of the successful launch of the long-range, ground-to-ground, intercontinental, strategic ballistic missile. The Chinese Guangzhou Daily reported that the three-stage, solid-fuel rocket was launched from northern Shanxi province and crashed down in the western territory of Xinjiang. Janes Defence Weekly estimated that the DF-31 had an 8,000-kilometer (5,000-mile) range and was capable of carrying a 700-kilogram (1,500-pound) nuclear warhead. Robert Karniol, a foreign correspondent covering Asia for the defense industry publication Janes, remarked that the DF-31 should be operationally deployed by China in 2000, and that the country expected to build 10 to 20 of the missiles, some replacing 1960s-era missiles with half the range of the DF-31. The Guangzhou Daily also reported that China had developed the technology for piloted spaceflight. Wang Xinqing, head of the China Carrier- Rocket Research Institute, which designs military- and civilian-use rockets, stated that the core of the program was the development of a new series of carrier rockets, Long March 5. Wang Xinqing also refuted a report by the U.S. Congress alleging that China had stolen the United States missile and nuclear warhead technology, insisting that China had perfected the rocketry before the United States had achieved it.(Matt Pottinger for Reuters, China Details Missile Test, Planned Space Flight, 12 August 1999.)
NASA announced it had completed negotiations on a US$625.6 million contract with Lockheed Martin Michoud Space Systems to purchase the last set of materials required to build 60 new Space Shuttle external fuel tanks. Although it was the sixth and last in a series of purchases of fuel tanks, this was the first purchase NASA had made consisting entirely of super lightweight tanks. The tanks design was the same as that of the lightweight tank design NASA had previously used, but the new tanks were 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) lighter, and used a new aluminum lithium alloy. NASA and industry partners had developed the lighter alloy, 30 percent stronger than the material used to manufacture the lightweight tank, to enable the Shuttle to deliver ISS components into the proper orbit.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, NASA Completes Purchase of Material for 60 Shuttle External Tanks, news releases 99-069, 28 April 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-069.html (accessed 5 February 2008).)
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martinbuilt Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russias new Dnepr rocket, Europes Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporations Pegasus.(United Press International, Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year, 23 November 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars, awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASAs Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeings Delta rocket more and more the launch vehicle of choice. Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had changed the face of the space program.(PR Newswire, Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASAs Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards, 27 January 1999.)
NASA released preliminary findings of an internal peer review conducted at Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) after the apparent loss of the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its orbit on 23 September. The results of the review indicated that a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California led to the loss of the spacecraft. The peer review discovered that one team had used English units while the other used metric units for a key spacecraft operation. NASAs systems engineers had failed to detect the error. In addition to the JPL committee, NASA had formed a separate review committee of experts from within and outside of JPL and planned to establish an independent failure-review board shortly.(NASA, Mars Climate Orbiter Team Finds Likely Cause of Loss, news release 99-113, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-113.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, as Director of NASAs Astrobiology Institute, effective immediately. NASA had created the Astrobiology Institute in July 1998, a virtual organization comprising NASAs centers, universities, and other scientific entities for the study of the origin, evolution, distribution, and destiny of life in the universe. The Institute, with a multidisciplinary focus, sought to bring together astronomers, biologists, chemists, exobiologists, geologists, and physicists, to search for the origins of life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the announcement of Blumbergs appointment at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, the site of the Institutes headquarters. Goldin stated that NASA had tasked the Astrobiology Institute with providing the intellectual underpinnings for building new types of instruments and space probes for finding life in the solar system and beyond.
NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Ball and AerojetGeneral Picked To Study New Weather Sensor, news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing development of crucial parts of the ISS, such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. She had also served as lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center, news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive, Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket planes two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheeds VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had placed a huge wager on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that delays in the prototype would harm NASAs plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.(Jeff Leeds, Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheeds X-33 Rocket Plane, Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)
Robert Thomas R.T. Jones, who had led the development of the swept-back jet wing design that revolutionized air travel and enabled planes to break the sound barrier, died at the age of 89. Jones had begun designing the swept-back wings in 1944, when airplane wings were perpendicular to the fuselage, while working at NACA (National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics), NASAs predecessor agency. In 1945 Jones had conducted airflow studies, showing that a cone-shaped shock wave cut across the tips of straight wings, causing deterioration at Mach 1, the speed of sound. Jones had concluded that a swept-back design would preserve the wings and reduce drag. Although his idea was initially ignored, virtually every commercial and military jet uses the design today. Joness later research had included work on the oblique wing, mounted on a pivot on top of the fuselage. The oblique wing maintained a right angle to the fuselage for maximum lift during takeoff, but the pilot could manipulate it so that, at cruising altitude, one wing tip pointed forward and one backward, saving fuel, generating less engine noise, and eliminating the sonic boom. Although Joness oblique wing design had never advanced beyond the testing stage, some aeronautical designers continued to study its possibilities.(Washington Post, Robert Jones Dies; Led Breakthrough on Wing Design, 15 August 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the missions duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite, news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
The Perseus B research aircraft, built by Aurora Flight Sciences Inc., sustained moderate damage when it crashed on a California highway during a flight from NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. The craft was a developmental vehicle designed to operate at high altitudes for extended periods on scientific sampling missions, one of several aircraft that NASA was evaluating as part of its Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program. Controllers could operate the craft remotely from a ground station, or the Perseus B could navigate autonomously along a preprogrammed flight path. At the time of the accident, ground-based Aurora Flight Sciences mission controllers at Edwards Air Force Base were guiding the Perseus B. DFRC flight safety officials, with assistance from Aurora Flight Sciences operations staff, formed an accident investigation team to determine the exact cause of the crash.(NASA, Perseus B Damaged in Crash on California Highway, news release 99-115, 1 October 1999.)
A Lockheed Martin Titan II rocket launched successfully, carrying JPLs QuikSCAT satellite. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation had built QuikSCAT in 11 months, setting an industry record. JPL stated that the satellite had opened its solar arrays as planned an hour after launch, and a tracking station in Norway acquired the first signal from the spacecraft 18 minutes later. NASA had originally scheduled the satellites launch for November 1998, but delayed it when a Titan IVA exploded after launch, carrying a payload for the National Reconnaissance Office. NASA had postponed the QuikSCAT launch until engineers could determine whether Titan II used any of the hardware that had caused the explosion on the Titan IVA. Following the launch of a Titan IVB rocket that placed a Milstar satellite in a faulty orbit, NASA had again delayed the QuikSCATs launch, pending investigation of the failure. The successfully launched QuikSCAT satellite was on a two-year mission with the option of a third year, to gather about 400,000 detailed measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the oceans surface. NASA intended the US$98 million mission to improve weather forecasting and detect the onset of conditions like El Nino. Engineers had designed the QuikSCAT to radiate microwave pulses over wide areas and to listen for the pulses echo. Those return signals would allow scientists to determine wind speeds and directions at the surface of the oceans. Understanding the interaction [of wind and ocean circulation] is important for weather prediction. Under the terms of NASAs first contract using the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, Ball Aerospace had provided the QuikSCAT spacecraft bus, launch interface, system integration, test, launch support, and two years of mission operations.(Dow Jones Newswire, Lockheed Martins Titan Launches with QuikScat Satellite, 20 June 1999; Satellite Launched on Weather Mission, New York Times, 20 June 1999; Aerospace Daily, QuikSCAT Makes It to Space After Six-Month Delay, 22 June 1999; Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp., BATC Launches Its First Commercial Spacecraft, news release, 19 June 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=30 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
After two delays, Space Shuttle Columbia launched on Mission STS-93 from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, under the command of Eileen M. Collins, NASAs first female Shuttle commander in 38 years of human spaceflight. Commander Collinss crew comprised Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby and Mission Specialists Steven A. Hawley, Catherine G. Coleman, and Michel Tognini. Columbia carried on board the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, previously known as the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as well as secondary payloads and experimentsthe Southwest Ultraviolet Imaging System to capture ultraviolet imagery of the Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter; plant growth experiments; biological cell-culture studies; and the Treadmill Vibration Information System and High Definition Television System, which the crew planned to test. NASA had scrubbed both of the Shuttles earlier launch attempts late in the countdown, halting the 20 July launch 6 seconds before blastoff because of a technical malfunction and the 22 July launch because of stormy weather. The U.S. Air Force and the Boeing Company postponed a commercial launch to permit NASA a third chance to deliver Chandra into orbit. However, the Shuttle continued to have problems. During the 8-minute climb into outer space, a 0.5-second-long short circuit shut down computers controlling two of the Shuttles three main engines. Furthermore, Columbia was 4,000 pounds (1,800 kilograms) short of liquid oxygen fuel in its external fuel tank, leaving the craft in orbit 7 miles (11 kilometers) lower than planned. Fuel carried aboard the orbiter made up the shortfall. Seven hours into the flight, the crew deployed Chandra into orbit, accomplishing its primary mission.(USA Today, Shuttle Lifts Off with Woman in Command, 23 July 1999; Brad Liston for Reuters, Shuttle Roars into History After Launch Problems, 23 July 1999; Beth Dickey, After Hiccup at Liftoff, Shuttle Puts Telescope into Space, New York Times, 25 July 1999; NASA, Mission Archives STS-93, Chandra X-ray Observatory, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-93.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imagings test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space, New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbias launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety stand down. NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted full responsibility for wiring damage found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch teams skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panels Attention, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
NASA scientists announced that, because the Deep Space 1 spacecraft had aimed its camera incorrectly when it flew within 15 miles (24 kilometers) of a small asteroid named Braille, the craft had failed to capture an image. However, the craft had succeeded in its primary mission to test 12 new technologies during the flyby, thereby validating the instruments future use in solar- system probes. Deep Space 1 was equipped with a mind of its own, enabling it to navigate through space without much assistance from ground control. The craft had traveled at 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour relative to the asteroid, which was 117 million miles (188 million kilometers) from Earth. The flyby of the Braille asteroid, the final test of Deep Space 1s Autonomous Navigation System, had been the closest any spacecraft had come to an object in our solar system without landing.(Washington Times, Spacecraft Misses Asteroid Snapshot: Camera Cant See Rock Called Braille, 30 July 1999.)
NASA released two initial images from its Chandra X-ray Observatory. One image traced the aftermath of a gigantic stellar explosion in such stunning detail that scientists believed they had detected evidence of a neutron star or black hole near the center. The second image showed a powerful x-ray jet blasting 200,000 light-years into intergalactic space from a distant quasar. Chandra was still in its orbital check-out and calibration phase when it captured the images, confirming that the observatory was performing up to expectations.(NASA, NASA Unveils First Images from Chandra X-ray Observatory, news release 99-98, 26 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-098.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASAs navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole, because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASAs Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost, news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter, 23 September 1999.)
NASA released new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of the cores of spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, and astronomers studying the images for clues about galactic development discussed their findings at a briefing at NASA Headquarters. Two complementary surveys by independent research teams had concluded that the Hubble images confirmed the evolutionary link between a disc-like cloud of dust and gas at the center of a galaxy and a bulge of millions of stars at the center of the disc-like cloud. The central bulge stabilizes a galaxys development, controls the birth of stars in the galaxys core, and holds secrets as to how and when a galaxy formed. Reynier F. Peletier of the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom confirmed that central bulges of more tightly wound spirals formed at approximately the same time in the early universe. C. Marcello Carollo of Columbia University, who had led a team studying galaxies with small bulges and bar-like structures that bisect the nucleus, had discovered that such galaxies developed more recently. Both teams had used HSTs visible-light and infrared cameras to determine the stars true colors, a measure of the age of the stars inside the galaxies core.(NASA, Starry Bulges Yield Secrets to Galaxy Growth, news release 99-107, 6 October 1999; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, Hubble Tackles Questions About Cosmic Bulges, 6 October 1999.)
An international team of scientists published findings based on research using data from NASAs Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. The team had sought to locate the origin of solar wind, which interacts with Earths magnetic field, creating auroral displays like the Northern Lights, as well as disrupting satellites and communications equipment. The SOHO team believed that the solar wind originated from honeycomb-shaped areas called convection cells, located beneath the coronal holes. Using data from the spectrometer, the scientists had measured for the first time the structure and motion of gases inside the coronal holes. The team reported that, in some places above coronal holes, magnetic field lines do not loop back to the Suns surface, but rather, the magnetic lines shoot upward without returning to the Sun, thereby originating the solar wind.(Donald Hassler et al., Solar Wind Outflow and the Chromospheric Magnetic Network, Science 283, no. 5403 (5 February 1999): 810; United Press International, Source of Solar Wind Believed Found, 4 February.)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earths landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earths Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earths radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission, 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Floridas Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agencys Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstans Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and Chinas Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the groups findings: companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer. Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Floridas expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights, 7 January 1999.)
Joseph G. Beerer of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory stated that all of the instruments aboard Mars Global Surveyor were operating, and that the craft had begun mapping Mars, approximately one year later than originally planned. NASA had launched the craft in November 1996, and Surveyor had entered orbit around Mars in September 1997. NASA had delayed the mapping portion of the mission when scientists detected a structural problem with one of the crafts solar panels. To avoid placing excessive stress on the panel, the flight team had opted to proceed cautiously in aerobraking. Aerobraking, a pioneering operation, was necessary to position the spacecraft for its Mars mapping mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking, news release 99-006, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 27 December 2007).)
The Boeing Company announced that it had completed negotiations on a cooperative agreement with NASA to develop an experimental space plane. The US$173 million contract stipulated that Boeing and the federal government share costs equally. Boeing and NASA hoped that the X-37 space plane, previously called the Future-X Pathfinder, would serve as a test bed for new reusable launch technologies, helping to achieve the goal of reducing the cost of placing space vehicles and cargo into orbit. Boeing envisioned a vehicle that would be unpiloted, autonomously operated, and capable of speeds up to Mach 25, while demonstrating aircraft-like operations. NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center led the X-37 government team, comprising the U.S. Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base and NASA facilities, including Ames Research Center, Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Dryden Flight Research Center.(The Boeing Company, NASA, Boeing Sign X-37 Vehicle Agreement, news release, 14 July 1999, http://www. boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990714t.html (accessed 19 February 2008); John ODell, California Southland Focus Boeing, NASA Agree on Space Plane Contract, Los Angeles Times, 15 July 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russias first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion, 22 November 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field. George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASAs predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewiss death in 1948, NACA had named the facility Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to Lewis Research Center in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to two of Ohios famous namesone an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.(NASA, NASA Announces Field Center Name Change, news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
NASA announced the establishment of a review panel to examine the overall safety of Shuttle maintenance and refurbishment practices following the discovery of maintenance-related damage to the Shuttle fleets electrical wiring. NASA had named Director of ARC Henry McDonald to chair the panel. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg indicated that the other team members, not yet named, would include top maintenance experts from NASA, the military, the commercial aerospace industry, and the commercial aircraft industry. NASA required the team to assess NASAs standard practices and recommend improvements, with preliminary findings due in October.(NASA, NASA Forms Independent Industry-Government Team To Review Shuttle Maintenance and Refurbishment Practices, news release 99-104, 20 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99- 104.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINSCENTAURRL10ENGINESCL. html (25 February 2008). The Independent Assessment Team on Mission Success, which Lockheed Martin had commissioned in May 1999 after a series of Titan IV launch failures, met its 1 September deadline, reporting its findings and recommendations to Lockheeds senior management. Lockheed Martin had tasked the investigating team with assessing program management, engineering and manufacturing processes, and quality-control procedures within the companys Space and Strategic Missiles Sector. Having discovered problems in accountability, quality, subcontract and supplier management, and cost emphasis, the Team recommended that the company develop a fly-out plan for Titan IVs remaining missions, improve its quality control, and improve its management of suppliers and subcontractors. Chairperson of the review panel A. Thomas Young remarked that regardless of the problems the team had uncovered, the panel had also found enormous fundamental technical strengths throughout the sector, as well as highly capable and dedicated staff. Young also commented that the new leadership team was off to a positive start. Vance D. Coffman, Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer for Lockheed Martin, endorsed the panels findings and pledged Lockheed Martin to implementing its recommendations.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Implements Space Panel Recommendations, news release, 8 September 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINIMPLEMENTSSPACE PANELR.html (accessed 27 February 2008).)
Discovery astronauts placed the HST back in orbit using the Shuttles robotic arm. Astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy operated the arm, grabbing a handle on the telescopes side. After releasing the latches securing the observatory inside the Shuttles bay, the robotic arm lifted the telescope above the spacecraft, and ground controllers opened the door covering HSTs telescopic eye. Once ground controllers gave the command, Discoverys robotic arm released the telescope. Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and Pilot Scott J. Kelly fired the Shuttles thrusters to move away from the telescope slowly.(Robyn Suriano, Hubble Set Free: Discoverys Crew Ready for Monday Landing at KSC, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 December 1999.)
NASA selected winners of its Government Inventor of the Year and Commercial Invention of the Year awards. Charles E. Clagett, Associate Head of the Component and Hardware Systems Branch at GSFC, won the Government Inventor of the Year Award for his Apparatus for Providing Torque and for Storing Momentum Energy. Clagett had developed the apparatus, known more commonly as the SMEX Reaction/Momentum Wheel, for NASAs Small Explorer program. NASA had used the apparatus successfully in the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer and the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite. Paul M. Hergenrother, Joseph G. Smith Jr., and Brian J. Jensen of Langley Research Center won the Commercial Inventor of the Year Award for their Phenylethynyl Terminated Imide Oligomers, fifth composition, known as PETI-5, which is a type of glue that holds fibers together. The Langley team had developed PETI-5 as an adhesive for use in various aerospace and commercial applications. Used in high- speed, high-temperature aircraft, PETI-5 had netted US$10 million in sales since becoming commercially available.(NASA, NASA Selects Top Inventions of the Year, news release 99-42, 12 March 1999.)
NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASAs new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASAs purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry, to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award, news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home, Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)
New York Governor George E. Pataki awarded NASA astronaut Eileen M. Collins of Elmira, New York, the states highest award, the Jackie Robinson Empire State Freedom Medal, for her achievement as the first female Space Shuttle Commander. Collins had been Commander of the historic Mission STS-93. During that mission, she and her crew had deployed the Chandra X- ray Observatory, the heaviest, largest, and most powerful x-ray telescope ever launched into space. Governor Pataki described Collins as a bold pioneer of the reaches of space and remarked that her talent, intelligence and courage set an example that every woman and every man can hope to duplicate in their lives. Every year New York presents the Empire State Freedom Medal, established in 1997, to those who best demonstrate the qualities of determination, dignity, fairness, and honor that were exemplified by Jackie Robinson, who broke major league baseballs color barrier.(NASA, First Female Shuttle Commander Eileen Collins Receives Jackie Robinson Medal, news release 99- 125, 27 October 1999.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASAs international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASAs international partners.(NASA, NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers, news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
Following a series of launch failures, Lockheed Martin Corporation announced management changes in three of its business sectors. Raymond S. Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, retired, effective immediately, and G. Thomas Marsh, Executive Vice President of Missiles and Space, succeeded him. Lockheed named the President of Missiles and Space, K. Michael Henshaw, as President and Chief Operating Officer of the Energy and Environment Sector, effective 1 June. In that position, Henshaw succeeded Robert J. Stevens, who had served in dual positions but was directed to devote his full attention to his role as Corporate Vice President of Strategic Development. Albert E. Smith, President of Aerospace Electronics Systems and of Sanders, a Lockheed Martin company in Nashua, New Hampshire, succeeded Henshaw as President of Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California. Lockheed named Walter P. Havenstein President of Sanders and Acting President of Aerospace Electronics System, a promotion from his former position as Executive Vice President. In addition to the recent launch failures, Lockheed had been bedeviled by problems in its space business, including a 10 percent reduction in sales in its Space and Strategic Missiles Sector and a 17 percent decline in operating profit, after inadequate preparation and cancellations had caused the delay of commercial satellite launches.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Announces Management Changes, news release, 11 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesManagementCh.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Tim Smart, Lockheed Revamping 2 Units: New Leaders Named After Series of Launch Failures, Washington Post, 12 May 1999.)
NASA released an image of Jupiters volcanic moon Io, captured at the closest range ever accomplished. The image, which NASAs spacecraft Galileo took during a flyby of the moon on 10 October, showed a lava field near the center of an erupting volcano named Pillan, with visible new lava flows from its volcanic center. To capture most of the new images of Io, Galileo had used a fast camera mode, in which the camera preprocesses the image, averaging the brightness in its adjacent parts. However, Ios radiation had disrupted the process, degrading the quality of the images. Radiation had not affected images, including the newly released image of Pillan, taken in other camera modes. Galileo Project Manager James K. Erickson remarked that Galileo would not use the fast camera mode during the next Io flyby.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Closest-Ever Picture of Volcanic Moon Io Released, news release, 22 October 1999.)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails, news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Hubble Trouble, 15 November 1999.)
The Boeing Company named former cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov as the companys director for Space and Communications, Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States, located in Boeings Moscow office. With the appointment, Titov became responsible for initiating new business opportunities, working closely with Boeings ISS program members and with Russian and Ukrainian partners on the Sea Launch program. A cosmonaut since 1976, Titov had commanded several Soyuz missions, served as a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle missions, and lived aboard Russias Mir space station, logging 387 days in space, including nearly 19 hours of extravehicular activity.(The Boeing Company, Director Space & Communications for Russia and CIS Named, news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990615r.html (accessed 8 February 2008).)
Lockheed Martin announced a sweeping reorganization of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panels recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martins VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marshs supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit, Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash, 14 July 1999.)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the spacecraft ground and flight control at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland]. In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
Lockheed Martin cleared its Atlas II rocket to resume the 1999 launch schedule, after having placed its schedule on hold when a Delta III launch failed in early May. Deltas RL10B-2, upper- stage engine was similar to the RL10A-4 used on Atlass Centaur upper stage. The Boeing Company and Pratt & Whitney had led the investigation of the Delta III launch failure, with the support of Lockheed Martin. Meanwhile, Lockheed Martin Astronautics had formed two panels to ensure that no aspects of commonality between the RL10 engine versions were overlooked. The Senior Engineering Review Panel and the Senior Management Review Team had addressed potential causes of launch failure identified in the Delta III investigation, ruling out those factors that did not apply to Atlas flights. When the investigators had determined that an engine- brazing process that left voids in combustion chamber structural jacket splice joints was common to all RL10 engines, Lockheed Martin had instituted a new set of inspection and analysis measures for accepting or rejecting each engine. Lockheed Martin intended to use the inspection techniques on new production chambers; Pratt & Whitney planned to continue using its standard procedure, with its Flight Certification Board certifying each set of RL10 engines for all Atlas missions.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martins Centaur RL10 Engines Cleared for Flight, news release, 30 August 1999,)
After assessing its safety aspects, officials from the Federal Aviation Administrations (FAAs) commercial space office approved the first space launch from a platform in the sea. The FAA issued the launch license to an international launch consortium known as Sea Launch. The Boeing Company, based in the United States, was a 40 percent partner in the consortium. The Sea Launch Company planned a demonstration launch for 27 March 1999, from a converted, self-propelled, oil-drilling platform in the Pacific Ocean. The consortiums initiative, to launch communications satellites from a mid-ocean location at the equator, offered several advantages, such as the capability to lift heavier-than-normal payloads.(Federal Aviation Administration, FAA Issues Launch License to First International Sea Launch Consortium, news release APA 34-99, 15 March 1999, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 4952 (accessed 27 December 2007); Associated Press, FAA Gives Its OK to 1st Spacecraft Launched from Sea, Salt Lake Tribune (UT), 16 March 1999.)
Indias government-run space agency began commercial operations with the launch, from an island in the Bay of Bengal, of its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C-2 (PSLV), carrying Indian, German, and South Korean satellites. PSLV carried into orbit Oceansat-1, Indias remote- sensing satellite, intended to carry out oceanographic research; KITSAT-3 of South Koreas Satellite Technology Research Center; and the German Aerospace Centers Tubsat. Chairperson of Indian Space Research Organization Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan stated that India could offer to launch satellites at a much cheaper rate than other countries with launch facilities. Without naming how much India was charging for its newly inaugurated launch services, Kasturirangan said that in the international market it would cost US$1 million to piggyback a satellite.(Dow Jones Newswire, Indian Rocket with Korean and German Satellites Takes Off, 26 May 1999.)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, Delta Rocket Soars into Space, Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
Officials at NASAs Langley Research Center (LARC) officially opened the Centers new Experimental Test Range (ETR), described as an electromagnetic wind tunnel. LARC engineers had designed the ETR to determine how low-frequency electromagnetic radiation affects aircraft, to help the military improve stealth technology. The ETR also would assist in testing technologies to enable airline passengers to watch television signals from satellites or to help Internet users make wireless connections. The first military customer that had signed up to use the ETR, the U.S. Armys National Ground Intelligence Center, planned to use models of enemy targets in the test chamber, to see how they appeared on radar screens.(Jeff Long for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Hampton, Va., NASA Research Center Tests Plane Design with Wind Tunnel, 17 November 1999.)
Scientists Peter Smith of the University of Arizona and Justin Maki of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory published a report in the Journal of Geophysical Research summarizing the results of the Mars Pathfinder Mission. After an exhaustive review of more than 17,000 images from the Pathfinders 1997 mission, the report had concluded that Marss air and dirt are yellowish-brown in color, not red. Viking probes of the 1970s had likewise indicated that Mars is not red, but rather yellowish-brown. However, Mars appears red to the naked eye from Earth, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) data had indicated that Mars is red. The scientists reported that the detailed analysis using Pathfinder data had revealed that the HST, not Pathfinder, needed to be recalibrated.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), The Red Planet? Mars Is Really Yellowing Brown: Pathfinder Discovers What Hubble Missed, 24 April 1999.)
NASA announced its decision to end a US$240 million project to land a small spacecraft on a comet, so that scientists could learn how to destroy a comet if it were on course to collide with Earth. NASA had planned to launch the probe in 2003 and to land it on the surface of Comet Tempel 1 in 2005. After landing, the probe was to drill into the nucleus of the comet, helping scientists understand the comets composition. Manager of the Space Technology 4 project Brian Muirhead remarked, we know very, very little about how comets are formed and what their constituency is, adding that anyone serious about planetary protection must learn more about comets. NASAs JPL was in the early stages of developing the Space Technology 4/Champollion project and had only spent US$10 million. NASA had also considered canceling Mars Surveyor 2001, but had already spent US$100 million on that project. Other projects were experiencing cost overruns also, such as the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, which needed an extra US$60 million to cover last-minute development problems. NASA intended to redirect some funds from Space Technology 4 to other missions experiencing funding difficulties, such as Chandra.(Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, Comet Lander, 29 June 1999.)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robots components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASAs ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiments success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine housekeeping chores, such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions, news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
The main engine of Japans H-2 rocket malfunctioned 4 minutes after launching from Tanegashima Space Center, failing to put the Mtsat satellite into orbit. Fearing they could lose control of its trajectory, officials ordered the rockets destruction 8 minutes into its flight, marking the first time the National Space Development Agency of Japan had destroyed a rocket in flight. It was the second launch failure for the H-2 rocket during 1999; another H-2 had failed to place its payload in orbit in February. However, before the February malfunction, Japan had launched five H-2 rockets successfully. The Mtsat satellite, intended to replace the Himawari 5 satellite, would have observed weather patterns and monitored aircraft.(Associated Press, Japan Destroys Rocket in Midair as It Lifted $95 Million Satellite, New York Times, 16 November 1999; Dow Jones Newswire, Japan Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, Rocket Destroyed, 15 November 1999.)
Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASAs orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the holy grail of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time, news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month launch drought. NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttles external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASAs history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discoverys crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Shuttle, 27 May 1999.)
NASA announced that after just two months in space, the Chandra X-ray Observatory had taken a stunning image of the Crab Nebula, revealing for the first time a brilliant ring about the nebulas heart. The Crab Nebula, located 6,000 light-years from Earth, in the constellation Taurus, is the remnant of a star that Chinese astronomers had observed exploding in 1054 A.D., when it appeared suddenly and remained visible for weeks, even during daytime. Astronomers had used virtually every astronomical instrument to study the Crabs area of the sky, discovering that unlocking its mysteries led to insight after insight into how the universe works. Astronomers had linked the origin of pulsars to supernovas and confirmed the cosmic origin of chemical elements through the study of the expanding cloud of filaments in the Crab. The new image showed the Crab pulsar accelerating particles up to the speed of light and flinging them out into interstellar space at an incredible rate. Using Chandras exceptional resolution, scientists had traced the jet all the way to the neutron star, where the ring pattern clearly appeared. Previously, Hubble Space Telescope images had revealed moving knots and wisps around the neutron star, and other x-ray images had shown the outer portions of the jet, only hinting at the ring structure.(NASA, Chandra Discovers X-ray Ring Around Cosmic Powerhouse in Crab Nebula, news release 99-109, 28 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-109.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); Paul Hoversten, Photos Get to the Source of Pulsar, USA Today, 29 September 1999.)
The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft, news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)
Lockheed Martin Corporation named former Martin Marietta President and Chief Operating Officer A. Thomas Young to lead an independent review of the management, engineering, manufacturing, and quality control processes of its space and missile business, specifically Astronautics, Missiles and Space, and Michoud Space Systems. The company had experienced a series of expensive and well-publicized failures of its rockets and satellites, including two in the previous week, when a Titan IV placed one military satellite in the wrong orbit and when another satellite, the remote-sensing Ikonos, lost contact with the ground. The company instructed the panel to submit a report to senior Lockheed management by 1 September.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Announces Comprehensive Space Sector Review, Former Martin Marietta President Will Chair Independent Panel, news release, 4 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesComprehensiv.html (accessed 7 February 2008); Tim Smart, Panel To Review Lockheed Failures: Former Company President To Head Probe of Aerospace Foul-Ups, Washington Post, 5 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch, 29 April 1999.)
NASA announced the student winners of the 19981999 National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). A team of 33 students at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Florida, had produced the winning design, aimed at attracting customers who want to move from propeller-driven craft to jets without needing a significant increase in pilot skill. A 13-member team from Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pennsylvania, won second place for their Baracuda, an acronym for Boldly Advanced and Refined Aircraft Concept Under Development for AGATE, a national, general aviation revitalization program. The teams conventional-layout, modern- composite airplane featuring advanced aerodynamics, systems, and avionics was a four-place, single-engine, jet-powered aircraft. A three-university teamthe University of Virginia, Old Dominion University in Hampton, Virginia, and Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New Yorkwon third place for a highly innovative design known as the Yeah Man, a craft with two tail booms, each with vertical tails. The aircraft, which NASA scientists had tested in the Full Scale Wind Tunnel at Langley Research Center, showed good aerodynamic characteristics.(NASA, NASA and FAA Pick Student Aircraft-Design Contest Winners, news release 99-87, 2 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-087.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. Pete Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligences Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failuresan explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers at least [US]$3 billion. Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake got through, despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his companys workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedmans team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedmans international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASAs Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the Hubble constant, used in mathematical equations to gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other. Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The teams findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedmans team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman teams conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the teams methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe, news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years, Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discoverys crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-Francois Clervoy.
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts captured the HST using the Shuttles robotic arm. Discovery had to alter its approach to the space telescope, because the telescopes failed gyroscopes had left the telescope a little shaky, but Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and his crew had prepared for such a scenario. A fully operational HST would have had its aft pointed at the center of Earth; Brown would have carried out a straightforward approach, rising up from below until the robotic arm simply locked on. Without its gyroscopes functioning, the HST slowly rotated at one revolution per hour. Therefore, controllers activated backup gyroscopes to eliminate the rotation as much as possible, permitting Brown to fly around the HST and properly position the Shuttles robotic arm. As both spacecraft traveled around the Earth at 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour with Brown at the controls, Discovery moved closer to the HST until French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy had removed the 43-foot (13-meter), 25,000-pound (11,300-kilogram) telescope from orbit and anchored it in the Shuttle cargo bay.(Associated Press, Discovery Astronauts Capture Hubble Telescope for Repairs, Washington Times, 22 December 1999; William Harwood, Discovery Catches Up with Hubble for a Service Call in Space, Washington Post, 22 December 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of ShuttleMir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector, news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
The Peoples Republic of China announced it had launched into orbit its first piloted spacecraft, a non-reusable capsule named Shenzhou, which carried a mannequin for test purposes but was capable of carrying a crew of four. Xinhua news agency reported that the capsule, launched from Jiuquan satellite launch center aboard the new model Long March 2F, had spent 21 hours in space, orbiting Earth 14 times. China had built a new land- and sea-based, space-monitoring-and- control network for the launch. China heralded the launch as a breakthrough in the Chinese governments effort to join the United States and Russia in the elite club of manned space flight. The Chinese had abandoned the pursuit of human spaceflight in the late 1960s, because Premier Zhou Enlai thought it was too costly, but in 1992, President Jiang Zemin had decided to renew Chinese efforts, with the goal of putting a human in space by the end of the century. The head of Chinas Manned Spaceflight Program told Xinhua news agency that the successful test flight of the Shenzhou capsule demonstrated that the Chinese spacecraft and the new Long March rocket performed superbly. During the mission, the Chinese had conducted experiments in remote sensing, environmental monitoring, space materials, astronomy, and physics. Shenzhou had landed in Inner Mongolia using a parachute.(Michael Laris, Chinese Test Craft for Manned Orbits: Space Launch Boosts National Pride, Washington Post, 22 November 1999; Washington Times, Chinese Successfully Launch First Spacecraft, 22 November 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 553, 1 December 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx553.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Following a series of recent launch failures, Boeing Company announced the convening of an independent panel of experts to examine its rocket programs, specifically Boeings Delta, Sea Launch, and Inertial Upper Stage programs. To head the panel, Boeing had selected Sheila E. Widnall, former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The panel was tasked with examining organizational roles and responsibilities within Boeing; recent launch failure investigation findings; processes used for government, civil, and commercial launches; acceptance processes for major subsystems and complex assemblies from suppliers; and manufacturing, assembly, transportation, and storage activities of Boeing launch programs.(Associated Press, Boeing Forms Independent Panel To Review Space Failures, 9 June 1999.)
NASAs Mars Global Surveyor successfully completed the aerobraking phase of its mission, raising its orbit completely out of the Martian atmosphere and preparing the craft to begin its primary mapping mission. Glenn E. Cunningham, Deputy Director of the Mars Exploration Program at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), described the Mars spacecrafts pioneering operation of aerobraking as a long and arduous task, which had become a valuable learning experience for all involvedengineers and scientists alike. The technique required the spacecraft to use frictional drag as it skim[med] through the planets thin atmosphere, altering the shape of the crafts orbit and providing an innovative method to change the orbit using less on-board fuel. NASA had first tested aerobraking in 1994, during the final days of the Magellan mission to Venus. A structural problem with Mars Global Surveyors solar panel had delayed the final burn of aerobraking by approximately one year, so that the flight team could ensure that the process would not overstress the weakened panel. The extended aerobraking phase had enabled Global Surveyor to acquire bonus science data, yielding some spectacular new findings about Mars, such as a profile of the planets northern polar cap and information about the unique nature of its remnant magnetic fields.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking, news release 99-06, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundationnow a part of Illinois Institute of Technologyhad directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being military high ground. The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project, Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 1314; Associated Press, Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon, 18 May 2000.)
Mitsuyuki Ueda of the Aeronautics and Space Development Division of Japans Science and Technology Agency announced that Japan had decided to freeze the development of an unpiloted space shuttle, which was four years behind schedule, because of problems in Japans shuttle program, as well as in its H-2 rocket program. Japan had originally conceived its planned 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18.1-tonne) shuttle in the 1980s, modeling it after the U.S. Space Shuttle, and designing it to conduct scientific experiments and to carry into space payloads of up to 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes). Technical and financial setbacks within Japans shuttle program contributed to the freeze. In addition, because the original plan had called for Japan to launch the space shuttle aboard a Japanese-designed H-2 rocket, a launch failure of an H-2 rocket had influenced the decision to halt Japans shuttle program. In the failed launch of November 1999, officials had to destroy the rocket in midair, leading an advisory panel to suggest that Japans planned shuttle should launch from a reusable high-speed jet plane, rather than atop a rocket.(Associated Press, Japan Freezes Plans To Make Unmanned Space Shuttle, 2 August 2000.)
During routine testing in preparation for a July 2000 launch, excessive vibration damaged NASAs High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Images (HESSI) spacecraft. The vibration test device was accidentally set at a level 10 times higher than appropriate, causing structural damage and cracks in two of the satellites four solar arrays. Officials estimated that the damage would delay the planned launch by at least six months. NASA had designated about US$75 million for the project. The faulty test, occurring at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, revealed the high degree of precision required of engineers when creating and testing a space-bound craft. Although the satellite had vibrated at the incorrect setting for only about 200 milliseconds, it still sustained damage. However, the project engineers were optimistic that the mission would resume eventually.(Associated Press, NASA Engineers Damage Satellite During Shake Test, 24 March 2000; NASA, HESSI Sustains Damage During Vibration Testing, news release 00-45, 24 March 2000.)
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the stations primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESAs Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station, news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Lockheed Martin and NASA entered into a consolidated space operations contract (CSOC), allowing NASA to use the services of two commercial, satellite ground-tracking stations. Under CSOC, NASA customers would have access on a per-pass basis to additional stations on Svalbard Island in Norway, owned by Kongsberg Spacetec-Lockheed Martin Space Data Services, and in Poker Flat, Alaska, owned by DataLynx. Both tracking stations had recently completed CSOC operational-readiness reviews in preparation for inclusion in Lockheed Martins catalog of services available to NASA programs.(Lockheed Martin Adds Two Commercial Stations to CSOC Capability, Aerospace Daily, 29 November 2000. 1052 NASA, NASA Technology Allows Engineers to See Airframe Noise, news release 00-189, 30 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-189.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
NASAs Langley Research Center awarded contracts valued at US$1.8 million to two companies for operating airport-surface surveillance systems intended to prevent runway accidents, a top safety priority of the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board. The contracts required Sensis Corporation of Dewitt, New York, and Rannoch Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia, to operate the Airport Traffic Identification System (ATIDS) and the Dynamic Runway Occupancy Measurement Systems (DROMS) at Detroits Metropolitan Wayne International Airport, for six months, establishing and validating the systems in a live environment. The contracts also required Sensis to deploy and evaluate DROMS at Memphis International Airport and to interface the system with the existing Sensis-operated ATIDS at that airport.(NASA, Contracts Awarded for Airport Surface Surveillance Systems, news release C00-m, 28 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-m.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The Sea Launch Company suffered a setback in its bid to become a major participant in the satellite launch industry, when one of its Russian-Ukrainian Zenit 3SL rockets carrying a British communications satellite crashed into the Pacific Ocean. The launch was only the third undertaken by the international company, which had planned to use a converted ocean oil rig known as Odyssey as its permanent launchpad. The Sea Launch Company comprised the Boeing Company, together with companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway. The company had designed its innovative Sea Launch System to use Earths rotation and the faster movement of Earths surface at the equator to make it easier to launch rockets with heavy payloads. The failed satellite had cost London-based ICO Global Communications more than US$100 million to develop.(Associated Press, Sea Launch Satellite Falls into Ocean; Boeing-Led Venture Out $100 million, 13 March 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The missions crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission, 8 September 2000; NASA, Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
NASA released to the Internet a database of 1.9 million celestial images, the largest collection of images of stars and other celestial bodies ever made freely available for public use. The rapid improvement of technology had made possible the release, which brought to home computers information that could have filled 6,000 CD-ROMs. The Two-Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), which used two 51-inch (130-centimeter) telescopes to survey the sky, had collected the images. The University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory had collaborated on 2MASS, creating a database of great value to scholars and the public alike.(NASA, Twin-Telescope Sky Survey Gives You the Stars, news release 00-108, 14 July 2000.)
News reached the United States that space debris had crashed to the ground near Johannesburg, South Africa, prompting NASA to respond. Several metal balls had fallen from the sky, leaving 8-inch (20-centimeter) dents in the ground. NASA scientists clarified that the debris probably came from a Delta rocket launched in 1996. Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris Nicholas L. Johnson explained that manufactured objects sent into space plummet back to Earth nearly every day, landing mostly in the ocean. Johnson also stated that NASA would compensate anyone hurt by the falling debris, remarking that no such injuries had occurred in more than 40 years.(Associated Press, Hail of Metal Balls Puzzles Farmers, Until NASA Steps In, 3 May 2000.)
New Skies Satellites N.V. selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems (LMCSS) to build a second geosynchronous satellite to provide high-speed Internet access and other multimedia communications to a large coverage area, extending from the eastern Mediterranean and southern Africa to Australia, Japan, and Korea. New Skies selected the LMCSS A
In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellors Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years, U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASAs next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, Red Planet Is Next Frontier, 2 May 2000.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americoms fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four othersthe GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site, news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected iron-emission lines in the afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), marking the first time such lines had been unambiguously detected in association with GRBs, and the first time scientists had been able to measure their properties precisely in x-ray wavelengths. Luigi Piro, lead author of a paper published in the 3 November issue of the journal Science, explained that the discovery provided an important clue to understanding the origins of the bursts. The new data enabled scientists to rule out the theory that two neutron stars or black holes collide to cause a GRB, one of various theories about how the bursts originate. Instead, Piro suggested that the bursts were more likely the result of something similar to a supernova explosion, but much more powerful.(NASA, NASAs Chandra Captures Telling Gamma-Ray Afterglow, news release 00-173, 3 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-173.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); L. Piro et al., Observation of X-ray Lines from a Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB991216): Evidence of Moving Ejecta from the Progenitor, Science 290, no. 5493 (3 November 2000): 955958.)
Raymond Toricelli of New Rochelle, New York, pled guilty to breaking into two NASA computers in 1998, to steal user names and passwords to gain access to other systems. The two computers, which helped launch robotic spacecraft, were at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California. Toricelli had also set up a chat room to direct people to a pornography site, which paid him 18 cents per referral; broken into a San Jose University computer system to gain access to other networks; and stolen more than 15 credit card numbers online. He stated that he had never intended to damage the computers he illegally entered. Prosecutors planned to seek a prison term of 8 to 14 months at Toricellis sentencing on 7 March 2001. The maximum penalty for his crime was 27 years in prison and a US$950,000 fine.
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARCs chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASAs astrobiology program and to establish NASAs Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffens two loves, and that the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.(NASA, NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies, news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official, 27 November 2000.)
The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASAs special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Vosss mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the classs trip to NASA to watch Endeavours launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.(Billy Cox, Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
NASA released the first HST images taken after the Shuttles Mission STS-103, in which the crew of Discovery realigned and refurbished the telescope. The stunning clarity of the new images suggested that the mission specialists had succeeded in their sensitive work. According to Steven Beckwith, Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the work returned HST to a condition that was better than it was even before the fourth gyroscope failed. Astronomers had focused on targets more than 5,000 light-years away to test the upgraded telescope. During the servicing mission, astronauts had also installed a Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 and a Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, new instruments that would contribute to the already formidable strength of the HST.(NASA, Hubble Reopens Eye on the Universe, news release 00-16, 24 January 2000.)
In an article in the journal Science, a team of researchers led by Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reported that they had found compelling evidence that Mars once had a wet climate. According to Zuber, Evidence is building of more water on the surface of Mars at one time. The researchers had used the laser measurements taken by Mars Global Surveyor to reach their conclusions. Although Zuber indicated that scientists did not yet have enough evidence to determine whether Mars once had a surface ocean, the study did find large, buried channels beneath the planets crust, suggesting that an enormous flow of water once deluged the landscape. The researchers had also found further evidence of two distinct crustal provinces on Mars, similar to those on Earth. The team estimated that Marss crust was 50 miles (80 kilometers) thick beneath the planets southern highlands, but only 22 miles (35 kilometers) thick beneath the northernmost areas of the planet. By using Surveyors data to analyze thoroughly the topography of the planet, the research team had also drawn the conclusion that Mars had once been home to more water than ice. The variety of landmasses suggested that, for a period, the planets core had released heat, turning ice trapped beneath Marss surface into water. As one newspaper described the formative events estimated to have taken place approximately 4 billion years ago, It steamed and streamed.(Marie T. Zuber et al., Internal Structure and Early Thermal Evolution of Mars from Mars Global Surveyor Topography and Gravity, Science 287, no. 5459 (10 March 2000): 17881893; NASA, View Inside Mars Reveals Rapid Cooling and Buried Channels, news release 00-36, 9 March 2000; Dan Vergano, Northern Mars Once Was Drenched, USA Today, 13 March 2000.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin, Khrunichev State Research, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, launched a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Proton launch, the fourth in the year for ILS, successfully placed into orbit a United Statesbuilt GE-1A communications satellite serving customers in parts of Asia, including China, the Philippines, and India.(Jim Banke, Proton Rocket Lifts American Satellite into Earth Orbit, Space.com, 2 October 2000, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/launches/proton_launch_001001.html (accessed 14 April 2008).)
NASAs Glenn Research Center (GRC) in Cleveland, Ohio, opened a new laboratory dedicated to the study of ballistics. The laboratory, housed in the complexs Building 49, featured a 40-foot (12-meter) gas gun that could shoot projectiles at speeds of up to 1,500 feet (457.2 meters) per second. A camera with the ability to capture 2.5 million images per second allowed researchers to observe the behavior of the projectiles and chart the results of their impact on aviation equipment. The whole idea, Team Leader Dale A. Hopkins explained, is to watch the impact and see how materials struck by the projectiles behave . . . not just whether they survive, but how they deform and fail. GRC had designed the new facility to test materials used for aircraft engine housings and for flywheel containment. Researchers hoped that the new tools would help engineer aircraft that could withstand the pressures of high-speed and high-altitude flight better than those already available could. GRC had been testing ballistic materials since 1980.(NASA, New Lab Ready To Test Sudden Impact, news release 00-34, 3 March 2000.)
Margaret G. Kivelson and four coauthors from the University of California at Los Angeles published in the journal Science the strongest evidence to date that Jupiters moon Europa contains a salty, liquid ocean beneath its surface. The team had used data from the Galileo probes magnetometer to study Europas magnetic compass, finding that the presence of a layer of electrically conducting liquid, such as saltwater best explained the behavior of the moons magnetic compass. Kivelson explained that the team had inferred that the conductor must be a liquid ocean, since ice is not a good conductor of electricity. However, Torrence V. Johnson of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that the magnetometer data by itself was insufficient to conclude the presence of a liquid ocean. Johnson explained that scientists needed several further steps of inference, such as precise measurements of gravity and altitude, indicating the effects of tides.(NASA, Galileo Evidence Points to Possible Water World Under Europas Icy Crust, news release 00-131, 25 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-131.txt (accessed 6 May 2008); Margaret Kivelson et al., Galileo Magnetometer Measurements: A Stronger Case for a Subsurface Ocean at Europa, Science 289, no. 5483 (25 August 2000): 13401343.)
NASA released time-lapse movies created from images produced by the Hubble Space Telescope, showing spectacular outbursts from young stars, changing dramatically over a period of just weeks or months. NASA had combined individual images of young star systems XZ Tauri and HH 30 in the Taurus-Auriga molecular cloud, captured over several years, to create the time-lapse movies. Documenting the activity of the early stages of stars lives, the movies demonstrated that images taken of the universe today wont necessarily look the same as those snapped a few months from now.(NASA, Hubble Movies Show the Changing Faces of Young Stars, news release N00-044, 21 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/2000/n00-044.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
President William J. Clintons proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administrations previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASAs plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor, Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 1112.)
Engineers at NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) successfully tested a prototype for the flying lifeboat that would transport astronauts to and from the ISS. DFRC officials launched a robotic X-38 from under the wing of a B-52 flying at 39,000 feet (12,000 meters). It free fell for more than 40 seconds before deploying a 5,500-square-foot (511-square-meter) parachute, which provided a soft landing for the spacecraft. The test was a significant step in evaluating the technology planned for the crew return vehicle, a low-cost ISS initiative.(Associated Press, Space Station Lifeboat Prototype Successfully Tested, 30 March 2000.)
NASA and the Boeing Company announced an agreement to use Boeings Delta Launch Services Inc. for a variety of NASA missions. The contract, estimated to be worth at least US$168 million, included options to extend the agreement. NASA also awarded both Boeing and Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services Inc. indefinite deliveryindefinite quantity contracts for 10 years. The agreements solidified NASAs partnerships with the two major aerospace companies. A NASA spokesperson clarified the reasons for the extension of the relationships, saying that Boeing and Lockheed were selected based on their ability to meet NASAs highly critical future mission requirements and their proven track records for providing a quality product. At the time of the agreement with Boeing, the company had flown 82 missions for NASA with a success rate of 98 percent.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Delta Rockets To Launch Next-Generation NASA Space Craft, news release, 16 June 2000; NASA, NASA Awards Launch Services Contracts, news release c00-e, 16 June 2000; Seattle Post- Intelligencer (WA), Boeing Wins $168 Million NASA Order for 3 More Delta II Launches, Options, 19 June 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discoverys crewCommander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthurwas transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
Chairman and founder of Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc. Andrew Beal announced his decision to cease all business operations effective immediately. The company had sought to develop low-cost, reliable, commercial space launch systems and had made significant advances in low cost hydrogen peroxide propulsion systems. Beal expressed confidence that, despite the companys cost overruns and schedule delays, Beal Aerospace Technologies could have successfully developed its BA-2C rocket-launch system if it had remained in operation. Beal outlined the risk factors that had been beyond the companys control and had led to the decision to cease operations: 1) NASAs and the U.S. governments commitment to the subsidization of competing launch systems; 2) federal laws mandating the companys potential liability for pre-existing environmental contamination at the only available Cape Canaveral launchpads; and 3) uncertainty about receiving approval from the U.S. Department of State to launch from the companys launch facilities in Guyana. Beal remarked that government subsidization of launch systems was the primary reason that the company had to choose, either to become a government contractor, like the Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin, or to cease operations.(Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc., Statement from Andrew Beal Regarding Cease of Operations by Beal Aerospace, news release, 23 October 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronauticss Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.(NASA, Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies, news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA awarded Lockheed Martin Space Systems a US$1.15 billion six-year contract to produce 35 additional super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle Program, the sixth production of tanks and the first composed entirely of super-lightweight tanks. The contract covered the manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of the tanks, as well as the operations and maintenance of NASAs Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans and activities at MSFC and KSC. Jerry W. Smelser, Manager of MSFCs External Tank Project Office, described the contract as designed to assure the delivery of a quality product and to reward the contractor and employees on the basis of performance.(NASA, NASA Awards $1.15 Billion Contract for Shuttle External Tanks, news release C00-p, 30 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-p.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA announced a partnership with Dreamtime Holdings Inc., a start-up company backed by Lockheed Martin to provide the International Space Station (ISS) with high-definition television and to create digital archives for NASA. The agreement was NASAs first involving a commercial partner that would provide support for the ISS. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the partnership at NASAs Ames Research Center, located in the high-technology hub of Californias Silicon Valley, predicting that the partnership would move NASA to the forefront of the information age and terming it innovative government at its best. Dreamtime planned to spend US$100 million on the project, which would give civilians access to neverbefore-seen images of the Space Shuttles and of NASA missions. The pact resulted from the Commercial Space Act of 1998, enacted to increase commercial involvement in and funding for the ISS.(NASA, NASA, Dreamtime Partnership Propels Space Information Age to New Heights, news release 00-87, 2 June 2000; Frank Morring Jr., Startup To Spend $100 Million Digitizing Station, NASA Archives, Aerospace Daily, 2 June 2000.)
The Love Bug computer virus infected the computer system of NASA, along with those of the Pentagon, the CIA, Microsoft Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and other major business and government offices. Considered one of the most damaging and costly computer viruses in history, Love Bug spread primarily through e-mail messages, corrupting files on millions of computers. Four of NASAs 10 space centers suffered from the attack, causing both Johnson Space Center (JSC) and Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to shut down e-mail and other communication between computers.(Los Angeles Times, Fast Moving Virus Hits Computers Worldwide, 5 May 2000.)
NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns, 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmospheres Ozone, New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
NASA announced that its Chandra X-ray Observatory had revealed a luminous spike of x-rays, known as a hot spot, located approximately 800,000 light-years away from its black-hole source. Scientists commented that the images captured x-ray behavior that astronomers had not predicted. Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland explained, the brightness and the spectrum of the x-rays are very different from what theory projects. A possible explanation offered for the brilliant hot spot of x-rays was that a series of shock waves had catapulted across the galaxy electrons with energies as high as 50 thousand billion times the energy of light.(NASA, Spectacular X-ray Jet Points Toward Cosmic Energy Booster, news release 00-89, 6 June 2000.)
The 20 July 2000 edition of Astrophysical Journal Letters published research of Gibor Basri chronicling the first sighting of a flare from a failed star, or brown dwarf. Using the Chandra X- ray Observatory, a team of scientists from the University of California at Berkeley had spotted the brown dwarf and its bright x-ray flare. Scientists believed that examining the x-ray flare would help them better understand dying stars and the explosive activity and magnetic fields of low-mass stars. Early analyses indicated that the brown dwarfs x-ray flare was approximately 1 billion times more powerful than the x-ray flares emitted from the planet Jupiter. Scientists reacted to news of the discovery with excitement and surprise. Robert E. Rutledge of California Institute of Technology stated that he and his colleagues were shocked, clarifying: we did not expect to see flaring from such a lightweight object. This is really the mouse that roared. The task of spotting an x-ray flare had been difficult, because the brown dwarf emitted the flares only periodically. However, the intermittent flares made the successful capture of an image all the more significant. The observation of the brown dwarfs occasional release of x-ray flares confirmed the theory that brown dwarfs only release energy when they heat to temperatures above 4,500F (2,500C).(Gibor Basri et al., An Effective Temperature Scale for Late M and L Dwarfs, from Resonance Absorption Lines of Cs I and Rb I, Astrophysical Journal Letters 538, no. 1 (20 July 2000): 363385; NASA, Chandra Captures Flare from Brown Dwarf, news release 00-103, 11 July 2000.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had located a small armada of mini- comets, the fragmented remains of the nucleus of the comet LINEAR. When it had disappeared behind the Sun on 27 July 2000, astronomers initially thought that LINEAR had disintegrated entirely. Upon losing sight of the comets core, ground-based observers had suggested that the nucleus had disintegrated into a pile of dust, and, consequently, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute had reprogrammed the HST to search for the nucleus. The exceptional resolution and sensitivity of the HST had revealed the nuclei of a half-dozen mini-comets at a level of detail never before observed in a disintegrating comet. Some astronomers had suggested that the fragments the HST revealed were the primordial building blocks of the original nucleus. If so, studying them could help scientists understand how the comet had originally formed.(NASA, Hubble Discovers Missing Pieces of Comet Linear, news release 00-122, 7 August 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-122.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA awarded its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year awards. Inventors Anne K. St. Clair, Terry L. St. Clair, and William P. Winfree, working as a research team at NASAs Langley Research Center, won the award for inventing a material that they had named Colorless and Low Dielectric Polyimide Thin Film. Commercial manufacturers could apply the thermoplastic material to many types of surfaces to protect against ultraviolet radiation and high temperatures. The researchers also suggested adding the material to liquids, such as paints and cosmetics, to provide ultraviolet protection. Douglas B. Leviton received the Government Inventor of the Year award for his Ultra-High Sensitivity, Incremental, and Absolute Optical Position Encoder. The encoder allowed scientists to calibrate space-bound instruments more accurately than they had done previously. Both awards recognized inventions completed during 1999. NASA honored the recipients at a ceremony, presenting them with plaques and cash awards.(NASA, NASA Selected Its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year, news release 00-53, 5 April 2000.)
NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASAs Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion areasurpassing the ozone holes record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an extremely intense Antarctic vortexan upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continentmight partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASAs Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica, news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA dedicated a new aerospace laboratory at Anne Beers Elementary School in Washington, DC, featuring a simulated Shuttle cockpit and Mission Control Center. NASA had named the facility, designed to encourage student interest in space exploration, for U.S. Representative Louis Stokes (D-OH), who had proposed legislation to fund the endeavor in 1998. NASAs GRC and Goddard Space Flight Center had worked with the Orchard Glenn School of Cleveland, Ohio, and the University of the District of Columbia to construct the innovative facility.(NASA, Aerospace Laboratory Encourages Students To Reach for the Stars with NASA Help, news release m00-051, 15 March 2000.)
As a part of its Celebrate the Century program, the U.S. Postal Service unveiled a stamp commemorating the Space Shuttle Program. The stamp with the Shuttles image joined 12 other stamps with images recalling significant American memories of the past century, such as video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall, personal computers, and Cabbage Patch Dolls. The Space Shuttle stamp was part of the celebration of the 1980s portion of the millennium. Kennedy Space Center Director Roy D. Bridges Jr. issued a statement thanking the Postal Service for the honor.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Joins American Icons in Commemorative Stamp Collection, news release 00- 12, 12 January 2000.)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASAs exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commissions report and Collinss response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America, news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezdas living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crews radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares, Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
Lockheed Martin announced that for the third time in four years, the Air Traffic Control Association had awarded the company its Industry Award, recognizing Lockheeds outstanding achievement in and contribution to the science of air traffic control. The award specifically recognized Lockheed Martin Air Traffic Management for its worldwide support of air traffic control systems. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the German Civil Aviation Authority, and the United Kingdoms National Air Traffic Services Ltd. Had all nominated the company for the award.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Receives Prestigious Air Traffic Control Association Award, news release, 27 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinReceivesPrestigious Ai.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earths atmosphere. Director of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event a bittersweet day for NASA. The spacecraft, NASAs gamma-ray equivalent of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellites control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earths atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASAs efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earths atmosphere.(NASA, Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns, news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth, news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, A Satellites Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project, Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross reported that the Boeing Company would have to forfeit most of its profit from the ISS contract because of its nearly US$1 billion in cost overruns. NASAs incentive-laden contract with Boeing allowed for significant bonuses for meeting timeline and cost limits. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had ordered an audit of the NASA-Boeing contract in 1999, because projected cost overages had continued to rise. Nonetheless, as Boeing neared completion of the construction of its portion of the ISS, both NASA and the aerospace giant were optimistic that cost overruns had stabilized, and that the space station hardware would perform well in space.(Tony Capaccio, Boeing Overruns on Space Station Near $1Billion, Los Angeles Times, 23 February 2000.)
A team of three high school students from the North Carolina School for Science and Mathematics in Durham won first place in the Siemens-Westinghouse Science and Technology Competition. The team won for discovering the first evidence of a neutron star in the nearby supernova remnant IC443, using data from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and the National Science Foundations Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory. The students had located a point-like source of x-rays embedded in a supernova and had determined that the central object was most likely a pulsar, a young and rapidly rotating neutron star. Bryan M. Gaensler, a pulsar expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had reviewed the teams paper, remarked that the students had produced a really solid scientific finding.(NASA, Students Using NASA and NSF Data Make Stellar Discovery; Win Science Team Competition, news release 00-195, 11 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-195.txt (accessed 7 April 2008). 1067 Andrew Kramer for Associated Press, Russian Company To Build Spacecraft To Carry Customers, 13 December 2000.)
NASAs Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASAs Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument, news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented awards to three minority contractors at NASAs annual Minority Business and Advocates Awards Ceremony. RS Information Services (RSIS), based in McLean, Virginia, won Minority Contractor of the Year; Rigging and Welding Specialists Inc., a Native Americanowned business, won Minority Subcontractor of the Year; and Pace and Waite Inc. won Women-Owned Business of the Year. In addition, NASA recognized advocates for innovative approaches to using minority- and women-owned businesses, awarding NASAs Exceptional Achievement Medal to Kenneth Martindale and Rodney J. Etchberger of Johnson Space Center and to Shantaram S. Pai of Glenn Research Center. Furthermore, NASA recognized five individuals for outstanding achievements and three NASA field centers for meeting or exceeding all socioeconomic business goals for FY 1999.(NASA, NASA To Honor Minority Businesses, news release 00-148, 25 September 2000, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-148.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. Gus Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASAs second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatchs failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissoms claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, Grissoms Capsule Back at Space Center, 14 June 2000.)
NASA announced that a team of scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to solve one of astronomys fundamental problemsdetermining the distance from Earth to a cosmic object. Peter Predehl, the lead researcher on the project, had found that by scattering x-rays between Earth and a given object, the dust grains and scattered materials between the two points could serve as measuring posts to determine the distance covered by the x-ray. Because of the Chandra Observatorys superior resolution and strength, particles that scientists could not otherwise have observed would serve as points of context. Researchers were confident that they could use the new approach to help determine the size of nearby galaxies. Furthermore, the newly devised means of measuring the distance between objects and Earth had implications for understanding the universe and its age.(NASA, Chandra Shows New Way To Measure Cosmic Distances, news release 00-66, 25 April 2000.)
Jason Allen Diekman of Mission Viejo, California, pled guilty to federal charges of computer crimes after negotiating a deal with prosecutors. Prosecutors had charged Diekman in September with illegal hacking and with using stolen credit card numbers to purchase US$6,000 worth of computer equipment and other items. He had confessed to investigators that he had hacked into hundreds, maybe thousands of computers over two years, including systems at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, Cornell University, the University of California at San Diego, and California State University at Fullerton. Diekmans most serious confessed invasions had occurred at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where he had gained root-level access to two computer systems, and at Stanford University, where he had gained control over 24 systems, two of them owned by NASA and containing flight-control software for NASAs satellites. The U.S. District Judge set sentencing for 5 February 2001.(David Rosenzweig, Hacker Pleads Guilty to Invading JPL, Stanford Computers Crime: Mission Viego Man, 20, Accepts Federal Plea Bargain. He Had Gained Control of NASA Computers at Both Sites, Los Angeles Times, 7 November 2000.)
NASA announced that new technology recently tested at Ames Research Center (ARC) had converted sounds emanating from landing-gear wind noise into color images on computer screens, enabling engineers to pinpoint loud and preventable aircraft flight noise more easily than in the past. The imposition of nighttime curfews on noisy takeoffs and landings had prompted aircraft manufacturers to develop quieter planes. Paul T. Soderman, leader of the ARC aeroacoustics group, explained that the ability to visualize the cause of wind noise coming from landing gear enables engineers to analyze the problem so that they can find ways to reduce significantly noise. The engineers had created the sound images using a computer linked to a quarter-scale landing-gear model and an array of 70 microphones inside the wall of a wind tunnel. The researchers had then removed various combinations of landing-gear parts in the wind tunnel, resulting in significant noise reduction.
NASA announced that follow-up studies had determined that the distant mass known as TMR- 1C, discovered in 1997, was probably not a protoplaneta young, still-forming precursor of one of the giant planets. In 1998 astronomer Susan Terebey of the Extrasolar Research Corporation had published findings suggesting that the body was a protoplanet several times larger than Jupiter. Terebeys research had received widespread attention. However, although NASA had released the images of TMR-1C captured by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had urged scientists to obtain further verification before identifying the body as a protoplanet. After observing the body over several months, astronomers had concluded that TMR-1C was a bright star, rather than a planet. Reflective dust had likely increased the brightness of the star, located approximately 135 billion miles (217 billion kilometers) from Earth, making it appear to be a planet. After her initial high-profile announcement, Terebey had continued to study the star using the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii and had amended her own hypothesis, reporting, the new data do not lend weight to the protoplanet interpretation and the results remain consistent with the explanation that TMR-1C may be a background star. Most newspapers gave as much coverage to the news of the changing assessment as they had given to the original discovery.(James Glanz, Scientists Retract Claim of Planet Discovery, New York Times, 7 April 2000; Associated Press, Presumed Protoplanet May Be a Background Star, 7 April 2000; NASA, Suspected Protoplanet May Really Be a Distant Star, news release 00-58, 6 April 2000.)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had discovered what they believed to be the earliest known structure ever to form in the universe. The researchers had used the Hale Telescope at Palomar Observatory in California and the National Science Foundations Mayall Telescope in Kitt Peake, Arizona, to find an ancient quasar. By measuring the quasars redshift to determine how fast the quasar was moving away from the galaxy, scientists had been able to calculate the cosmic distance separating Earth and the quasar. The odds of discovering such a distant and relatively fast-moving quasar were remote, especially since scientists could monitor only a fraction of the sky at any one time. The discovery had the broader value of providing a reference point by which to assess those bodies between Earth and the quasar. Daniel Stern of NASA described the findings utility: Finding a quasar at this distance is like turning on a flashlight at the edge of the universe.(NASA, Newfound Quasar Wins Title Most Distant in the Universe, news release 00-30, 18 February 2000.)
Astronomers using the telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico captured the first- ever images of the so-called Metal Dog Bone asteroid, officially named 216 Kleopatra. Scientists had categorized the asteroid as a main-belt asteroid, theorizing that the New Jerseysized rock was the result of an ancient, violent collision. Steven Ostro of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the find one of the most unusual asteroids weve seen in the [s]olar [s]ystem. Scientists made the discovery by bouncing radar signals off the asteroid and cataloging the signals echoes. By gathering a comprehensive collection of echoes, the research team had been able to assemble a computer model of the asteroids shape. The use of radar signals with a moderately powered telescope had made the long-distance discovery possible. Ostro marveled at the technology, describing the find as akin to using a Los Angeles telescope the size of the human eyes lens to image a car in New York. Many of the astronomers working on the project spoke of their amazement at the size, shape, and metallic complexion of the asteroid. They also clarified that the asteroid posed no danger to Earth.(NASA, Astronomers Catch Images of Giant Metal Dog Bone Asteroid, news release 00-74, 4 May 2000. 921 Birmingham Post (AL), Serious Bone Loss for Cosmonauts Not Mir Speculation, 5 May 2000.)
Astronomers using images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered what they believed to be the first examples of isolated stellar-mass black holes adrift among the stars of our galaxy. They announced their discovery at a convention of the American Astronomical Society. The findings supported a long-standing theory that black holes could form with the collapse of just one massive star, although an opposing theory had concluded that multiple stars must collapse in tandem. Moreover, the researchers contribution was the latest in a string of recent findings illuminating the relatively commonplace nature of black holes.(NASA, Lone Black Holes Discovered Adrift in the Galaxy, news release 00-4, 13 January 2000.)
Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mirs days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russias commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today, 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
NASA controllers began sending signals to the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to perform a series of maneuvers that would ultimately end in the satellite crashing into the Pacific Ocean. The endgame commands marked the conclusion of a successful nine-year mission, which had recorded data on more than 2,500 gamma-ray bursts. The US$670 million satellite, launched on 5 April 1991 aboard Mission STS-37, had provided researchers with never-before-seen images of explosions throughout the universe. It will be like losing a member of the family, remarked one NASA scientist who had worked on the program since 1979. NASA officials had decided to end the satellites space tenure because of the possibility that the aging satellite might become unresponsive and plummet out of control to Earth. By initiating the satellites demise, NASA could control the landing area of the 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) spacecraft. Some critics charged NASA with being too conservative, because it had based its decision on the 1-in- 1,000 odds that an uncontrolled descent of the satellite to Earth would result in injuries.(James Orberg, Plan To Scrap Satellite Sacrifices Science, USA Today, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, NASA To Destroy Compton Satellite After Nine Years, 28 May 2000.)
NASA announced that scientists using the Chandra X-ray Observatory had confirmed the existence of middleweight black holes. Several groups of scientists used Chandra to focus on a mid-mass black hole located 600 light-years from the center of galaxy M82. Previous x-ray data from the German-U.S. ROSAT (Rontgensatellite) and the Japan-U.S. ASCA (Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics) had suggested the existence of a mid-mass black hole in M82. Scientists compared Chandras new high-resolution images with optical radio and infrared maps to determine that a single, bright source was emitting most of the x-rays. The scientists continued to observe M82 over an eight-month period, noting that the intensity of the x-rays rose and fell every 600 seconds. Philip Kaaret of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics explained that this behavior was similar to black holes swallowing gas from a nearby star or cloud. Martin Ward of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom remarked that the findings opened a whole new field of research.(NASA, Chandra Clinches Case for Unexpected Black Hole Discovery, news release 00-140, 12 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-140.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) selected Space Systems and Applications Inc. of Lanham, Maryland, to provide engineering, science, and technology support for NASAs Space and Earth Science Directorates. The value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract was US$204.5 million over a period of five years. Under the contract, NASA required Space Systems and Applications to provide research and information technology services including scientific data analysis, modeling and simulation of physical processes, development of flight-project data systems and large-scale data management, archival and delivery systems, and systems analysis and programming. These services would support a broad range of scientific disciplinesastronomy and astrophysics, climatology and atmospheric science, geodynamics, land processes, oceanography, planetary studies, solar and space plasma physics, and solid earth geographics.(NASA, Contract for Goddard Space Center Support Awarded, news release C00-j, 6 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-j.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Suns atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets, news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)
NASA announced its agreement with Lockheed Martin on a plan for the X-33 space plane program. The agreed plan included aluminum fuel tanks for hydrogen fuel, a revised payment schedule, and a target launch date in 2003, contingent on Lockheed Martins winning additional funding under the Space Launch Initiative for completing the project. NASA had funded the project through March 2001. The restructured plan focused on providing milestone payments to Lockheed Martins team, following the completion of tests and the delivery of hardware and software systems this year. The plan also gave greater emphasis to mission safety, quality, and mission success. Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center, pointed out that, despite setbacks, the programs successes had included the creation of technology applicable to the space program and to the commercial aircraft industry, such as a revolutionary new rocket engine; a robust, reusable, metallic thermal-protection system; and software and sensors that automatically determine and predict failures and errors before they affect the flight.(NASA, NASA, Lockheed Martin Agree on X-33 Plan, news release 00-157, 29 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-157.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institutions National Air and Space Museum for its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built. NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASAs predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonians National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners, news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
Engineers completed a weeklong series of tests on the U.S.-built Destiny laboratory, planned to launch to the ISS in 2001, ensuring that the module had no leaks and would provide a safe, vacuum-sealed environment in which the ISS astronauts could conduct research. NASA and the Boeing Company had worked together to test the 32,000-pound (14,500-kilogram) research laboratory. Placing Destiny in a pressurized chamber, engineers had monitored gas levels inside the module over the course of the week. Tip Talone, Director of the ISS Payload Process at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), characterized the results as a large step in meeting the labs Destiny, stating that the laboratory had exceeded expectations.(Dow Jones Newswire, Space State Laboratory Exceeds Expectations in Vacuum Chamber Test, 7 July 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, 20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers, 3 December 2000.)
Arizona State University and JPL, a division of California Institute of Technology, announced the creation of the Arizona State University Planetary Imaging Facility and Advanced Training Institute (PIF-ATI) for the study of Mars. Arizona State University and JPL would jointly fund the new facility, which the two institutions intended for scientists and students to use. PIF-ATI expanded on a facility originally planned in support of the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS), scheduled to fly on the 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft. PIF-ATI would offer scientists and students outside the project greater access to instruments and data, providing access for university students, for students of the fifth through twelfth grades, and for their teachers.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, New Mars Research Facility To Involve Scientists, Kids, news release 2000-115, 20 November 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marsasu.html (accessed 17 April 2008).)
In a much-anticipated launch, the Astro-E satellite lifted off aboard an M-5 rocket from the Kagoshima Space Center on the Japanese island of Kyushu. However, soon after launch, Astro-E was lost when the rocket suffered a control system breakdown, propelling the satellite into a lower orbit than planned. U.S. officials monitoring the launch determined that the satellite had most likely burned up in Earths atmosphere. Astro-E, the product of a joint venture between the United States and Japan, carried new x-raysensing equipment, which scientists had hoped would further illuminate the material surrounding black holes. Scientists had designed the new equipment to sense minute changes in the heat of single protons. The specialists overseeing the launch and mission had hoped that Astro-E would orbit and gather data for five years. The satellite had cost more than US$100 million to develop.(NASA, Japanese-U.S. Satellite Ushers in Golden Era of X-ray Astronomy, news release 00-18, 2 February 2000; Associated Press, Japan Suffers Another Setback When Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, 10 February 2000; Justin Ray, Astro-E Believed Lost Following Botched Launch, Space Flight Now, 10 February 2000.)
Lockheed Martin Systems Integration announced that the U.S. Navy had selected the company to build seven SH-60R Multi-Mission Helicopters, under the first SH-60R low-rate initial production (LRIP) contract, moving Lockheed Martin from development and testing to the production phase of the SH-60R program. The contract required Lockheed Martin to integrate the flight avionics systems, mission avionics systems, and stores and defense systems.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Awarded First SH-60R Avionics Production Contract, news release, 23 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedFirstSH60R Avio.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA announced that SPX Services Solutions had obtained a license to use NASA-patented technology to monitor more carefully levels of exhaust produced by the United States millions of motor vehicles. NASA had developed its atmospheric, remote-sensing technology to track greenhouse gases and to monitor Earths ozone layer. Combining government and private forces, researchers intended to focus on the pollution output of motor vehicles, particularly that of individual automobiles. SPX Services planned to design a device that would enable a driver to test his or her own vehicle to determine its compliance with U.S. Clean Air Act standards, rather than requiring the driver to take it to an auto mechanic for an emissions test. The goal of self- monitoring suited the increasingly popular idea of encouraging individuals to accept personal responsibility for protecting Earth from noxious pollutants.(NASA, NASA Satellite Technology To Monitor Motor Vehicle Pollution, news release 18 July 2000.)
An independent study, commissioned by NASA in the wake of the highly public failures of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, found that cost-cutting measures had created significant risks for NASAs Shuttle program. Although the report maintained that the overall safety of NASAs operations remained within an acceptable range, the investigators warned that the use of contractors and the lack of oversight compromised the quality of NASAs missions. NASAs chief of the Office of Space Flight accepted the reports recommendations to improve NASAs operations, also noting, however, that NASA had already investigated and dealt with many of the weaknesses highlighted in the report. With budgetary matters always a pressing concern, NASA had made various necessary reductions in personnel, relying on companies such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin more than ever. NASA had initiated the investigation to understand more fully the impact of the changes on NASAs highest prioritythe safety of its astronauts.(Associated Press, NASA Says Shuttle Cuts Have Led to Higher Risk, 10 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, Study Raises Concerns About Shuttle Safety, 13 March 2000.)
NASAs Langley Research Center selected Swales and Associates Inc. to provide research and development, engineering, and support services, under a contract valued at up to US$240 million over five years. Specific work areas covered under the contract included full-spectrum aerodynamics, gas dynamics, fluid dynamics, aerothermodynamics, acoustics and aeroacoustics, metallic and nonmetallic structures and materials, and spaceborne and airborne systems.(NASA, NASA Awards Support Services Contract to Maryland Firm, news release C00-o, 24 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-o.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA declared an end to its attempts to contact Mars Polar Lander, which had descended to the Red Planets surface on 3 December 1999. The planned 90-day mission had derailed when mission controllers at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) were unable to communicate with the probe after it landed. Investigators had methodically tried different commands to reach Lander. Meanwhile, scientists and amateur space enthusiasts alike had offered a wide range of hypotheses concerning the cause of Landers silence, speculating that Lander had exploded before actually reaching Marss surface or that it had simply sunk in the Martian dust. After exhausting all means of contacting the probe, NASA had declared the US$165 million mission concluded, indicating that future missions would attempt to make up for the loss of Polar Lander. Project Manager Richard A. Cook expressed his sense of closure about the decision to stop investigating the matter: we feel somewhat complete in the sense that we did go through the things we thought were reasonable . . . we gave it a good shot.(Usha Lee McFarling, NASA Gives Up Hope of Finding Mars Probe, Los Angeles Times, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, JPL To End Search Today for Mars Polar Lander, 17 January 2000; USA Today, NASA Quits Trying To Contact Missing Mars Polar Lander, USA Today, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, Report: Mars Lander May Have Touched Down in Steep Canyon, 6 January 2000.)
NASA celebrated the 20th anniversary of its Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP), created to encourage promising high school students, especially minorities, to pursue careers in math, science, and engineering. During the first 20 years of the program, nearly 3,000 students participated, and 3,300 NASA employees served as SHARP mentors. Most SHARP student participants had served as interns at one of NASAs research centers during the summer months. NASA had begun the program and had continued to fund it as part of its educational mission.(NASA, NASAs SHARP Program Celebrates 20 Years of Excellence, news release 00-96, 19 June 2000.)
00-114, 20 July 2000; NASA, First Opportunity Tonight for Zvezda To Dock with International Space Station, news release N00-36, 25 July 2000. satellite because it was able to meet challenging demands for bandwidth, power, and in-orbit flexibility.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Build First Interactive Broadband Multimedia Spacecraft for New Skies Satellites, news release, 4 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedContractBuildF.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA announced that a team of Lockheed Martin scientists using NASAs Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft to observe coronal loopscoils of hot, electrified gasbelieved they had located the source of the heating mechanism that makes the Suns corona 300 times hotter than its visible surface. A thirty-year-old theory had assumed that the coronal loops heated evenly, but the TRACE observations had indicated that most of the heating occurs at the base of the loops, near the point from which they emerge and return to the solar surface. The team had observed 41 loops extending from 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) to more than 180,000 miles (290,000 kilometers) from the solar surface and had found that, although threads within shorter loops heat more evenly, longer threads cool noticeably as they attain height. The team had calculated the loops energy levels and estimated that heating typically occurs in the first 6,000 miles of a loops length. Richard Fisher, head of the Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics at NASAs GSFC, remarked that understanding how the coronal loops function could shed light on coronal-mass ejections (CMEs). CMEs can disrupt or destroy satellite components orbiting Earth and prompt surges in electrical transmission lines, causing blackouts on Earth.(NASA, Fountains of Fire Illuminate Solar Mystery, news release 00-146, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-146.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Peter N. Spotts, Scientists Begin To Unravel a Stubborn Solar Mystery, Christian Science Monitor, 27 September 2000.)
More than 10,000 white-collar workers walked off the job at the Boeing Company, in protest over failed contract negotiations. Most of the strikers came from the aerospace giants work site in Seattle, Washington.
After completing four months of on-orbit checkout and verification, Terra, the newest in NASAs series of Earth Observing System Satellites, became functional. NASA had developed and launched Terra to monitor Earths atmosphere on a daily basis. Researchers hoped that gathering frequent data would allow a more comprehensive assessment of Earths climate change. According to Yoram J. Kaufman, Project Scientist for Terra at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Terra is measuring and documenting the Earths vital signs, many of them for the first time. In the midst of public and scholarly discussions of global warming and climate change, the new research satellite was a step toward understanding the causes of the changes. The data will help us understand our planet, aid in our distinguishing between natural and human-induced changes, and show us how the Earths climate affects the quality of our lives, Kaufman clarified. The satellites first transmitted images thrilled scientists. The satellite surveyed North America, creating images in many different layers, to reveal how different levels of population and types of vegetation affected the climate. NASA officials planned to make the images obtained by Terra available to business, scientists, and the public.(NASA, Terra Spacecraft Open for Business, news release 00-62, 19 April 2000; NASA, New Views of Earth from Terra Satellite Wednesday, news release N00-16, 18 April 2000.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had captured an image of a lone neutron star traveling close to Earth, one of several hundred million neutron stars that scientists believed to exist in the Milky Way. Hubble scientists believed that, at 200 light-years away, this neutron star was the nearest to Earth. No companion star affected its appearance, allowing astronomers to more easily test and confirm stellar theories against its physical properties, such as size, brightness, and true age. Frederick M. Walter of State University of New York at Stony Brook remarked that, as the closest and brightest of the few known isolated neutron stars, this star would be the easiest to study and is an excellent test bed for nuclear astrophysical theories.(NASA, Hubble Sees Lone Neutron Star Streaking Across Galaxy, news release 00-176, 9 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-176.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
NASA launched the most advanced communications satellite it had ever developed, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-H (TDRS-H) created to provide communication between the Space Shuttles, ISS, HST, and NASA control centers. Intended to replace a communications satellite that had been in place since 1983 and had surpassed its mission-designed lifetime, the new TDRS-H was the first of three communications satellites planned to link NASAs space-bound vehicles. NASA had designated nearly US$500 million for the design, building, and launch of the three new satellites. The TDRS-H launched aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIA rocket, separating from it after about 30 minutes of flight. Once the satellite reached 171 longitude, it became operational.(Lockheed Martin Inc., International Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Provide Mission Success for NASA Satellite Launch, news release, 30 June 2000; NASA, Advanced Communications Satellite Ready To Serve New Millennium Space Projects, news release 00-98, 21 June 2000.)
NASA announced the selection of Sverdrup Technology Inc. to fulfill a contract providing engineering, science, and technical services at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The two- year contract, with three one-year priced options valued at US$300 million over five years, would go into effect on 15 October.(NASA, Tennessee Technology Firm Selected for $300 Million Contract, news release c00-n, 6 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-n.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASAs Stardust spacecraft entered safe mode after a stream of high-energy protons emanating from a solar flare hit the craft. Stardust, on a mission to return samples of a comet, had been 130 million miles (210 million kilometers) from the Sun, traveling at about 12,000 miles (19,000 kilometers) per hour, when the solar flare erupted on 9 November. The solar wind had brought the stream of protons into contact with the craft hours later, in the middle of the night, confirming that NASA engineers and scientists monitoring the situation had reason to feel concerned.(Associated Press, NASAs Stardust Spacecraft Survives Encounter with Solar Flare, 21 November 2000. 1036 Associated Press, NASAs Stardust Spacecraft.)
At a news conference, NASA scientists announced the preliminary findings of Deep Space 1s 22 September flyby of Comet Borrelly, a type of comet that originates in a region near Pluto. NASAs Deep Space 1 spacecraft, operating two years past its planned mission duration, had passed within 1,400 miles (2,250 kilometers) of Borrelly, returning the best images and data of a comet ever captured. The encounter was only the second time that a spacecraft had come within such a distance of a comets nucleus, as well as the first close flyby of a comet of Borrellys type. In 1986 ESAs Giotto spacecraft had flown within 373 miles (600 kilometers) of Halleys comet, which belongs to a category of comets that originate from outside Earths solar system. In addition, NASA scientists reported that the data captured by Deep Space 1 had substantially enhanced existing scientific knowledge of comets. Scientists found a number of Deep Space 1s observations surprising, including the discoveries that the comets icy jets discharge in tall columns rather than in a diffuse spray, that a cloud of charged particles emanates from off the comets center, and that solar wind flows asymmetrically around the particle cloud.(Warren E. Leary, Probe Sends Postcards from Comets Core, New York Times, 26 September 2001; NASA, Deep Space 1, http://nmp.nasa.gov/ds1/ (accessed 17 November 2008).)
A team of astronomers released images taken by NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory, revealing that black holes are present throughout the universe, across space and time, more pervasively than previously estimated. The researchers had found that black holes were even more common millions of years ago than they are today. The scientists had used new x-ray technology to examine galaxies several billion years old. The research had focused on a small sliver of the skya deep fieldthat the Chandra X-ray Observatory had probed looking for black holes and other bodies. Based on the findings in the relatively small sampling, the researchers had estimated that the universe might contain as many as 300 million black holes. Chandra had captured images using exposure times of up to 10 days and focusing on the same region of the sky for more than one year. The astronomers believed that their new images had exposed the early history of the universe, perhaps traveling as far back in time as 90 percent of the way to the Big Bang. In examining this distant patch of sky, the researchers had discovered black holes of all types and masses.
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richardslaunched from NASAs KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helmswould replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttles 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a moving van for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew, news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station, New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew, 8 March 2001; Reuters, USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission, 8 March 2001.)
Using data from the European Space Agencys (ESAs) Infrared Space Observatory, a team of NASA and university researchers identified three stars that they believed contain enough hydrogen to create a Jupiter-like gas planet. The scientists, from Italy, the Netherlands, and the United States, indicated that the stars Beta Pictoris, 49 Ceti, and HD1235344 have particularly fertile environments, which might eventually form planets. Perhaps most significant, the researchers found a thousand times more hydrogen in several stars than scientists had discovered in earlier studies.(W. F. Thi et al., Substantial Reservoirs of Molecular Hydrogen in the Debris Disks Around Young Stars, Nature 409, no. 6816 (4 January 2001): 6063; Associated Press, Study Finds Nearby Star Systems Capable of Making Big Planets, 3 January 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a crewless logistics and resupply mission to the ISS. The Progress automatic cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 9:32 a.m., Universal Time (UT),108 on a Soyuz-U rocket. The mission, officially designated as M-45, carried to the ISS 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms, 2.8 tons, or 5,512 pounds) of fuel, oxygen, equipment, and other supplies.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574; Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2001: The Year in Review, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2001/yearinrev/01YearReview.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, NASA scientists Patricia T. Boyd and Alan P. Smale, both working at NASAs GSFC, announced that they had uncovered a predictable mathematical pattern governing the release of x-ray light from binary star systems. Boyd and Smale had tracked the emission of x-rays from three binary star systems over a period of several years, determining that the number of days between the low points of emission in each binary system was always based on multiples of a single constant number. The discovery countered the common perception among scientists that flares and bursts happen completely at random, suggesting that a repeatable process occurs when swirling matter pours into a black hole, thereby creating an emission. According to Smale, the ongoing challenge would be to combine this knowledge of a pattern, while still considering the many random factors. The interplay between periodic and random components in these systems is a puzzle, Smale concluded.(NASA, Method Uncovered in Madness of Black Hole and Neutron Star Eruptions, news release 01-111, 5 June 2001.)
NASA announced several new findings made possible by the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Farhad Zadeh of Northwestern University had used Chandra to locate a cauldron of 60 million degree gas enveloping a cluster of young stars. The discovery marked the first time that scientists had located such high-energy x-rays surrounding young stars. Zadeh also noted that the newly discovered cluster, located some 25,000 light-years from Earth and estimated at 1 to 2 million years old, had provided evidence in support of the theory that stellar winds generated by stars can produce very hot gas. In addition to Zadehs find, Andreas Zezas of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics announced that his team of scientists had found new midmass black holes in several starburst galaxiesregions where stars form and explode frequently. Researchers had long hypothesized that such an environment might exist but had previously been able to locate only a few midmass black holes. Zezas credited the powerful Chandra X-ray Observatory with allowing astronomers to examine far-flung galaxies more closely than before. Kimberly A. Weaver of NASAs GSFC, who had contributed to Zezass project, hypothesized that the concentration of midsize black holes could possibly lead eventually to the formation of a single, massive black hole.(NASA, Star Factory near Galactic Center Bathed in High-Energy X-rays, news release 01-113, 6 June 2001; John Noble Wilford, Hot Stellar Winds Captured by X-ray Orbiter, New York Times, 12 June 2001; NASA, Chandra Sees Wealth of Black Holes in Star-Forming Galaxies, news release 01-110, 6 June 2001.)
Lieutenant Governor of Florida Frank T. Brogan and Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASAs KSC, broke ground on a new research facility located just south of KSC. The new project, officially named the Space Experiment Research and Processing Laboratory (SERPL), joined researchers from the state of Florida, NASA, the Florida Space Research Institute, and the University of Florida. The research center would devote significant resources to ISS research and to examining the commercial potential of space-related research. Bridges described the venture as widely beneficial, saying, SERPL and the unprecedented opportunities for collaboration that it represents are key to Kennedys evolution to a recognized center for technology development. We expect this partnership to pay dividends to NASA, the State of Florida, and the space industry well into the future.(M2 Presswire, NASA and Florida Join Forces To Develop Space Science Facility, 9 February 2001.)
Arthur F. Davidsen, an astrophysicist who had helped found the Space Telescope Science Institute at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, died at age 57. Davidsen had served for many years as a professor of physics and astronomy at Johns Hopkins, focusing much of his research on the missing mass or dark matter of the universe. His findings had led to the development of the theory that, because of the reflecting light of other bodies, we are able to observe only about 1 percent of the universes matter. Davidsens work indicated that, although the remaining matter exists, it remains hidden from us. Not only had Davidsen led his colleagues in establishing the Space Telescope Science Institute, but he had also encouraged the Institute to participate in operating the HST. In his later years, Davidsen had even begun planning for the instrument that would eventually supplant the HST as the worlds foremost astronomical tool. Davidsen had trained at Princeton University and at the University of California at Berkeley. In 1979 he had won the American Astronomical Societys Helen B. Warner Prize for his work using a rocket to obtain the first ultraviolet spectrum of a quasar.(Martin Weil, Hopkins Astrophysicist Arthur Davidsen Dies, Washington Post, 22 July 2001; Los Angeles Times, Obituaries: Arthur Davidsen; Astrophysicist Led Work To Build Knowledge of Universe, 23 July 2001. 88 NASA, NASA Celebrates 25th Anniversary of Mars Landing, news release 01-143, 17 July 2001.)
NASA announced that astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had discovered a supernova blast located farther away from Earth than any previously observed object. The discovery provided support for the theory that the universe might be expanding more rapidly than in the past. The supernova, approximately 10 billion light-years away from Earth, was relatively bright. According to Adam Riess of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the researcher who made the find, the discovery was significant because scientists would now be able, not only to observe the activities of the universe, but also to understand why it behaves as it does. This supernova shows us the universe is behaving like a driver who slows down approaching a red stoplight and then hits the accelerator when the light turns green, Riess explained.(NASA, Farthest Supernova Ever Seen Sheds Light on Dark Universe, news release 01-58, 2 April 2001.)
Lockheed Martin confirmed that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) had decided not to fund the companys development of the X-33 space plane, a possible replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Since 1996, Lockheed Martin had been developing a pilotless prototype of the X- 33, a reusable spacecraft that would be able to launch without shedding fuel tanks or boosters and to land like an airplane. However, the development of lightweight fuel tanks had taken the project off schedule and over budget, and NASA had decided in March 2001 to forego continued funding for the X-33, although it was, reportedly, 75 percent complete. When Lockheed Martin had subsequently attempted to secure another government sponsor for the project, the U.S. Air Force had expressed interest in the project and submitted to the Pentagon a proposal to fund the space plane. However, the DOD had since determined that the project was too costly to undertake.(Michael Cabbage, Air Force Decides Not To Revive Lockheeds X-33 Space Plane, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
For the first time, astronomers detected a supermassive black hole consuming material in the Milky Way. Frederick K. Baganoff of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a team of scientists using NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory to observe a source of radio emissions called Sagittarius A* had noticed a rapid rise and decline in x-ray emissions in its vicinity. The scientists, who believed that Sagittarius A* is connected to a black hole in the center of the galaxy, speculated that the emissions emanate from matter falling into the black hole. The Chandra observations had provided the best view yet of the area just outside of the black holes event horizonthe point of no return for all matter falling into a black hole. The discovery added significantly to previous research indicating that the Milky Way Galaxy contains a black hole or some other large, dark object.(NASA, Chandra Catches Milky Way Monster Snacking, news release 01-179, 5 September 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of Lockheed Martin to construct Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), scheduled to launch in August 2005. Under the US$145 million contract, Lockheed Martin would be responsible for building the orbiter and for integrating and testing six scientific instruments and two engineering payloads. In addition, Lockheed Martin would provide operations support for spacecraft during its five and one-half year mission. Odyssey, designed for low-altitude remote sensing of Mars, would include an atmospheric sounder; a context imager; a high-resolution camera; a shallow, subsurface, sounding radar; a visible, near-infrared imaging spectrometer; and a wide-angle color imager. NASA engineers planned to use Odysseys images to help determine landing sites for future Mars missions. NASA also planned for the spacecraft to provide telecommunications and navigation relay capability for future missions to the planet.(NASA, NASA Selects Spacecraft Contractor for 2005 Mars Mission, news release c01-w, 3 October 2001; Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Chosen by NASA and JPL to Build the 2005 Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, 3 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinChosenByNASAJPL Build2.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASAs global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASAs JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deeres NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASAs Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm, news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a module of the ISS designed to expand the space stations size and provide other capabilities. The module, called Docking Compartment One (DC-1) or Pirs (Russian for pier), launched at 11:44 p.m. (UT), on a Soyuz-U rocket, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. A cargo craft called Progress M-SO1 would transport the module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency intended the DC-1 to provide additional stowage space for the ISS, an airlock for spacewalks, and an additional docking port for future Soyuz and Progress vehicles. The 8,000-pound (3,600-kilogram), 16-foot-long (4.9-meter-long) module would increase the total mass of the space station to 303,500 pounds (138,000 kilograms).(Puttkamer, Space Flight 2001; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575, 1 October 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx575.html (accessed 14 November 2008).)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Landers safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration, at the National Geographic Societys Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Marss Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Marss surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASAs Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Marss hostile but fascinating landscape.
NASA opened a new command and control center that would allow researchers on Earth to participate in scientific research conducted aboard the ISS. The new facility, located at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, featured state-of-the-art communication and research technologies. Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson described the new center as a significant part of NASAs ongoing plan to make space research more efficient and useful: From this facility we will manage fundamental scientific research that can only be done in spaceresearch that will lead to knowledge to benefit all humanity here on Earth. NASA planned to staff the 13,000-square-foot (1,200-square-meter) facility 24 hours per day to support research aboard ISS. In addition to its link to the ISS, the new facility was equipped to monitor payload resources, facilitate data transfer, and communicate with universities and research centers throughout the world. The new command post opened only days before Space Shuttle Atlantiss scheduled trip into space to carry the Destiny research laboratory module to the ISS.(NASA, NASA Opens Space Station Command Post, news release 01-15, 2 February 2001; Shelby G. Spires, MSFC Opens Science Mission Control Today, Huntsville Times (AL), 2 February 2001.)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russias second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
NASAs Helios aircraft set a world record for the highest altitude ever attained by an aircraft without rocket power. The solar-powered, propeller-driven aircraft reached an altitude of 96,500 feet (30,000 meters), eclipsing the previous record by more than 10,000 feet (3,000 meters). The remotely piloted aircraft took off from the U.S. Navys Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) in Hawaii at 8:48 a.m. local time on 13 August, staying aloft for nearly 17 hours before landing at 1:43 a.m. on 14 August. Fuel cells on the aircrafts wings provided electrical power during the daylight hours, when the aircraft achieved the record altitude; at night, the planes propellers acted as generators, providing electrical power to control the aircraft. According to NASA, an aircraft operating at such an altitude would be able to monitor the environment, improve communications on Earth, and simulate the conditions of flight within the atmosphere of Mars.(NASA, NASA Solar Aircraft Sets Altitude Record; Communications, Environmental Breakthroughs Expected, news release 01-165, 14 August 2001.)
At 4:51 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time (EDT), the Sun released one of the most powerful flares of the past 25 years. The flare originated from a region of the Sun known as active region 9393 and, almost immediately after its generation, began orbiting with the Sun. The flare, equal to the well- known X-20 flare of 16 August 1989, resulted from an explosion within the Suns atmosphere. Both the 1989 and 2001 solar flares disrupted radio communications. The flare of 3 April 2001 caused an R4 radio blackout on the sunlit side of Earth and released energy equal to 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT. Had it occurred on the side of the Sun facing Earth, it would probably have caused major power failures on Earth. ESAs Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spotted the record-setting sun flare and several smaller X-class flares, which occurred during the following days.(NASA, Sun Unleashes Record Superflare, Earth Dodges Solar Bullet, news release 01-66, 3 April 2001; NASA, Sun Takes Another Solar Shot, This Time at Earth, news release 01-71, 11 April 2001.)
NASA researchers with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of California at San Diego published research indicating that particles from human-produced pollution might significantly contribute to weakening the planets hydrological cycle. The hydrological cycle is the circulation of water between Earths atmosphere and its surface water and soils. Specifically, water precipitates from the atmosphere into surface water or soils and later evaporates from surface water, soils, and plants back into the atmosphere. The researchers had examined satellite data indicating aerosol distribution in the Indian Ocean region and had found that the aerosols, primarily composed of black carbon, could weaken the hydrological cycle in two ways. The aerosols could reduce the amount of sunlight reaching the ocean, thereby decreasing the amount of water evaporating into the atmosphere. In addition, when particulates enter clouds, they reduce the size of cloud droplets, thereby reducing the amount of rain over polluted regions. The particulates in aerosols comprise a mixture of substances formed by the burning of fossil fuels and rural biomass. The new research was significant because it suggested that aerosols might be more environmentally harmful than scientists had previously understood and that air pollution is both an urban and a rural phenomenon.(NASA, Tiny Pollution Particles May Carry Large Consequences for Earths Water Supply, news release 01- 239, 6 December 2001; V. Ramanathan, Aerosols, Climate, and the Hydrological Cycle, Science n.s. 294, no. 5549 (7 December 2001): 21192124.)
Scientists led by Ken Ebisawa of NASAs GSFC published research that helped resolve a long- standing question about whether the emission of x-rays from the plane of the Milky Way Galaxy was truly diffuse or derived from numerous discrete sources. The scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to carry out an unprecedented survey of a region of the galactic plane that had no known x-ray point sources, in the deepest examination ever made of hard x-rays in the region referred to as the zone of avoidance. Chandra had revealed 36 new x-ray point sources and an area of diffuse emission. Properties of the new point sources had indicated that they were probably located outside the Milky Way. In addition, Chandras survey had indicated that the diffuse x-ray emission revealed the galactic omnipresence of hot plasma with a higher energy density than any other substance in interstellar space.(NASA, Astronomers Go Behind the Milky Way To Solve X-ray Mystery, news release 01-161, 9 August 2001; Ken Ebisawa et al., Origin of the Hard X-ray Emission from the Galactic Plane, Science 293, no. 5535 (31 August 2001): 16331635.)
Responding to the ongoing reductions in the budget for NASA and for the ISS, the Boeing Company announced that it would lay off 400 workers who had been working on the development of ISS modules, including those workers who would have built the living quarters for the space stations researchers. At the time of Boeings cuts, NASA had trimmed nearly US$1 billion from its ISS funding.(Associated Press, Boeing Laying Off 400 on NASAs International Space Station, 17 March 2001.)
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. MAP carried two Gregorian telescopes, designed to record temperatures in selected locations throughout the sky. MAPs broad mission was to provide further insight into how the universe formed. The spacecraft cost US$95 million to build.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Delta II Helps Unlock Secrets of the Universe, news release, 30 June 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010630h.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Peter N. Spotts, Latest NASA Launch Aims To Take Cosmic Baby Picture, Christian Science Monitor, 29 June 2001;)
NASA astronomers linked the worlds two largest telescopes, both located at the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii. Using a process known as interferometry, the scientists used the two telescopes to capture images of a faint star in the constellation Lynx. According to Anne L. Kinney, Director of NASAs Astronomical Search for Origins program, combining the light from the two largest telescopes on Earth is a fabulous technical advancement. Using a tunnel that collects light waves that the telescopes have captured, to combine the images, the two telescopes worked together to allow astronomers to peer farther and more clearly into space than ever before. Scientists hailed the achievement as a significant step toward creating a new class of astronomical telescopes.(NASA, An Astronomy First: Telescopes Double-Team Hawaiian Night Sky, news release 01-42, 14 March 2001; Associated Press, Worlds Strongest Telescope Link Created, 15 March 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98/ISS-5A lifted off from NASAs Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the most expensive and crucial component of the ISSthe United Statesbuilt Destiny science laboratory. Mark Stephenson of the Boeing Company, which had built the US$1.4 billion research module, called the vessel the crown jewel of the ISS. NASA had set high stakes on the Destiny laboratory, which was so expensive and complicated to build, that NASA could not afford to assemble a backup module. Therefore, any problem in the transport and connection of the Destiny module would set back the ISS several years. NASA had delayed Atlantiss mission for three weeks when engineers discovered evidence that faulty wiring might compromise the Shuttles safety. The vital mission brought the ISS closer to becoming the permanent and highly functional research station that NASA and the international space community had long awaited. The Destiny laboratory measured 28 feet (9 meters) long, weighed more than 30,000 pounds (13,600 kilograms), and held 13 computers. NASA expected to control the ISS using the computers and communications equipment built into Destiny. Because of the Space Shuttles cargo, some officials speculated that Atlantiss mission was the most important for NASAs research agenda ever undertaken. One NASA spokesperson called the Destiny module the cornerstone for space-based research aboard the orbiting platform. The STS-98 crew consisted of Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell; Pilot Mark L. Polansky; and Mission Specialists Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Thomas D. Jones, and Marsha S. Ivins.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-98, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-98.html (accessed 2 February 2009); William Harwood, Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Shuttle Flight No. 102 Will Transport $1.4 Billion Lab Module, Washington Post, 8 February 2001; Kelly Young, Atlantis To Deliver Destiny, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 2001; Associated Press, Shuttle Totes Space Stations Crown Jewel, 8 February 2001; Associated Press, Countdown Begins for Launch of NASA Lab, 5 February 2001; NASA, Atlantis Set To Deliver International Space Stations Destiny, news release 01-16, 5 February 2001.)
The NEAR Shoemaker spacecraft landed on the 433 Eros asteroid, becoming the first probe ever to accomplish such a feat. The landing was a bonus. NEAR had already successfully completed a 1 billion-mile mission, which had provided pictures of Earth, comet Hoylake, and the asteroid 253 Mathilde. After a carefully scripted 5-hour descent, NEAR touched down safely, traveling at about 4 miles (6 kilometers) per hour. The spacecraft, which engineers had not designed for the impromptu landing mission, did not have a parachute to lessen its impact on the asteroids unknown surface. By firing the spacecrafts engines five times during descent, NASA controllers were able to slow the craft to a safe landing speed. As NASAs Chief Scientist Edward J. Weiler explained, If you were an Erosian watching this thing come in, it should have a velocity about that of a walking individual. Scientists landed the craft to demonstrate that the landing was possible, as well as to gather additional information. NASA engineers reported detecting a faint signal from the probe even after it had landed. The environment is harsh on the asteroid, which measures 21 miles (34 kilometers) long and 8 miles (13 kilometers) wide. Moving through space at more than 40,000 miles (64,300 kilometers) per hour, Eros reaches a temperature of 400F (204C) daily and has only weak gravity. Researchers believed that the asteroid is composed of material older than Earth and might have been part of another planet at one time.(Mike Toner, Discover: Rendezvous with Eros Matchup Planned Monday for Asteroid, Spacecraft, Atlanta Journal-Constitution (GA), 11 February 2001; Reuters, Space Probe Set To Land on Asteroid Eros, Washington Post, 12 February 2001; Dan Vergano, Probe Lands on Gigantic Near-Earth Asteroid, USA Today, 13 February 2001; Regina Holtman, Signals from Surface, Washington Times, 13 February 2001; Kathy Sawyer, Spacecraft Lands on Asteroid; NASA Probes Historic First May Yield Wealth of Data, Washington Post, 13 February 2001. 21 Associated Press, Atlantis Astronauts To Conduct 100th Spacewalk in U.S. History, 14 February 2001; Los Angeles Times, Spacewalk Improves View from Space Station Lab, 13 February 2001; Dow Jones International News, Window Shutter Gives US Spacewalkers Views of Earth, 12 February 2001.)
NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that Charles Elachi would become Director of its 5,000-employee, US$1.3 billion research facility in Pasadena, California. Elachi, an expert in the field of remote sensing best known for developing radar systems, had assumed JPLs top post after 30 years of service with NASA. JPL had interviewed more than 70 candidates over eight months before selecting Elachi. Concerning JPLs challenge to encourage further exploration while meeting tight budgets, Elachi remarked, Its basically striking a balance between faster implementation and cheaper implementation and making sure we have success. Having lost two separate spacecraft headed for Mars in 1999, JPL stood at a critical juncture as Elachi assumed control.(Associated Press, New Director Named for NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 31 January 2001; Usha Lee McFarling, 30-Year Veteran of JPL Is Chosen as Its Leader, Los Angeles Times, 31 January 2001.)
In the midst of increased concerns over the long-term effects of the depletion of Earths ozone layer and concerns over global warming, scientists learned that Marss average global temperature had increased 50F (10C) in one month. A research team at Arizona State University analyzed and made public data that Mars Global Surveyor had collected, indicating the planets drastic change in climate. Scientists concluded that a massive dust storm, originating in Marss lower latitudes, had caused the increase in temperature. The researchers believed that the dust had trapped sunlight, eventually causing a heat wave to envelope the Red Planet; they predicted, however, that the planets temperature would cool when the dust particles began reflecting sunlight.(Los Angeles Times, Science File in Brief; Global Warming Strikes Another Planet: Mars, 23 July 2001.)
Shang-Ping Xie of the University of Hawaiis International Pacific Research Center and Meteorology Department and W. Timothy Liu of NASAs JPL published in the journal Science the results of their study of Hawaiis so-called tail, demonstrating that a strong ocean current connects Hawaii with Asia. The researchers had concluded that the current was the result of the wind whipping around the small Pacific Islands and creating wakes eastward toward Asia. Scientists had long recognized that the Hawaiian Islands cause an eastward current, but common knowledge had suggested that the current reaches less than 200 miles (322 kilometers). However, using data from NASAs QuikSCAT satellite, the European Sensing Satellites, and the United States-Japan Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission, Xie and Lie had traced the eastward- flowing current farther, discovering that it actually extends nearly 5,000 miles (8,000 kilometers). From an historical perspective, the discovery provided evidence in support of the tradition that early Hawaiian settlers had sailed to the islands from the Far East.(Shang-Ping Xie et al., Far-Reaching Effects of the Hawaiian Islands on the Pacific Ocean-Atmosphere System, Science 292, no. 5524 (15 June 2001): 20572060; NASA, Satellites Reveal Hawaiis Long Tail of Wind and Water, news release 01-121, 14 June 2001.)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASAs JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Centers goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSCs Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director, news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
Researchers published findings from an unprecedented analysis of NASA-produced satellite data of carbon absorption by northern hemisphere forests. The researchers had used the satellite data to study the extent to which forests had absorbed carbon released into Earths atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide from fossil-fuel combustion. Many scientists consider atmospheric accumulation of carbon dioxide to be a primary cause of global climate change, because forests act as sinks, absorbing carbon dioxide, thereby reducing its atmospheric accumulation. The researchers had found that forests in Europe, Russia, and the United States annually absorbed almost 700 million tonnes (771 million tons or 1.5 trillion pounds) of carbon from 1981 to 1999. They had also found geographic variations in carbon absorption, with Russian forests accounting for nearly 40 percent of the carbon sink and Canadian forests losing carbon. The findings were significant, because they indicated which forests had lost carbon and which had stored it. The findings also validated relationships between satellite measurements and ground-based measurements of carbon absorption, demonstrating the crucial importance of satellites in monitoring forests. NASAs Earth Science Enterprise, dedicated to understanding human- induced and natural changes in Earths environment, had funded the research.
The first changing of the guard took place aboard the ISS Discovery when the crew of Expedition 2, which included astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, replaced the first ISS research team, Expedition 1. The new crew planned to spend four and one-half months aboard the space station, with Usachev serving as the outposts Commander. With the official beginning of her mission on the ISS, Helms became the first long- term female occupant of the space station. The new crew anticipated working well together, having trained as a unit for nearly four years. Because the first crew had completed many of the ISSs final construction tasks, crew of Expedition 2 looked forward to having more research time than their predecessors had enjoyed.(Todd Halvorson, Space Crews Ceremoniously Switch Places, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 March 2001; NASA, Space Station ShiftChange Set with Next Shuttle Launch, news release, 01-30, 28 February 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Station Alpha About To Get Its First Female Resident, 5 March 2001; Juan A. Lozano for Associated Press, New Space Station Crew Moves into Orbiting Outpost, 14 March 2001.)
Daniel Wang, a University of Massachusetts professor and leader of a study team of astronomers, announced that his team had discovered a giant halo of hot gas spiraling a galaxy similar to the Milky Way and relatively near Earth. The researchers had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST to observe galaxy NGC 4631, some 25 million light-years from Earth. The discovery not only revealed the increasing power of the astronomical tools at the disposal of scientists, but also contributed to astronomers knowledge about the structure and evolution of galaxies. Wang explained the significance of the discovery: Scientists have debated for over 40 years whether the Milky Way has an extended corona, or halo, of hot gas . . . by studying similar galaxies like NGC 4631, we can get an idea of whats going on within our own galaxy. The studys results also provided new information about how energy and mass spin around galaxies, as well as about the possible effects of rapid star formation.(NASA, Chandra Detects Halo of Hot Gas Around Milky WayLike Galaxy, news release 01-146, 19 July 2001.)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the worlds most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASAs decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASAs MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding a very tough decision.(NASA, NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34, news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle, New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project, Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs, 2 March 2001.)
NASA named Nelson H. Keeler Director of its Independent Verification and Validation Facility (IVVF) in Fairmont, West Virginia, giving Keeler the responsibility for safeguarding the facilitys mission-critical software. Keeler also assumed the task of evaluating the cost- effectiveness of NASAs technology and software. Before joining NASA, Keeler had served in the U.S. Coast Guard, amassing more than 6,000 flight hours in search-and-rescue and law- enforcement missions. During a stint at the U.S. Coast Guards Research and Development Center, he had won the Legion of Merit medal. Keeler had served in NASAs Space Station Freedom program, in the NASA Office of Space Flights Advanced Launch Technology and Advanced Flight Systems programs, as well is in private industry, before becoming Director of the IVVF.(NASA, NASA Names Nelson Keeler Independent Verification and Validation Facility Director, news release 01-117, 7 June 2001.)
An international team of astronomers presented compelling new evidence that comet impacts had played a significant role in the formation of life on Earth. The researchers, led by Michael J. Mumma of NASAs GSFC and Hermann Boehnhardt, working at the European South Observatory in Chile, presented their findings in an issue of Science devoted to the burgeoning field of comet research. The astronomers had used orbiting space telescopes, as well as telescopes throughout the world, to provide unprecedented coverage of comets passing Earth. In the course of their observations, the team had witnessed the breakup of the Comet LINEAR, thereby gaining new knowledge about the organic materials contained in comets. This new understanding of the composition of comets led to new information about the impact of comets on Earthespecially during the collisions between comets and planets that occurred long ago. Mumma explained the significance of the new discoveries about the composition of comets: The idea that comets seeded life on Earth with water and essential molecular building blocks is dramatic, and for the first time, we have seen a comet with the right composition to do the job. The researchers concluded that comets had formed from dust, ice, and glass, and that, in colliding with other celestial bodies, comets had transferred fundamental building blocks to them.(Hermann Boehnhardt, The Death of a Comet and the Birth of Our Solar System, Science 292, no. 5520 (18 May 2001): 13071308; NASA, In Coming Apart, Comet Linear Exposes Its Deepest Secrets, news release 01-94, 17 May 2001; Peter N. Spotts, Comets Give Clues to Solar Systems Infancy: New Studies Chronicle the Break Up of a Comet That Sheds Light on Early Planet Information, Christian Science Monitor, 18 May 2001.)
John F. Yardley, who had worked at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, serving as the Launch Operation Manager for the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft and the Technical Director for the Gemini program before joining NASA in 1974, died at the age of 76. NASA had awarded Yardley its Public Service Medal in 1963 and in 1966 for his work on the Mercury and the Gemini. From 1981 to 1989, Yardley had been President of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Yardley as responsible as any individual for getting the Space Shuttle Program off the ground.(NASA, John F. Yardley, Human Space Flight Pioneer, Dies, news release 01-130, 27 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, John Yardley, 76, Dies; Had Central Role in Space Flight, New York Times, 28 June 2001.)
A research team announced the results of a NASA-funded study using microgravity to investigate the properties of everyday materials. Led by Jennifer A. Lewis, the team of researchers had pioneered a new approach to stabilizing particles in fluids, a process they termed nanoparticle haloing. By suspending movement of fine particles in fluids such as paint, Lewis and her colleagues had succeeded in manipulating the complexion of the liquid. Perhaps of greater significance, they had been able to ensure that the fluid did not break down as quickly as it would have done otherwise. The researchers believed that nanoparticle haloing would have wide application, such as in making the fluids more useful and long lasting. As Lewis said, This designer capability will assist us in developing improved materials. NASAs Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) made the project possible, offering grants for studies that might benefit from the use of a microgravity or low-gravity environment to examine the fundamental states and characteristics of materials.(NASA, Suspended in Space: Researchers Make Important Discovery About Materials, news release 01-154, 31 July 2001.)
Russian President Vladimir Putin appointed a new director of Russias largest manufacturer of spacecraft and rockets, the Khrunichev State Research and Production Company. Putin selected Alexander I. Medvedev to succeed Anatoly Kiselyov, who had headed the company for 26 years. At the time of the change in leadership, Kiselyov had reported failing health. Companies with interests in Russian space exploration continued to adjust to postcommunist operations. The Khrunichev State Research and Production Company, providing much of the revenue to keep Russias space projects alive, manufactured Proton booster rockets used to launch commercial and communication satellites.(Associated Press, New Chief for Russia Space Company, 7 February 2001.)
A group of scientists from Stanford University and NASAs GSFC published research providing the first clear evidence of the causes of sunspots. Sunspots are large dark areas on the surface of the Sun that can last for weeks or longer. The scientists had used the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO)a project of NASA and ESAto conduct an acoustic tomography of a large sunspot on 18 June 1998. This technique, much like medical ultrasound diagnostics, had enabled the scientists to conduct subsurface observations of the sunspot, whereas previous research had relied only on surface observations. Researchers had already known that material flows out of sunspots and that the magnetic field below sunspots obstructs the upward flow of energy from the solar interior, thus making the sunspot cooler than its surroundings. However, the SOHO data revealed that material also flows into sunspots, because the cooler material at the sunspots top condenses and flows downward, pulling the surrounding plasma and magnetic field inward with it. This concentration of material leads to further cooling of plasma, which, in turn, flows downward and draws in more plasma in a self-perpetuating cycle. These findings also clarified the previously unexplained attraction of magnetic fields with like polarities in sunspots. This characteristic had puzzled scientists because such magnetic fields generally repel rather than draw towards each other.(Junwei Zhao, Alexander G. Kosovichev, and Thomas L. Duvall Jr., Investigation of Mass Inflows Beneath a Sunspot by Time-Distance Helioseismology, Astrophysical Journal 557, no. 1 (10 August 2001): 384388; NASA, The Suns Dark Secret: How Sunspots Pull Themselves Together, news release 01-216, 6 November 2001.)
At the American Astronomical Society convention, astronomers Victoria M. Kaspi and Mallory S. E. Roberts of McGill University presented evidence dating a known pulsar to 386 AD. Because scientists consider it quite difficult to determine the age of particular pulsars or of any astronomical body, the scientific community regarded the find as especially significant. The researchers had used NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory to locate the pulsar exactly at the center of a supernova remnant known as G11.2-0.3, which astronomers had already definitively dated. Scientists believed that both the pulsar and the supernova had formed during an explosion in 386 ADan event that early Chinese astronomers had recorded. Astronomers have experienced difficulty tracking and interpreting the patterns of pulsars, because the formations spin and move rapidly. In light of the successful dating, many scientists hoped that the discovery might help them understand how pulsars develop.(NASA, Chandra Links Pulsar to Historic Supernova, news release 01-02, 10 January 2001.)
The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASAs JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Marss surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planets seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASAs chief Mars program scientist celebrated: Weve got a program! This is the next step . . . Its kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. Were bound for a new frontier.(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars, news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASAs Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission, Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures, Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists, 8 April 2001.)
NASA commemorated the 75th anniversary of the first successful launch of a liquid-fueled rocket. On 26 March 1926, Robert H. Goddard had launched a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long) rocket fueled by gasoline and liquid oxygen. The rocket flew just over 40 feet (12 meters) high using the same technology that would one day launch massive rockets carrying Space Shuttles and other research craft into space. NASA had named Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) after Robert H. Goddard. At the anniversary celebration, NASAs Chief Historian Roger D. Launius called Goddard the forefather of American space exploration: Dr. Goddard was a true visionary, having already visualized flight in outer space by the time he was 21. Goddard had turned 21 in 1903, some 50 years before space exploration began in earnest. Even 75 years after Goddards successful test, NASA continued to use liquid-propulsion systems to launch most of its spacecraft and satellites.(NASA, March 16 Marks 75th Anniversary of First Liquid-Fueled Rocket Launch, news release 01-35, 12 March 2001.)
An international team of astronomers led by Kailash C. Sahu of the Space Telescope Science Institute reported the discovery of what appeared to be planet-like celestial bodies clustered around a group of 10 million stars some 8,500 light-years from Earth. The team had used the HST to make their discovery, which formed the basis of their hypothesis that the strong gravitational force of the dense star cluster might have pulled the quasi-planets away from their parent stars. The researchers article in Nature prompted both skepticism and praise. Stephen P. Maran, an American Astronomical Society spokesperson, summarized the reason for the excitement surrounding the find: If it is confirmed, the finding suggests there is something big here that we dont understand. In addition, Sahus research team reported that they had observed six microlensing events during their study, thereby focusing the attention of the scientific community on Albert Einsteins theory of microlensing that the gravity of a celestial body can bend the light of a more distant object, thereby acting as a magnifying glass for space exploration.(Kailash C. Sahu et al., Gravitational Microlensing by Low-Mass Objects in the Globular Cluster M22, Nature 411, no. 6841 (28 June 2001): 10221024; Kathy Sawyer, A Dim Discovery in a Bend of Light; Celestial Orbs Detected Through Microlensing May Hold Clues to Stars Birth, Washington Post, 28 June 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASAs Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silversteins work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASAs predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASAs true founding members, who had made possible NASAs robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies, news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program, New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA, 4 June 2001.)
NASA announced that its X-40A aircraft, built by the Boeing Company and on loan from the U.S. Air Force, had successfully passed a test flight, giving the X-37 program a major boost. NASA had designed the X-37, a reusable craft that could launch into space and return safely, for use in testing NASA technologies. To test the flight-control system planned for the X-37, an Army Chinook helicopter lifted the X-40A aircraft to 15,000 feet (4,570 meters) and then released it to a safe landing. NASAs director of the X-37 program called the successful test, a cause for celebration, saying that incremental tests on prototype airplanes would ultimately make the X-37 program both cost-efficient and successful. Scientists hailed the safe landing of the X-40A as a triumph of cooperation among the U.S. military, NASA, and the Boeing Company, with each of the three playing a vital role in the development of the successful craft.(NASA, Successful X-40A Test Flight Gives Major Boost to NASAs X-37 Program, news release 01-51, 21 March 2001; M2 Presswire, X-40A Flight Test Successful; Major Milestone in X037 Space Plane Project, 15 March 2001.)
Konrad Dennerl, of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany, and his team of astronomers announced that they had performed the first x-ray observations of the planet Venus. The team had used NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory to conduct the observations, which revealed new information about the planets atmosphere. The x-ray observations of Venus were different from views of the planet made in visible light, because fluorescence, rather than reflection, produced the x-rays from the planet. Most of the fluorescent x-rays come from oxygen and carbon atoms located 120 to 140 kilometers (74 to 87 miles) above the surface of Venus, whereas clouds that are 50 to 70 kilometers (31 to 43 miles) above the surface reflect optical light. The observations represented a technological breakthrough. Other x-ray astronomy satellites had been unable to point steadily in the direction of Venus, because the planets relative proximity to the Sun had prevented them from locking onto guide stars that were visually distinct from the Sun.(NASA, Chandra Captures Venus in a Whole New Light, news release 01-236, 27 November 2001.)
The Pentagon selected an international team of contractors, led by Lockheed Martin, to build the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), a multi-role fighter plane that the United States, the United Kingdom, and other countries planned to use. The Pentagon planned for the JSF to function as a single, fungible, low-maintenance replacement for the various aircraft that different military branches in the United States and elsewhere had been using. The program, valued at approximately US$200 billion, included three versions of the JSF, to fulfill the different requirements of the various military branches in the United States and Europe. All of the versions would have stealth and supersonic capabilities. BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman would initially produce 22 aircraft during the system design and development phase; the companies expected to construct nearly 3,000 aircraft under the program.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Team Wins Joint Strike Fighter Competition, Pledges Full Commitment to This Cornerstone of Future Defense Capability, news release, 26 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinTeamWinsJointStrikeFi.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
A research team led by John Bally of the University of Colorado and Henry Throop of the Southwest Research Institute announced that the team had used the HST to observe the first direct evidence of the snowballing theory of planet birth. According to the scholars findings, later released in Science, dust grains in the midst of a cloud of dust and gas located in the Orion Nebula, which is approximately 1,500 light-years from Earth, had accreted into a single nucleus of gas and dust, thereby forming an embryonic planet. The researchers observing the occurrence speculated that a similar process might have formed the known planets of the universe. In describing the volatile environment in which the snowballing process occurs, Throop used the analogy of trying to build a skyscraper in the middle of a tornado. The researchers surmised that, although snowballing may have caused many embryo planets to begin forming, the complete process of forming a full-fledged planet might have occurred more rarely than scientists previously had speculated.(Kathy Sawyer, Astronomers Observe Forming of Infant Planet for First Time, Houston Chronicle, 6 May 2001; Henry B. Throop et al., Evidence for Dust Grain Growth in Young Circumstellar Disks, Science 292, no. 5522 (1 June 2001): 16861689.)
tdrs_jmedia.htm (accessed 25 November 2008). by Richard S. Ellis of the California Institute of Technology, had combined the natural magnifying power of galaxy cluster Abell 2218 with observations from the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to execute the technique successfully. As a result, the team had been able to detect faint light emitted by a small cluster of stars located nearly 13.4 billion light- years from Earth. Based on detectable characteristics of the stars, the scientists believed that a star cluster in its early formation stages had produced the detected light, and that, during the early formation of the universe, the infant star cluster may have combined with other star groups to create galaxies.(Richard Ellis et al., A Faint Star-Forming System Viewed Through the Lensing Cluster Abell 2218: First Light at z ~ 5.6? Astrophysical Journal Letters 560, no. 2 (20 October 2001): L119L122; William Harwood, Pre- Galactic Star Cloud Is Discovered, Washington Post, 6 October 2001.)
Astronauts Thomas D. Jones and Robert L. Curbeam Jr. made their third and final spacewalk from Space Shuttle Atlantis, finishing the installation of the ISSs science laboratory Destiny. The spacewalk was the 100th in the history of U.S. space exploration. Two days earlier, Jones and Curbeam had conducted a spacewalk to install a window shutter for Destiny, allowing the astronauts residing inside the ISS an unparalleled view of Earth. Overall, the mission to install the vital and expensive Destiny module went smoothly. Atlantiss crew worked quickly to connect the necessary cables, hatches, and wires to equip the new research center. The successful installation also allowed NASA to accept a transfer of leadership from the Russian Space Agency. Using the newly installed computers in the Destiny module, U.S. flight controllers took control of the ISS on 13 February 2001.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin received the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy presented by the National Space Club, one of the United States most prestigious space awards. Leaders from the aerospace industry, governmental space programs, and academics had selected Goldin for the award. I am both honored and humbled by the award which validates and supports NASAs continuing mission to pioneer the frontiers of space, Goldin remarked upon receiving the honor.(NASA, NASA Administrator Receives Premier Space Honor, news release 01-61, 30 March 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts training at NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASAs rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russias agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Titos crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff, Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station, New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains, 20 March 2001.)
Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) launched the first of its HII-A vehicles at 4:00 p.m., Japan Standard Time (JST), from Tanegashima Space Center. The HII-A carried two payloads, the Doppler Ranging Equipment and the Laser Ranging Equipment, both instruments designed to monitor the rocket during and after launch. Observers regarded the launch as a major success for the Japanese space program, which had designed the rocket as the countrys primary large-scale launch vehicle.(Puttkamer, Space Flight 2001; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), H-IIA Launch Vehicle, http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/rockets/h2a/index_e.html (accessed 10 November 2008); JAXA, LRE (Laser Ranging Equipment), http://god.tksc.jaxa.jp/lr/lre.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle, news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post, 16 May 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASAs Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASAs second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, Senate Names New NASA Official, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory, http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, NASAs Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS), http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
For the first time, scientists made combined internal and external observations of Jupiters magnetosphere, the biggest object with distinct boundaries within the solar system. In the first conjunction of two spacecraft at an outer planet, the Galileo spacecraft conducted observations from inside Jupiters magnetosphere, a comet-shaped region of space filled by the planets magnetic field. Meanwhile, on the outside of the magnetosphere, the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft monitored the effects of solar windparticles that flow from the Sun through the solar system. Scientists augmented the data gathered during these observations with data from near- simultaneous observations collected from radio telescopes on Earth and from spacecraft orbiting Earth, namely the HST and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Researchers found that, although Jupiters magnetosphere deflects solar winds, shock waves carried by solar winds compress the magnetosphere, stimulate radio emissions from within it, and brighten auroras at the planets poles. The observations helped bolster researchers confidence in their understanding of Earths own protective magnetosphere.(NASA JPL, Solar Wind Buffets Vast Jupiter Region, Team Approach Reveals, news release, 27 February 2002; Thomas W. Hill, Magnetic Moments at Jupiter, Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 965966.)
NASA awarded SLI contracts to Boeing and Lockheed Martin for flight-demonstrator technologies. The flight-demonstrator contracts would support development of the future OSP, which would serve as both the transport vehicle and the escape vehicle for astronauts assigned to the ISS. NASA awarded a contract valued at US$301 million (including options through 2006) to Boeings Phantom Works Division, to continue developing its X-37 test vehicle. The purpose of the X-37 was to test technologies that, eventually, NASA could use in the OSP. NASA awarded another contract worth US$53 million (including options through 2006) to Lockheed Martin, to develop a reusable, launchpad-abort demonstrator. The demonstrator, an escape module capable of recognizing problems and evacuating crew within seconds, would assist crews to escape emergencies occurring on the launchpad.(NASA, NASA Awards Contracts for Flight Demonstrators, news release c02-gg, 20 November 2002; Chris Kidler, NASA Awards X-37 Contracts, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 November 2002.)
Analyzing observations of the dwarf galaxy NGC 1569, a group of astronomers led by Crystal L. Martin of the University of California Santa Barbara found the first evidence that such galaxies produce most of the heavy elements in the universe. Heavy elements, defined as all elements other than hydrogen and helium, are essential for planet formation and can strongly influence astronomical phenomena such as the rate of galaxy formation. Scientists had theorized that, during the early development of the universe, heavy elements emanating from dwarf galaxies played a dominant role in enriching the intergalactic gas that formed other galaxies. Data from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory enabled Martin and her team to test this idea. They found that NGC 1569 emitted large quantities of heavy elements in extremely hot x-ray winds, the first direct evidence of metal-enriched winds from dwarf galaxies. The researchers noted that the findings left open the question of whether or not dwarf galaxies or other galaxies dominate the intergalactic metallic enrichment process.(NASA, Dwarf Galaxies Give Universe a Breath of Fresh Oxygen, news release 02-134, 23 July 2002; Crystal L. Martin, Henry A. Kobulnicky, and Timothy M. Heckman, The Metal Content of Dwarf Starburst Winds: Results from Chandra Observations of NGC 1569, Astrophysical Journal 574, no. 2 (1 August 2002): 663692.)
NASA announced the extension of its existing six-year contract with Lockheed Martin Space Systems to build 35 super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle program. The modified agreement extended the contract to September 2008, adding US$341 million to the original contract of US$1.15 billion, which NASA had awarded to Lockheed Martin in October 2000. Under the contract, Lockheed Martin would construct, test, and deliver the tanks; maintain and operate NASAs Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans; and provide services at NASAs KSC and its MSFC. Furthermore, under the terms of the extension, Lockheed Martin agreed to provide at least six tanks per year, instead of the eight tanks per year stipulated in the original agreement. (NASA, NASA Extends Shuttle External Tank Contract with Lockheed Martin to September 2008, news release c02-m, 12 June 2002.)
Burton I. Edelson, who influenced NASAs space science and Earth science programs, died at the age of 75. Edelson had served as NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Science and
Using images from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists found evidence that an ancient eruption had burst through a cluster of galaxies, which could explain why those galaxies act like massive magnetic fields. Scientists believed that the universes largest known structures bounded by gravitycalled galaxy clustersmight be the source of highly energetic and recurring explosions, which cause the clusters to behave like huge cosmic magnets. Chandras images of the galaxy cluster Abell 2597 had revealed a cloud of hot gas with two dark circular cavities called ghost cavities, containing little x-ray or radio emissions. The images suggested that powerful explosions around a black hole in the clusters center might have occurred when these ghost cavities expelled material from the black holes vicinity, creating gaps in the clusters hot gas. Scientists believed that these cavities might eventually move to the edge of the cluster, similar to the movement of air bubbles to the surface of water, thereby transporting magnetic fields to the cluster gas. The images suggested that these explosions are recurring. If the recurring explosions continue to create more cavities, this could explain the strong magnetic field of the extremely hot gas throughout the cluster.(NASA, Chandra Finds Ghosts of Eruption in Galaxy Cluster, news release 02-02, 8 January 2002.)
The Space Shuttle Competitive Source Task Force released its final report on the potential for private-sector operation of the Shuttle program. NASA had commissioned the Task Force to analyze the roles of NASA and its contractors with regard to Space Shuttle operations. More specifically, the Task Force had assessed various scenarios in which NASA would focus primarily on spaceflight research and development, outsourcing to the private sector the operation of the planned replacements of the Shuttles for routine transit to low Earth orbit. The Task Force had concluded that, although NASA faced numerous challenges to competitive sourcing for the Shuttle program, it should pursue some form of this option. Moreover, the panel suggested that the most likely scenario for successful private-sector involvement in the Shuttle program would not involve private operation of the program, but rather a transfer of program assets to private entities at highly deflated prices. Another option would entail the restructuring of existing contracts, perhaps taking steps to expand the pool of program suppliers beyond the existing duopoly of Boeing and Lockheed Martin. In addition, as a first step to privatization, NASA could establish a space authority to operate the Shuttle, as well as future human transportation vehicles.(Space Shuttle Competitive Sourcing Task Force, Alternative Trajectories: Options for Competitive Sourcing of the Space Shuttle Program (Final Report, Science and Technology Policy Institute, Rand Corporation, Arlington, VA, December 2002), http://www.rand.org/scitech/stpi/NASA/index.html (accessed 30 December 2009).)
NASA announced an agreement with the National Institute of Aerospace Associates (NIAA), an organization of universities and nonprofit organizations engaged in aerospace research, to create the National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) at NASAs LaRC. NASA described the agreement with NIAA as a long-term commitment to expand its collaboration with universities, industry, and other entities. The new NIA would host advanced aerospace and atmospheric research and the development of related technologies, offering graduate degrees in engineering and science, facilitating the growth of new business opportunities, and stimulating the commercialization of new intellectual property. The basic five-year cooperative agreement was valued at US$69 million, and the contracts total value could increase to US$379 million with the acceptance of three five-year options.(NASA, NASA Selects Corporation To Lead Innovative Research Institute, news release c02-aa, 26 September 2002.)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASAs SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the One NASA initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASAs various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASAs MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFCs Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASAs KSC.(NASA, NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director, news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, STS-112: Extending the Space Stations Backbone, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of two proposals for space missions for its Earth System Science Pathfinder small-satellite program, developed to research Earths carbon cycle and the relationship of climate change and oceans. Specifically, the selected proposals would support the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO), which would provide global measurements of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and the Aquarius mission, which would map salt concentrations on oceans surfaces to learn how they affect ocean circulation and global heat redistribution. NASA planned to provide up to US$175 million for each of the two proposals selected for the program. NASA appointed David Crisp of JPL as Principal Investigator for the OCO mission and Chester J. Chet Koblinsky of GSFC as Principal Investigator for the Aquarius mission. NASA had numerous university, corporate, and international collaborators for both missions, including the Argentine Space Program, a significant partner in the Aquarius mission.
A combined U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin crew engaged in the first flight of a C-5 Galaxy modified under the Avionics Modernization Program (AMP). AMP was the first phase of an overall C-5 modernization program to upgrade the planes communications, navigation, and air-traffic-control surveillance equipment. The programs objectives were to improve the C-5s reliability and to satisfy emerging air-traffic-management requirements, so that the C-5 would be able to operate in global airspace without restrictions. During the 5-hour test flight, the crew demonstrated the crafts basic flying qualities and navigational system, verified new primary flight displays, and engaged in initial testing of stability-augmentation operations. Lockheed Martin planned to introduce additional components of the new, automatic flight-control system and the Global Air Traffic Managementcompliant systems. After completing installation of the AMP components, Lockheed Martin planned to commence the second phase of the C-5 modernization, known as the Reliability Enhancement and Re-engining Program.(Lockheed Martin, Initial C-5 Upgraded Under the Avionics Modernization Program Makes Its First Flight, news release, 23 December 2002, http: //www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ InitialC5UpgradedUnderAvionicsModer.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Knight and Christopher Bolkcom, Strategic Airlift Modernization: Analysis of C-5 Modernization and C-17 Acquisition Issues, (report, Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC, 15 April 2008), CRS-4CRS-5.)
NASAs KSC awarded the Boeing Company the checkout, assembly, and payload-processing services (CAPPS) contract for the Space Shuttle and the EELV. The CAPPS contract had a four- year base period of performance valued at US$332 million. In addition, the contract had two three-year extension options, which could increase the contracts total value to US$810 million. Under the contract, Boeing would perform payload-processing tasks, such as ensuring that payloads were compatible with launch vehicles and loading payloads into launch vehicles. Boeing had also held KSCs previous payload-processing agreement, called the payload ground- operations contract.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Wins Major Space Payload Processing Contract, news release, 29 August 2002. 86)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HSTs successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescopes main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universes creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer, news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
NASA launched Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) on a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. NASA scientists had created CONTOURscheduled to make close
Administrator Sean OKeefe selected astronaut Shannon W. Lucid as NASAs Chief Scientist. In this post, Lucid became responsible for ensuring that NASAs programs were of scientific merit. At the time of the selection, Lucid was a spacecraft communicator supporting the Space Shuttle and ISS missions. A veteran of five Space Shuttle flights, Lucid had been one of the first six women selected to become an astronaut and the only woman awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. Lucid replaced Kathie L. Olsen, who had occupied the position since May 1999. Olsen had accepted an appointment as the Associate Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President.(NASA, NASA Astronaut, Dr. Shannon Lucid, Selected as Chief Scientist, news release 02-27, 12 February 2002.)
Administrator Sean OKeefe testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology concerning NASAs FY 2003 budget. Administrator OKeefe also reported a recent independent audit of NASAs finances, which NASA planned to release to the public the next day. According to newspaper reports, the lawmakers questioned OKeefe in a tone that was frequently skeptical and even critical. At the time of OKeefes testimony, NASA was already under public scrutiny regarding its budget overruns and financial accounting procedures, and critics had proposed reductions in its budget for human space travel.(Karen Masterson, Skeptical Lawmakers Quiz NASA Chief About Budget, Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2002.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space began hearings on legislation to reauthorize NASA programs. Subcommittee chairman Ron Wyden (DOR) expressed concern about the agencys financial management, particularly cost overruns for the ISS. He also urged NASA to maintain the excellence of the Shuttle program while research continued on a next-generation space vehicle. Members of the subcommittee heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, who addressed them for the first time, and from William F. Readdy, Deputy Associate Administrator of the NASA Office of Space Flight. The members of the subcommittee questioned OKeefe about his vision for NASA and his plans to reduce NASAs budget by ending particular programs. In his prepared statement, OKeefe discussed the status of the ISS and Space Shuttle programs.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, NASA Reauthorization, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 May 2002; Karen Masterson, JSC Mission May Hit Detour, Houston Chronicle, 9 May 2002.)
The Russian Space Agency notified NASA that it had abandoned its plan to transport singer Lance Bass of the popular music group N Sync to the ISS. Television producers had intended to sponsor Bass, featuring him in a television documentary about his trip to the ISS. However, the sponsors had failed to raise the estimated US$20 million needed to cover the singers fare. Therefore, Russian officials had decided to withdraw Bass as a member of the Soyuz crew scheduled to leave for the ISS on 28 October 2002. If the 23-year-old Bass had gone on the Soyuz mission, he would have become the youngest person ever to travel in space, as well as the third space tourist.(Marcia Dunn, Its Official: Russia Faxes NASA To Confirm Bass off Space Flight, Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of the instrument and science teams that would provide instruments for NASAs Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST), the intended successor of the HST. The team selected to provide the primary near-infrared science camera comprised engineers and scientists from the project teams leader, the University of Arizona at Tucson, as well as from Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center, EMS Technologies of Canada, and COM DEV Limited, also of Canada. The team selected to build the NGSTs mid-infrared instrument included engineers and scientists from NASAs JPL, NASAs Ames Research Center (ARC), ESA, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the University of Arizona at Tucson. In addition to the principal instrument scientists, NASA had selected scientists to serve on the NGST Science Working Group, including Heidi B. Hammel, Simon Lilly, Jonathan Lunine, Mark McCaughrean, Massimo Stiavelli, and Rogier Windhorst.(NASA, NASA Selects Instruments and Science Team for Next Generation Space Telescope, news release 02- 109, 10 June 2002.)
Astronomers used images from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe, for the first time, the life cycles of x-ray jets ejected from a black hole. Scientists considered x-ray jets an extremely important phenomenon to understand, because they could reveal information about the dynamics of matter that accumulates in intense gravitational fields. From 1998 to 2002, the two satellites had collected the images showing the progressive changes of two jets of high-energy particles emitted from a black hole, microquasar XTE J1550- 564. The images revealed that the jets had initially traveled at nearly half the speed of light, later decelerating and eventually disappearing. Astronomers were surprised to discover that the x-ray jet farthest from Earth was three times brighter than the jet that traveled closer to Earth, a finding that was not explained by existing models of x-ray jets.(NASA, Chandra Discovers the History of Black Hole X-ray Jets, news release 02-189, 3 October 2002; S. Corbel et al., Large-Scale, Decelerating, Relativistic X-ray Jets from the Microquasar XTE J1550-564, Science n.s. 298, no. 5591 (4 October 2002): 196199.)
NASAs Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) reentered Earths atmosphere nearly 10 years after its launch on 7 July 1992. NASA had initially planned for the spacecraft to operate for only three years but had extended the EUVEs scientific mission twice, ending operations on 26 January 2001. The EUVE did not have an on-board propulsion system, and NASA scientists had not designed it to survive reentry intact. Thus, in February 2001, mission engineers had left the spacecraft in a decaying orbit, so that it would destruct upon reentering Earths atmosphere. The EUVE, the first astrophysics mission to explore the extreme ultraviolet spectrum (the energy range between 70 and 760 A), had examined nearly 1,000 sources near Earth, including three-dozen objects outside of the Milky Way Galaxy.
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced its first successful launch of a satellite into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. ISRO launched METSAT, a meteorological satellite, from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India, using it own rocket, the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The new version of the PSLV reflected a significant enhancement of the rockets capabilities and a substantial improvement in ISROs overall launch capabilities. Previous versions of the PSLV had been capable of placing 900- kilogram (2,000-pound) satellites in a 900-kilometer (560-mile), polar Sunsynchronous orbit, whereas the PSLV-C4 had placed the 1,055-kilogram (2,325-pound) METSAT in a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee (the farthest point from Earth) of 34,700 kilometers (21,600 miles).(ISRO, PSLV-C4 Launch SuccessfulPlaces METSAT in Orbit, news release, 12 September 2002, http://www.isro.org/pressrelease/Sep13_2002.htm (accessed 3 October 2008); Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
167Inside Wallops, Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees, 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement, news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy, news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad OConnor, Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader, New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
G. Scott Hubbard replaced Henry McDonald as Director of NASAs ARC. Hubbard, ARCs Deputy Director of Research at the time of the appointment, had served in a number of management roles at the Center since the beginning of his career with NASA in 1987. In addition, he had helped establish NASAs Astrobiology Institute at ARC and had originated the Mars Pathfinder program. McDonald, who had served as Director of ARC from 1996 to 2002, had left the Center to become a professor of computational engineering at the University of Tennessee in Chattanooga.(NASA History Division, NASA Center Directors, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 3 October 2008); NASA ARC, G. Scott Hubbard Named NASA Ames Research Center Director, news release 02-103AR, 19 September 2002.)
NASA scientists published research challenging prominent theories about the growth of the gravitational field at Earths equator, a phenomenon that began in 1998. Researchers had suggested that atmospheric change, or the melting of glaciers and polar ice, had caused a geographic shift in the planets gravitational field, with a decline in upper latitudes and a corresponding increase in lower latitudes. However, NASA scientists Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao discovered that the quantity, rate, and timing of atmospheric change and ice melt did not correspond to the magnitude and rate of gravitational shift. Based on their analysis of data that 10 satellites had acquired between 1979 and 2002, Cox and Chao found a more probable explanation of this phenomenon. The data suggested that the oceans had been rapidly transporting substantial quantities of water and ice from higher to lower latitudes, thereby shifting Earths mass and causing a corresponding alteration in the planets gravitational field from the higher to the lower latitudes. The scientists noted, however, that additional data and analysis were necessary to determine whether their interpretation of the data was correct.(NASA, Satellites Reveal a Mystery of Large Change in Earths Gravity Field, news release 02-147, 1 August 2002; Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao, Detection of Large-Scale Mass Redistribution in the Terrestrial System Since 1998, Science 297, no. 5582 (2 August 2002): 831833.)
In an article in the journal Nature, astronomers at ESA reported that they had found evidence indicating which specific type of stellar object produces gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), the universes most energetic phenomena. Prevailing hypotheses had posited that, either GRBs originate from the merger of two neutron stars, or they form from the collapse of one massive star, but researchers had discovered no conclusive proof to support either of these ideas. However, based on their analysis of the speed, temperature, and chemical elements of a GRB that had occurred on 11 December 2001, ESA astronomers found evidence supporting the latter hypothesis. The research team examined two sequential observations of the GRB, both taken by ESA satellites: the BeppoSAX satellite had made the first observation, and, nearly 11 hours later, the XMM-Newton satellite had made the second. The team had found large quantities of argon, calcium, magnesium, silicon, and sulphur, moving at 1/10th the speed of light. These findings supported the idea that a supernova explosion from a single massive star produces GRBs. If the merger of two neutron stars had produced the burst, astronomers would have expected the stars to produce large amounts of elements other than those observedparticularly ironand to emit those elements at a slower velocity.(J. N. Reeves et al., The Signature of Supernova Ejecta in the X-ray Afterglow of the -ray Burst 011211, Nature 416, no. 6880 (4 April 2002): 512515; ESA, ESAs X-ray Space Telescope Proves Supernovae Can Cause Mysterious Gamma-Ray Bursts, ESA news release 22-2002, 4 April 2002.)
NASA engineers completed a successful demonstration of a solar-powered UAV for remote- sensing applications. Engineers with NASAs Suborbital Airborne Sciences programs had guided the Pathfinder-Plus UAV throughout a flight lasting nearly 4 hours, during which the aircraft had captured more than 300 high-resolution digital images of a coffee plantation on the Hawaiian island of Kauai. NASA had developed the UAV for Earth science research, but project engineers described the flight demonstration as evidence that their integration of the UAV technology with decision-support systems would have additional practical applications. For example, project engineers hoped that the UAV technology might eventually enable farmers and ranchers to produce harvests more effectively and efficiently. The solar-powered UAV had a ground-controlled aerial imaging system. In fact, an undergraduate student nearly 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) away at California State University in Monterey Bay controlled one of the crafts digital cameras during the demonstration.(NASA, NASA Mission Demonstrates Practical Use of UAV Technology, news release 02-200, 16 October 2002.)
Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 landed at NASAs KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:32 a.m. (EST). During the 11-day mission, the Shuttle crew had conducted five spacewalks and performed several significant modifications of the HST, including the installation of an ACS and an experimental cryocooler, which had restored the operation of the NICMOS. The missions total duration was 10 days, 22 hours, and 11 minutes.(NASA, STS-109, http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
Lockheed Martin, NASA, and the state of Mississippi opened the Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center at NASAs SSC. Officials planned for the 220,000-square-foot (20,440-square-meter) facility to commence operations by the end of 2002. Lockheed Martin announced that its new facility would include a center for production of propulsion and thermal systems for spacecraft, as well as an integrated metrology center. The company also announced that it would provide engineering and manufacturing services at the facility. Lockheed Martin officials cited the location of NASAs Center of Excellence for propulsion testing at SSC as a critical factor in their decision to consolidate the companys capabilities at the single facility.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center Opens Doors at John C. Stennis Space Center, MS, news release, 5 August 2002, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ LockheedMartinMississippiSpaceTechn.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry released its final report on the industrys health and future well-being. President George W. Bush had created the Commission, composed of aerospace industry executives, lawyers, and policy analysts, to analyze the U.S. aerospace industrys stability, financial health, and relationship to national security. The Commission had concluded that the United States should establish a national aerospace policy; create a government-wide framework to implement that policy; reduce legal and regulatory barriers, to enable the industry to grow and become more internationally competitive; and increase investments in the nations aerospace industrial base, infrastructure, personnel, and long-term research. In addition, the Commissions report provided numerous recommendations to the industry concerning how to meet those objectives, such as increasing and sustaining public and private investment in the aerospace industry and aerospace technologies, transforming the nations air transportation system, and enhancing the defense industrial base.(Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry, Final Report (Arlington, VA, November 2002); The Boeing Company, Boeing Supports Recommendations of U.S. Aerospace Commission, news release, 18 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021118a.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aquas primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, Aqua Launched To Study Earths Water Cycle, news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, NASA To View Interaction of Earths Water and Climate, New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASAs KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle programs inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASAs effort to absorb President George W. Bushs proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications, news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida, Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
Crew of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 finished installing several new instruments on the 12- year-old HST and sent the observatory back into orbit. During a series of five spacewalks conducted in as many days, Columbias crew had installed a new power-shunting unit, an improved solar panel, and a cooling unit that would restore the Near-Infrared Camera and Multi- Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) to operational status. In addition, Columbias crew had installed a new main camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), which NASA had designed to give the telescope unprecedented ability to observe distant galaxies and other objects.(Warren E. Leary, Hubble Returning to Mission Able To Peer Deeper Into Space, New York Times, 10 March 2002.)
Astronomer Riccardo Giacconi received the Nobel Prize in physics for research on cosmic x-ray radiation. Giacconis projects had included NASA-funded research leading to his discovery of cosmic x-ray sources. A professor at Johns Hopkins University, Giacconi had been the first scientist to discover a source of x-rays outside Earths solar system and the first to prove that the universe contained background radiation of x-ray light. In addition, many astronomers believed that x-ray sources Giacconi had discovered contained black holes. Giacconi had also been responsible for the conception and design of the first x-ray satellite and the first operating x-ray telescope. Together with Harvey Tananbaum, he had proposed the design of the x-ray telescope that eventually became NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory. Moreover, Giacconi had been the first Director of the Hubble Space Telescope Science Institute and the Principal Investigator for the Chandra Ultra-Deep Survey, which had obtained the deepest x-ray exposures with a millionth-second observation.(NASA, Nobel Physics in Physics Awarded to Astronomer for NASA-Funded Research, news release 02-197, 8 October 2002; Nobel Foundation, Advanced Information on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2002, news release, 8 October 2002, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2002/phyadv02.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008). 306 Gwyneth K. Shaw, Military Influence To Grow at NASA, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 October 2002.)
Radar images of near-Earth asteroid 2000 DP107 revealed that it is a binary system, composed of two objects orbiting each other. The finding suggested that many near-Earth asteroids could be binaries. The images, taken by NASAs Goldstone telescope facility and the National Science Foundations Arecibo Observatory, revealed that the asteroid was not one, but two objects, a nearly 800-meter-diameter (2,625-foot-diameter) primary and an almost 300-meter-diameter (985-foot-diameter) secondary, revolving around their common center of mass. The researchers suggested that approximately 16 percent of near-Earth asteroids larger than 200 meters (655 feet) in diameter could be binary systems. In addition, the analysis suggested that binaries with similar orbits might result from a close encounter of an asteroid and a planet, in which the planets gravitational pull breaks off a portion of the asteroid. Scientists consider binary asteroids potential hazards to Earth and worthy of further study.(J. L. Margot et al., Binary Asteroids in the Near-Earth Object Population, Science 296, no. 5572 (24 May 2002): 14451448; NASA JPL, Some Asteroids Have Astronomers Seeing Double, news release, 11 April 2002.)
Scientists found that a bright blue ring of dust surrounds Earths solar system, beginning outside of Saturns orbit and extending beyond the orbit of Neptune. However, viewed from outside the solar system, this band of dust appears to surround the Sun. The discovery of the dust ring provided empirical support for the idea that this feature around a mature star indicates that the star harbors a planetary system. Therefore, researchers planning missions would be able, based on whether the star has a dust ring, to narrow down the list of which stars to study in their search for planets and planetary systems. ESA scientist Markus Landgraf had led the research team, which had made the discovery using data collected by Pioneer 10 and 11.(ESA, ESA Scientist Discovers a Way To Shortlist Stars That Might Have Planets, ESA news release SNR 1- 2002, 15 February 2002.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASAs budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASAs accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASAs FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASAs lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASAs 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASAs accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAOs auditing methodology rather than in NASAs system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, NASA Space Station Cost Limits (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
The United States launched the fifth Milstar satellite on a Titan 4B-Centaur from Cape Canaveral, Florida, completing a fleet of communications satellites designed to provide government leaders and military troops with jam-resistant transmission nearly anywhere on Earth.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002 Activities (Washington, DC, 2002), p. 114, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2002.pdf (accessed 29 July 2002); Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002: The Year in Review, NASA, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2002/yearinrev/ 02YearReview.html (accessed 23 July 2002).)
The China National Space Administrations (CNSAs) Kaituozhe 1 rocket failed during launch, for reasons that remained unclear. Kaituozhe 1 was the first of the CNSAs new all-solid-fuel, four-stage launch vehicles. CNSA and other Chinese government agencies apparently provided no information to the public about the event or about the reason the launch had failed.(Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
Astronomers from the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and the European Southern Observatory published research detailing their discovery of a diffuse emission of x-rays from a cluster of forming stars known as RCW 38. The new discovery contrasted with astronomers conventional understanding of bodies that commonly emit high-energy particles, namely supernovas and exploding stars in the intense magnetic fields surrounding neutron stars and black holes. The astronomers, using NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory, had discovered that neither type of body was evident in the RCW 38 stellar region, which is, instead, an area of active star formation. Although the scientists remained uncertain about the source of the x-rays, as well as the effects of the x-rays on the star cluster, they hypothesized that these x-rays could affect the chemistry of the bodies that would form planets around the stars in the cluster.(NASA, Young Star Cluster Found Aglow with Mysterious Cloud, news release 02-251, 18 December 2002; Scott J. Wolk et al., Discovery of Nonthermal X-ray Emission from the Embedded Massive Star-Forming Region RCW 38, Astrophysical Journal Letters 580, no. 2 (1 December 2002): L161L165.)
Using the most sensitive images ever taken by the HST, scientists found new evidence of star creation, challenging the findings of much of the existing research on the origin of the universe. Although the HST had captured images of portions of the skies that appear empty to the naked eye, the images revealed nearly 5,000 galaxies. Led by Kenneth M. Lanzetta of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, a team of scientists had examined approximately 150 of those galaxies spectroscopically, inferring from color variations their actual distance from Earth, as well as the properties of less visible light from even fainter and more distant galaxies. The scientists had also conducted spectroscopic analysis of remote quasars to measure the early universes gas density, because high gas density implies high creation rates of stars, which are the building blocks of galaxies and the birthplaces of solar systems. The new images indicated that countless stars had begun forming at a period closer to the birth of the universe than previous research had suggested. Although the HST had captured the images in 1995 and 1998, using the most advanced available technology, the findings suggested that the peak of star creation had occurred earlier than Hubbles ability to detect it. However, the scientists believed that they could date the peak of star creation to within a few hundred million years after the Big Bang.(NASA, Hubble Suggests First Stars Opened in a Blaze of Glory, news release 02-01, 8 January 2002; William Harwood, Stars May Have Brightened Infant Universe, Washington Post, 9 January 2002.)
NASA scientist Zdenek Sekanina published new findings challenging existing ideas about comets. Existing theory had posited that comets rarely break up and that, when they do, the fragmentation usually occurs in close proximity to the Sun. However, basing his research on the analysis of images taken by the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), operated jointly by NASA and ESA, Sekanina had discovered that comets fragment throughout their lifetimes, often at distances far from the Sun. Moreover, Sekanina had found that such fragmentation generally occurs in a somewhat orderly pattern, with a single comet fragmenting into clusters of smaller comets. Sekanina had analyzed a type of very small comet called a sungrazer and discovered that sungrazers are actually fragments of other comets that have broken apart during a previous encounter with the Sun. Moreover, he had found that sungrazers continue to break into pieces throughout their orbits around the Sun. Sekanina had also examined another type of comet57P/du Toit-Neujmin-Delaporte, finding that this type of comet shows the same pattern of fragmenting into smaller comets as it moves farther from the Sun.(NASA, Comets Break Up Far and Near, news release 02-158, 5 September 2002; Zdenek Sekanina, Runaway Fragmentation of Sungrazing Comets Observed with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, Astrophysical Journal 576, no. 2 (10 September 2002): 10851089.)
Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. became the eighth Director of NASAs JSC, replacing Acting Director Roy S. Estess, who resumed his position as Director of NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC). Before assuming the post, Howell had worked for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) administering its safety, reliability, and quality-assurance contract with NASA, to provide safety and mission assurance for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs.(NASA JSC, Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. Named as Johnson Space Center Director, news release J02-17, 12 February 2002.)
A team of NASA scientists using uninhabited aerial vehicles (UAVs) to research electrical storms achieved a flight-duration milestone. The research was part of the Altus Cumulus Electrification Study (ACES), a project that examined the causes of electrical storms and their effects on the planet. The ACES research team employed Altus II UAVs to study thunderstorms over Florida, capping off four weeks of research flights with the studys longest flight, lasting for 6 hours and 32 minutes and monitoring four successive thunderstorms. General Atomics Aeronautical Systems had built the Altus II, which could fly near thunderstorms for hours, at altitudes of up to 65,000 feet.(NASA MSFC, National Space Science and Technology Center, NASA Lightning Study Achieves Flight- Duration Milestone, Monitoring Four Storms in Single Mission, news release N02-011, 23 August 2002.)
Using data gathered by NASAs Mars Odyssey spacecraft, scientists discovered direct evidence of water ice on Mars. NASA scientists were using the Odyssey to measure and map soils in Marss polar regions when the spacecrafts gamma-ray spectrometer detected hydrogen, indicating the presence of substantial, subsurface water ice in the upper meter of soil in a region surrounding Marss south pole. Scientists had already suspected that Mars possessed large quantities of water near its surface, but the Odysseys new information was the first direct evidence supporting this hypothesis. Scientists also found that large areas in Marss low and middle latitudes contained slightly enhanced amounts of hydrogen. However, their report did not indicate whether the hydrogen was in the form of water ice or chemically bound to minerals in the soil.(NASA, Odyssey Finds Water Ice in Abundance Under Marss Surface, news release 02-99, 28 May 2002.)
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellites thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. governments research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket, Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin, news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Researchers using data from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory found a substantial, pulsating source of x-rays in Jupiters atmosphere near the planets north magnetic pole. Existing theories could not explain either the pulsations or the location of the x-ray source. Scientists had posited that energetic oxygen and sulfur ions steadily precipitate from Jupiters inner magnetosphere, entering the planets polar regions and producing a northern aurora of x-rays. However, images from Chandra revealed that most of Jupiters northern auroral x-rays originate at latitudes that only ions precipitating from Jupiters outer magnetosphere could reach. In addition, researchers found that the hot-spot source of the x-rays was pulsating at 45-minute intervals, contradicting scientists theory that the x-ray emissions originate from a steady precipitation of ions in the inner magnetosphere. Although this discovery invalidated previous theories, scientists were not yet able to explain the process they had observed. Specifically, according to Chandras measurements, the researchers found insufficient energetic oxygen and sulfur ions within the required distance of the ion sourceat least 30 times Jupiters radiusto account for the observed x-ray emissions.(NASA, Jupiter Hot Spot Makes Trouble for Theory, news release 02-34, 28 February 2002; G. R. Gladstone et al., A Pulsating Auroral X-ray Hot Spot on Jupiter, Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 10001003.)
NASA scientists Eric J. Rignot and Robert H. Thomas published results of one of the most detailed and widespread examinations of polar ice sheets ever performed. Researchers had already determined that changes in the thickness of polar ice correlated with changes in sea level but disagreed about the extent to which the thickness of the ice sheets was changing. Analyzing recent remote-sensing measurements of ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica, Rignot and Thomas discovered that the thickness of the ice sheets was changing more rapidly than previously thought. Although the data was indeterminate concerning changes in some parts of the ice sheets, Rignot and Thomas found clear evidence that large regions of the polar ice sheets were rapidly changing, with accumulation of ice in some areas and attrition in others. Despite such variations, the scientists found that, overall, the major polar ice sheets were losing mass. Specifically, Greenlands ice sheet was losing 50 cubic kilometers (12 cubic miles) of mass annually, and the West Antarctic ice sheet appeared to be losing nearly 48 cubic kilometers (11.5 cubic miles) of mass per year.(NASA JPL, NASA Study Finds Rapid Changes in Earths Polar Ice Sheets, news release, 30 August 2002; Eric Rignot and Robert H. Thomas, Mass Balance of Polar Ice Sheets, Science 297, no. 5586 (30 August 2002): 1502 1506.)
In an article in the journal Nature, scientists reported that they had used images from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory to reveal how objects in the most active area of the Milky Way Galaxy affect each other and other parts of the galaxy. The scientists had used 30 separate images from Chandra to construct a montage of the Milky Ways central regions, revealing hundreds of white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes, shrouded by the extremely hot gas around a massive black hole. The researchers found that emissions from highly ionized iron, previously attributed to diffuse hot gas, had actually originated from discrete sources in the Milky Ways white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes. The findings helped clarify the relative contributions of diffuse and discrete sources of x-rays emitted from the galaxy.(NASA, Chandra Takes In Bright Lights, Big City of Milky Way, news release 02-03, 9 January 2002; Q. D. Wang, E. V. Gotthelf, and C. C. Lang, A Faint Discrete Source Origin for the Highly Ionized Iron Emission from the Galactic Centre Region, Nature 415, no. 6868 (10 January 2002): 148150.)
President George W. Bush signed National Security Presidential Directive-15 (NSPD-15), initiating a review of all U.S. space policies. According to NSPD-15, the reviews purpose was to update the countrys National Space Policylast revised in 1996to better address domestic and international developments affecting the nations space capabilities. The review provided recommendations in three specific areas: commercial remote sensing and foreign access to remote-sensing space capabilities; space transportation policy; and existing national policy statements related to space activities. The National Security Council (NSC) was to chair the review with support from the Office of Science and Technology Policy. In addition, the NSC had established the Space Policy Coordinating Committee (Space PCC), which would include representatives from federal agencies with roles in the formation of U.S. space policy, such as the International Trade Administration and NOAA.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 43; U.S. National Security Professional Development Integration Office, National Space Policy Review: Fact Sheet (report, National Security Presidential Directive/NSPD-15, Arlington, VA, 2002), http://www.nspd.gov/ rawmedia_repository/4ff02489171c66d9a66ae29824384025.pdf (accessed 18 August 2008).)
A Russian Space Agency launch failed, when an uncrewed Soyuz-U rocket exploded after the rockets engine automatically shut down, 29 seconds after liftoff from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The rocket was carrying a Foton-M1 spacecraft with 44 microgravity experiments that ESA, Japan, Russia, and the United States had intended for the ISS. ESA stated that it planned to rebuild the Foton-M1 spacecraft for a later launch.(ESA, Foton, http://www.spaceflight.esa.int/users/index.cfm?act=default.page&level=11&page=facfoton (accessed 6 January 2009); Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TMA-1 from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 8:11 a.m., local time10:11 p.m. (EST). The launch was officially designated ISS Mission 5S. Soyuz TMA-1 was the first of a newly modified version of the Soyuz spacecraft, offering improved safety features and accommodation for crew members of a larger range of sizes. In addition, Soyuz TMA-1 was an automatic passenger craft intended to replace Soyuz TM- 34 as the ISSs escape craft. The Russian Space Agency had been sending Soyuz vehicles to the ISS every six months as CRVs for scientists residing on the ISS. Soyuz TMA-1s crew consisted of Commander Sergei V. Zalyotin and two crew members, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov and Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne. The missions primary purpose was to provide a CRV for the ISS; however, Soyuz TMA-1s crew also planned to conduct scientific experiments with the ISS Expedition 5 members. ISS crew would conduct most of these experiments under a commercial contract between Russia and ESA.(Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002; NASA Mission Control Center, Report #48, http://quest.nasa.gov/ news/space/2002/10-29a.txt (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, Major Component of Space Station Is Attached, New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
NASAs KSC launched the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) on a Pegasus XL rocket from a Lockheed L-1011 aircraft. The purpose of HESSIs two-year mission was to analyze particle acceleration and explosive energy released in solar flares, using imaging and spectroscopic instruments. Solar flares can release in a few minutes, or even just a few seconds, an amount of energy nearly equal to that released by the explosion of 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT, disrupting communications satellites and power grids. Scientists at the University of California at Berkeley, which would manage the US$85 million mission, had designed the 645-pound (290-kilogram) probe.(Houston Chronicle, New NASA Probe To Analyze High-Energy Flares from Sun, 5 February 2002; Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
Scientists obtained the first measurements ever taken of the dimensions and compositional matter of a neutron star, providing important new information about the fundamental nature of matter and energy. Using ESAs XMM-Newton space telescope, Jean Cottam of NASAs GSFC and other researchers captured the first measurements of the gravitational redshift of a neutron star. Gravitational redshift occurs when an intense gravitational field such as that of a neutron star warps light or other electromagnetic radiation. Thus, by calculating the stars redshift, the scientists were able to estimate its gravity, compositional material, and other characteristics. The researchers found that the star EXO 0748-676 is likely composed of normal nuclear matter, as scientists had previously theorized. The researchers observations regarding neutron stars, specifically, and matter and energy, generally, occurred under conditions that scientists are unable to replicate on Earth. The researchers thought that the findings might reveal new information about the creation of the universe, because, theoretically, the temperature and pressure of neutron stars is similar to the temperature and pressure that was present just one second after the Big Bang.(ESA, XMM-Newton Closes In on Spaces Exotic Matter, ESA news release 69-2002, 6 November 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAK117708D_index_0.html (accessed 2 February 2010); NASA, Exotic Innards of a Neutron Star Revealed in a Series of Explosions, news release 02-214, 6 November 2002; Jean Cottam, Frederik Paerels, and Mariano Mendez, Gravitationally Redshifted Absorption Lines in the X-ray Burst Spectra of a Neutron Star, Nature 420, no. 6911 (7 November 2002): 5154.)
Boeing and the U.S. Air Force signed a US$9.7 billion contract for 60 C-17 Globemaster III transport aircraft. The contract, an extension of previous agreements between the Air Force and Boeing, would increase the number of C-17s in the Air Force fleet to 180. The Air Force had been using C-17s to transport personnel, equipment, and supplies in support of combat and humanitarian missions.(The Boeing Company, Boeing and U.S. Air Force Sign $9.7 Billion C-17 Contract, news release, 15 August 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020815m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
The ReMAP Task Force of NASAs Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) presented its final report to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA had charged the ReMAP Task Force with evaluating the research productivity and priorities of NASAs OBPR and with providing a framework for prioritizing a research program for the OBPR and the ISS. ReMAPs 173-page report identified two major goals of these programs: research enabling human exploration of space and basic research of intrinsic scientific interest. In addition, the report made several recommendations, for example, that NASA increase the ISSs facilities and equipment for scientific research, as well as the amount of time that ISS crew members dedicated to scientific operations. The report stated that, if NASA did not make these and other enhancements to the ISS, then NASA should cease to characterize the ISS as a science driven program.(NASA ReMAP Task Force, Report by the NASA Biological and Physical Research Maximization and Prioritization (ReMAP) Task Force to the NASA Advisory Council (report, Washington, DC, August 2002).)
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency awarded the Boeing Company a contract to design a fuel cellbased propulsion system for a pilotless, ultra-long-endurance UAV. According to Boeing, the UAVs propulsion system would incorporate existing automotivefuel cell technology, to create a vehicle with a variety of commercial and military applications.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Receives Contract for UAV Advanced Propulsion System, news release, 3 September 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020903m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
In a meeting with reporters, newly appointed NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe emphasized that, although he wanted NASA to remain at the forefront of science and technology, he also wanted to address NASAs financial and management problems. OKeefe, who had received the U.S. Senates confirmation on 20 December 2001, said he would spend the next few months learning about NASA. Explaining that he wanted both to refocus NASA and to keep it within its budget, OKeefe did not rule out the possibility of closing field centers and laying off employees to achieve his objectives. However, he stressed that he considered the budgetary problems of the ISS his immediate concern, and that he would first devote his attention to implementing the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation Task Forces (IMCEs) recommendation to scale back the ISS, at least temporarily, to reduce costs.(Warren E. Leary, New NASA Administrator Says Money Troubles Are Solvable, New York Times, 9 January 2002; William Harwood, Panel Urges Space Station Reforms, Washington Post, 3 November 2001; NASA, People: Former NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/AN_Feature_Administrator.html (accessed 31 July 2008).)
Two separate teams of astronomers reported that NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST had observed two stars, possibly composed of a form of matter unknown to scientists. Researchers examining data from Chandra and the HST had noted that the neutron star RX J1856.53754 was far smaller than expected and, therefore, had concluded that the star might be composed, not of neutrons, but of quarkscomponents of protons and neutrons that scientists had never before observed outside of the nucleus of an atom in laboratories on Earth. Another team of astronomers had analyzed Chandras observations of neutron star 3C 58 and had found that the stars temperature was less than 1,000,000C (1,800,032F), a far lower temperature than scientists would expect for a star composed of pure neutrons. Thus, that star also appeared to be composed, either of quarks, or of another form of matter unknown to scientists.(NASA, Cosmic X-rays Reveal Evidence for New Form of Matter, news release 02-65, 10 April 2002; Jeremy J. Drake, Is RX J1856.5-3754 a Quark Star? Astrophysical Journal 572, no. 2 (20 June 2002): 9961001; Patrick O. Slane, David J. Hefland, and Stephen S. Murray, New Constraints on Neutron Star Cooling from Chandra Observations of 3C 58, Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 1 (20 May 2002): L45L49.)
In an article published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters, scientists using data from NASAs high-altitude research balloon reported a discovery that, potentially, could improve the research methodology for studying gases that contribute to ozone-layer depletion. Although scientists already knew that reactive hydrogen gases destroy stratospheric ozone and were able to detect hydrogen peroxide from space, they had problems with computer models used to analyze hydrogen-peroxide concentration in the atmosphere. However, in the reported study, researchers funded by NASAs Earth Science Enterprise had compared a new predicted rate of hydrogenperoxide formation with the levels of the gas measured by two instruments on board NASAs high-altitude research balloons. The new data had revealed a high degree of agreement between the actual and the predicted measurements. The researchers noted that, although their newly discovered rate of hydrogen-peroxide formation had no appreciable impact on rates of stratospheric ozone loss, they expected the findings would help to analyze the deleterious effects on Earths ozone of other, less easily measured, hydrogen gases.(NASA JPL, NASA Study Leads to Better Understanding of Ozone Depletion, news release, 9 May 2002; L. E. Christensen et al., Kinetics of HO2 + HO2  H2O2: Implications for Stratospheric H2O2, Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 9 (7 May 2002): 1299.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although OKeefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
ESA launched the International Gamma Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL) observatory from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 10:41 a.m., local time12:41 a.m. (EST). ESA had designed the satellite, and Italys Alenia Spazio had developed it, with support from more than 30 European firms. INTEGRAL would study dense objects that are sources of high-energy radiation, such as neutron stars and black holes. Project scientists hoped that INTEGRAL would produce images that would help confirm the presence of black holes at the center of galaxies, beginning with the Milky Way. INTEGRAL had two main instruments for analyzing gamma-ray sources: the Spectrometer on INTEGRAL, or SPI spectrometer, and the Imager on Board the INTEGRAL Satellite, or IBIS imager. The spectrometer and imager had an extremely sharp angular resolution, enabling them to conduct spectral analyses with an energy resolution 40 times better than that provided by any previous satellite. INTEGRAL also carried an x-ray imager and a charged-coupled device (CCD) imager that operated within the visible spectrum waveband. Using the combined data from the four instruments, project scientists would be able to make simultaneous observations of high-energy phenomena, from visible light to gamma rays.(ESA, Europe Opens a Window onto a Violent Universe, ESA news release 66-2002, 17 October 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAKXQTHN6D_index.0.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
Scientists with NASAs JPL made contact with Pioneer 10, the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. NASA scientists had last made contact with the space probe on 9 July 2001 but had lost contact with Pioneer 10 from August 2000 to April 2001. Pioneer 10, launched on 2 March 1972, had been the first spacecraft to pass through an asteroid belt, the first to make direct observations of Jupiter, and in 1983, became the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. After Pioneer 10s mission had ended on 31 March 1997, scientists with JPLs Deep Space Network had continued to track the spacecrafts signal as part of a study of communications technology. In addition, NASA had used the probe for training flight controllers in the acquisition of radio signals from space.(NASA, An Early NASA Pioneer Still on the Job in Deep Space, news release 02-44, 4 March 2002.)
The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space, 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness, Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
NASA announced the successful completion of a series of engine and parachute tests, clearing the way for NASA to carry out integrated Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) test flights to support its Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. In November and December 2003, engineers had conducted a series of 14 hot-fire tests of a 50,000-pound-thrust (22,680-kilogram-thrust) RS-88 rocket engine, resulting in a total of 55 seconds of successful engine operation. The Rocketdyne Propulsion Power unit of the Boeing Company had designed and built the engine. On 9 December 2003, engineers had tested the parachutes at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Grounds in Yuma, Arizona, verifying the function, performance, and stability of an 80-foot (24.38-meter) drogue parachute and of four 156-foot (47.55-meter) main parachutes. Testers had dropped a 12.5-ton (11.34-tonne or 11,340-kilogram) pallet from 10,000 feet (3,048 meters) to simulate the size and weight of a vehicle and crew. The pallet had descended to a soft landing under nearly two acres of parachutes.(NASA, Engine, Parachute Tests Pave Way for Launch Escape System, news release 03-417, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03417_escape_system.html (accessed 23 March 2003). 573 Chris Kridler, Beagle 2 On Its Own, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 20 December 2003.)
The ISS marked its five-year anniversary in space. Since the Russian Zarya control module had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 20 November 1998, the ISS had grown from an uninhabited module to a permanently staffed research facility the size of a three- bedroom house. After five years, the ISS was not completely constructedNASA was preparing more than 80 tons (72,575 kilograms or 72.58 tonnes) of equipment and hardware, including solar arrays and support structures, for launch at the Space Station Processing Facility at its KSC. Also in launch preparation at KSC was the Node 2 module, which would connect the U.S., European, and Japanese research laboratories; and the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module. The eventual launch of the European Columbus laboratory under construction in Bremen, Germany, would expand the stations volume to that of a five-bedroom house. The first crew to live aboard the orbiting facility had arrived on 2 November 2000, and since that date, eight successive crews22 peoplehad staffed the ISS, conducting research in bioastronautics, physical sciences, fundamental space biology, space product development, and spaceflight disciplines.(NASA, International Space Station Marks Five Years in Orbit, news release 03-374, 19 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03374_iss_five_yrs.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
NASA announced the successful first test flight of Altair, its UAV. The purpose of the test flight was to evaluate Altairs airworthiness and flight controls. NASAs Earth Science Enterprise had established performance specifications for the craft, which was an extended-wing version of the MQ-9 Predator B military UAVone of several UAVs designed for civil applications.(NASA, NASAs Newest Unmanned Aircraft Makes Successful First Flight, news release 03-193, 9 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03193_altair.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
A team of engineers from academia and industry conducted the first known flight test of a powered, liquid-propellant, aerospike engine, which they had developed under the California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN). The X-33/Venturestar single stagetoorbit rocket plane, which NASA and Lockheed Martin had shelved, had been a prototype for aerospike-motor technology. Students at California State University at Long Beach had designed and developed the research vehicle Prospector 2 to use a mixture of liquid oxygen and ethanol. The rocket pitched after several seconds of stable flight, crashing to the floor of the Mojave Desert in California and destroying student payloads on impact. However, the aft section of the vehicle, which contained the aerospike, remained mostly intact. The mission achieved its single objective: to lift the vehicle into the air using the liquid-propellant aerospike engine. The test revealed several areas of the aerospike-engine design that needed improvement.(Space News, Rocketeers Fly Aerospike Engine, 24 September 2003.)
NASA announced its selection of Allied Aerospace Industries of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to manufacture three flight-ready experimental demonstrator vehicles for the X-43C project, a NASA-led initiative. NASAs LaRC had led the team, comprising members from the U.S. Air Force and from the aerospace industry, to design and develop the X-43C demonstrator vehicle and propulsion system. Following the example of the Hyper-X (X43-A), a vehicle designed to demonstrate short-duration, scramjet-powered flight at Mach 7 and Mach 10, the creators of the X-43C intended it to demonstrate free flight of a scramjet-powered vehicle, with acceleration capability between Mach 5 and Mach 7. Allied Aerospace Industries had also developed the X43-A vehicle. The Air Force had provided a dual-mode scramjet capable of operating as a ramjet or scramjet for the X-43C vehicles. The cost-plus-fixed-fee completion-type contract that NASA awarded to Allied Aerospace Industries was valued at US$150 million over 66 months, covering all work through completion of the Preliminary Design Review; options covered the final design, hardware fabrication, and all support activities. X-43C Project Manager Paul L. Moses remarked that the demonstrator vehicle would validate advanced technologies, design tools, and test techniques for designing reusable space-access vehicles in the future.(NASA, NASA Selects Allied Team To Provide Hypersonic Vehicles, contract release C03-ll, 8 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_c03ll_x43c.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Brian Berger, Hypersonic Efforts Get an Extra Boost: NASA, Air Force Providing $150 Million for Test Program, Space News, 21 October 2003.)
Scientists studying data produced by the thermal emission spectrometer (TES) on board NASAs Mars Global Surveyor published findings in the journal Science disputing the theory that Mars once had a warm climate. Using the TES, which measured infrared light from rocks, scientists had searched for patterns of color to identify different minerals, particularly carbonates. Carbonates form only in the presence of liquid water. TES data confirmed small concentrations of carbonates in Martian dust, but no large deposits, such as those that would have formed at the bottom of a lake or ocean. Lead author of the article, Philip R. Christensen of Arizona State University, remarked that, according to the data, it was extremely unlikely that large bodies of water exposed to the atmosphere for an extended period had ever existed on Mars. Matthew P. Golombek of NASAs JPL commented that the new findings directly contradicted the idea that, at one time, Mars may have been warmer and wetter with a denser carbon-dioxide atmosphere. Previously, scientists had proposed this theory to explain Marss apparent geological formations resembling the intricate patterns of riverbeds, carved canyons, and delta fans.(Joshua L. Bandfield, Timothy D. Glotch, and Philip R. Christensen, Spectroscopic Identification of Carbonate Minerals in the Martian Dust, Science 301, no. 5636 (22 August 2003): 1084; New York Times, Study: No Past Standing Water on Mars, 22 August 2003; Kenneth Chang, New Data Dispute Theory That Mars Had Warm Climate, New York Times, 22 August 2003.)
NASA announced that it had awarded the contract to manage the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Science and Operations Control Center to a nonprofit consortium, the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA). The contract, valued at US$162.2 million, stipulated that AURA manage the Science and Operations Control Center at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland. AURA would provide products and services required to prepare the science program, develop ground systems, provide science and engineering support, provide integration and test support, perform educational and public outreach, and perform flight and science operations during the launch and commissioning of JWST, scheduled for launch in 2011.(NASA, Webb Spacecraft Science and Operations Center Contract Award, contract release c03-r, 6 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_c03r_Webb.html (accessed 6 June 2003).)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz had won Discover Magazines Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Diaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASAs JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earths solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Diaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award, news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA announced that NOAA, Lockheed Martin, and NASA had formed teams to investigate the 6 September accident involving the NOAA-N Prime satellite. While moving the spacecraft from a vertical to a horizontal position, Lockheed Martin workers had dropped it, significantly damaging the craft. NASA and Lockheed Martin had placed the satellite under guard, securing all records. NASA and NOAA were waiting for an assessment of the damage to determine how the accident would affect satellite programs.(NASA, NASA, NOAA and Lockheed Martin Investigate Satellite Accident, news release 03-287, 9 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03287_satellite_accident.html (accessed 28 January 2009). 514 Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Boeing Names New ISS Leader, 12 September 2003.)
NASA issued new safety standards for future space vehicles, such as the proposed Orbital Space Plane (OSP) and next-generation launch systems, requiring crew-escape systems and methods of aborting launches. Earlier, NASA had rejected recommendations for the proposed systems as too impractical or expensive for the existing Space Shuttle fleet. The new standards represented NASAs effort to provide maximum reasonable assurance that, in the future, mission failures would not automatically endanger the crew. The standards, known as the Human-Rating Requirements and Guidelines for Space Flight Systems, stipulated that NASA would design future spacecraft to allow the crew to escape quickly during prelaunch procedures and to abort the mission or to effect an emergency escape during ascent.(Eric Pianin, New Standards Are Issued for Space Vehicle Safety, Washington Post, 18 July 2003.)
2003/q2/nr_030411t.html (accessed 19 September 2008). system intended for space science missions. Under the third contract, EDD would support GRC in developing and testing technologies for the HiPEP project.(The Boeing Company, Boeing EDD Wins NASA Contracts for Advanced Electric Propulsion, news release, 14 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030414s.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
U.S. Representative William L. Jenkins (R-TN) announced that NASA had awarded East Tennessee State University a grant valued at US$363,310 to study light patterns of stars located hundreds of light-years away. The award would grant researchers of the universitys physics and astronomy department access over the next five years to data from COBEthe Cosmic Background Explorer satellite. The scientists would use the COBE data to study the infrared variability of asymptotic giant branch stars, older stars with shells of gas and dust around them. During its mission in 1989 and 1990, the COBE satellite had surveyed the sky on 10 infrared wavelengths, observing the cosmic backlight of the universe, as well as asymptotic giant branch stars. Although astronomers in the field had conducted significant research on the backlight data, they had done little with COBEs infrared data on the stars.(Sam Watson, NASA Grant To Fund ETSU Study of Stars, Johnson City Press (TN), 9 January 2003.)
NASA announced the successful test of a High Power Electric Propulsion (HiPEP) ion engine using commercial-utility electrical power, marking the first successful test of an engine that could lead to revolutionary propulsion capabilities for space exploration missions throughout the solar system and beyond. The test used the largest microwave ion thruster ever built. The test was also the first in a series, demonstrating the high-velocity and high-power thrust necessary for the new nuclear electric propulsion (NEP) applications. NASAs Project Prometheus had been studying the HiPEPone of several candidate propulsion technologiesfor possible use on the Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter (JIMO). The JIMO Missions design included a small nuclear reactor as its power source and electric thrusters to provide propulsion. NASA planned for JIMO to study Jupiters three icy moonsGanymede, Callisto, and Europa. Director of Project Prometheus Alan R. Newhouse remarked that the test represented a huge leap in demonstrating the potential for advanced ion technologies.(NASA, NASA Successfully Tests Ion Engine, news release 03-377, 20 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03377_ion_engine.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
Japans Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japans NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
The CAIB carried out preliminary tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, firing foam at a fiberglass replica of the wing of an orbiter. The impact of a 1.67-pound (0.76-kilogram) piece of foam fired at 533 miles per hour (858 kilometers per hour) created a narrow 22-inch-long (56-centimeter-long) gash in the fiberglass wings. The CAIB conducted the test in preparation for an official test with panels composed of reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC), a material two and one-half times more resilient than fiberglass. In addition to determining whether foam could damage the fiberglass, the CAIB intended the test to calibrate the mechanism for testing the RCC without using up scarce RCC samples.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, Mockup Wing Is Torn by Foam in Shuttle Test, New York Times, 30 May 2003; Mark Carreau, Foam Test Leaves Gash in Shuttle Wing Replica, Houston Chronicle, 30 May 2003. 450 Leonard David, Japan Recovers Capsule That Carried Made-in-Space Product, Space.com, 29 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/japan_capsule_030529.html (accessed 4 December 2008).)
NASA researchers announced that the ER-2, a modified U-2 aircraft, had collected tiny interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) in Earths stratosphere, which likely contained bits of ancient stars. The particles, collected over a period of two decades, included the only samples of comets that researchers were able to study in a laboratory. Lindsay Keller, a researcher in the Office of Astromaterials Research and Exploration Science at NASAs JSC, remarked that the stardust grains were typical of the kind of dust available at the beginning of the solar systemthe building blocks of the Sun and planets. Scott Messenger, an astrophysicist at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, described the IDPs as rich in stardust and molecular cloud material, suggesting that the particles had remained essentially unchanged since the solar systems formation. To detect the remnants of the early stars, scientists had used Washington Universitys new type of ion microprobe, which measured isotopic ratios on scales much smaller than previously possible.(NASA, NASA Finds Remnants of Ancient Stars in Earths Upper Atmosphere, news release 03-084, 27 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03084.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
NASA announced its collaboration with Japans NASDA and the Japanese Meteorological Research Institute to study snowfall over Wakasa Bay, Japan. The study would use NASAs EOS Aqua satellite in conjunction with research aircraft, which would gather data for the study using the coastal radar systems. NASA had begun the Wakasa Bay Field Campaign on 3 January 2003, scheduling the study to run through 14 February 2003. Although, historically, scientists had found it difficult to quantify contributions to the global hydrologic cycle from the northern Pacific Ocean, they expected that the new satellite instruments, which could detect precipitation over water, would provide data needed to interpret the effect of Pacific Ocean hydrology on the world.(NASA, NASA Joins Snow Study over the Sea of Japan, news release 03-025, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-025.txt (accessed 29 July 2008).)
NASA announced that it had selected several radioisotope-based, power-conversion technologies for research and development. The awards represented the first competitive technology procurement funded entirely by NASAs Project Prometheus. The projects covered distinct areas in power-conversion technology: thermoelectrics, thermophotovoltaics, Stirling engines, and Brayton engines. NASA intended the awards to lay the foundation for technology development enabling new classes of missions, such as networked science stations on Mars and small spacecraft capable of complex maneuvers in deep space. Each award would cover three one-year performance periods with continued support from one period to the next, contingent on the programs needs, availability of funds, and each teams ability to meet milestones. The total funding was US$43 million divided into various increments covering fiscal years 2003 to 2006.(NASA, Advanced Radioisotope-Power Technologies R&D Teams Selected, contract release c03-n, 7 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03n.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
The remotely operated Helios Prototype aircraft crashed into the Pacific Ocean during a test flight within the confines of the U.S. Navy Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) test range. Ground-based mission controllers had been flying the solar-electric, propeller-driven, proof-of- concept flying wing remotely. The craft had been aloft west of Kauai, Hawaii, for about 29 minutes at approximately 8,000 feet (2,438 meters), when the accident occurred, destroying it. High-efficiency solar cells, spread across the upper surface of its 247-foot-long (75-meter-long) wing, supplied power to its electric motors and other systems during daylight; at night, an experimental fuel cellbased electrical system generated power. The prototype, designed to fly at altitudes up to 100,000 feet (30,480 meters) had set a world record for altitude of winged aircraft96,863 feet (29,524 meters)during a flight in August 2001. NASA had intended the craft to fly single-day atmospheric-science and imaging missions at high altitudes, as well as to perform multiday telecommunications-relay missions at lower altitudes of 50,000 to 65,000 feet (15,240 to 19,812 meters). The prototype was one of several in development that NASA had sponsored and funded under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program.(NASA, Helios Prototype Solar Aircraft Lost in Flight Mishap, news release 03-219, 27 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03219_Helios.html (accessed 12 December 2008); B. J. Reyes for Associated Press, Record-Setting Solar Airplane Crashes, 26 June 2003.)
After completing a 16-day orbital science mission that NASA judged a success, the crew of STS- 107 perished when Space Shuttle Columbia broke apart above Texas during reentry. NASAs Mission Control lost communication with Columbia at 9:00 a.m. (EST) and immediately switched to the contingency plan to preserve all flight-activity information. NASA had scheduled the landing for 9:16 a.m. (EST). NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe issued a statement describing all the steps NASA had taken after the loss of the Shuttle. NASA officials had spoken with President George W. Bush and Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge; met with family members of the crew; assembled an internal mishap investigation team; and appointed a mishap investigation board. The board comprised an external group of people independent from NASA, charged with examining all the information that Mission Control had locked down when it lost communication with Columbia.(NASA, NASA Statement on Loss of Communications with Columbia, news release 03-030, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-030.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); NASA, Statement by NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, news release 03-032, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-032.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); Washington Post, The Columbia Catastrophe, 2 February 2003.)
Boeing announced the successful completion of Phase III testing of the X-31A Vector aircraftthe worlds only international experimental airplane in the X-plane series to receive international collaborationdemonstrating the use of thrust-vectoring technologies for performing extremely short takeoff and landing (ESTOL) operations. The U.S. Navy, Germanys defense procurement agency, the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, and Boeing Phantom Works had conducted the ESTOL demonstrations, carrying out the final flight on 29 April at Patuxent River Naval Air Station in Maryland. The demonstrations had consisted of a series of fully automated ESTOL landings on an actual runway using a high angle-of-attack landing, proving that an integrated flight-and-propulsion control system had potential use in ESTOL. Such capabilities would give fighter aircraft greater operational flexibility and lower life-cycle costs.(The Boeing Company, Boeing X-31A Vector Completes International Flight Test Program, news release, 7 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030507a.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
NASA and the U.S. Army transferred an XV-15 tilt-rotor aircraft to the National Air and Space Museums Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center near Washington Dulles International Airport in Virginia. J. Victor Lebacqz, Acting Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Aerospace Technology, described the XV-15a unique type of aircraft possessing the takeoff, hover, and landing capabilities of a helicopter, with the range and speed of a turboprop aircraftas one of NASAs most successful research aircraft and a prime example of cutting-edge aerospace research. Tilt-rotor flight research had begun in the 1950s with the Bell XV-3 convertiplane. In 1977 the first of two XV-15s built by Bell HelicopterTextron had made its maiden flight. The XV-15 had achieved speed and altitude records for its class, receiving multiple awards from national organizations. Its success had led to the development of the V-22 Osprey and to the worlds first civil tilt-rotor, the nine-passenger Bell-Agusta 609, which was under development and scheduled for delivery in 2007.(NASA, Tilt Rotor Aircraft Joins National Air and Space Museum Collection, news release 03-295, 16 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03295_tilt_rotor.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA announced the selection of Donald J. Campbell, Director of GRC at Lewis Field, as Special Assistant to the Deputy Administrator for Nuclear and Alternative Power Generation Systems, effective 1 October 2003. In his new position, Campbell would lead the development and integration of high-power generation systems for propulsion, considered fundamental building blocks for sustained robotic and human exploration in outer space and deep space. Campbell had directed GRC since January 1994. Local political and community leaders had criticized Campbell for his leadership style, which had not galvanized the GRC workforce or fully leveraged the Centers economic potential. NASA named Deputy Director of GRC Julian M. Earls to succeed Campbell as GRCs Director.(NASA, Glenn Research Centers Donald J. Campbell Selected as NASA Deputy Administrator Special Assistant, news release 03-260, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/ HQ_03260_Campbell.html (accessed 29 December 2008); NASA, Dr. Julian M. Earls Selected To Lead NASA Glenn Research Center, news release 03-261, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03261_Earls.html (accessed 29 December 2008); John Mangels and Michael OMalley, NASA Glenn Chief Leaves; Deputy Gets Job, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 9 August 2003.)
NASA awarded a contract valued at up to US$238.7 million to the Physical Science Laboratory at New Mexico State University, to operate and maintain scientific balloon facilities and to provide engineering support for the NASA Scientific Balloon Program. The four-year contract with two three-year options had a baseline value of US$39.8 million.(NASA, NASA Selects PSL for Balloon Program Support Contract, news release c03-g, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03g.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russias Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earths upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as the worlds smallest space telescope, with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileos telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellitesCubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tubethe Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSATwould image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads, Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia, Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
NASA announced the publication in the Journal of Geophysical Research of the conclusions of a research team that had used data spanning the years 1991 through 2000, which the Microwave Limb Sounder on NASAs Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite had collected. The team had found that ozone depletion over Earths Arctic region varies in amount, timing, and pattern of loss, confirming previous variations in Arctic ozone-loss estimates. The teams findings provided the first consistent, three-dimensional picture of ozone loss during multiple Arctic winters. (NASA, NASA Finds Wide Annual Fluctuations in Arctic Ozone Loss, news release 03-125, 28 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03125.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
NASA announced that the Demonstration for Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft had completed the lengthy design-certification review for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program, verifying the crafts safety, performance, and functional requirements. The DART team, based at NASAs MSFC, planned to demonstrate the vehicle without a human pilot in 2004, launching it on a Pegasus rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet. At 40,000 feet (12,192 meters) over the Pacific Ocean, the Pegasus rocket and the DART craft would separate, and DART would travel from a parking orbit to maneuver close to a target satellite or to rendezvous with it. The demonstration would require 24 hours. DART was the first of three flight-testing demonstrators: Boeing Expendable Launch Systems was developing the X-37 flight demonstrator, and Lockheed Martin Corporation was developing the launchpad-abort demonstrator. DART was NASAs first completely computer-controlled, rendezvous-capable spacecraft.(NASA, Space Flight Demonstrator Completes Design Certification, news release 03-274, 21 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03274_dart_design.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched the Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)D2 rocket from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The main payload was the GSAT-2, a geostationary communications and space-monitoring satellite, which carried four C-band and two Ku-band transponders that would provide voice and video transmissions to India and neighboring countries. The GSLV-D2 also carried into orbit experimental payloads: a Coherent Radio Beacon Experiment, a Solar X-ray Spectrometer, an external Total Radiation Dose Monitor, a Radiation Sensitive Field Effect Transistor, and a Surface Change Monitor. However, its main mission was to test the GSLV-D2, an improved version of the GSLV first launched in April 2001.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595, 1 June 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx595.html (accessed 20 November 2008); K. S. Jayaraman, India Launches Second GSLV Rocket with GSAT, Space.com, 8 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/gslv_launch_030508.html (accessed 1 December 2008).)
NASA announced the successful test of a launchpad-abort test vehicle designed to support its OSP Program. Wind tunnel tests had demonstrated the Lockheed Martindesigned Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) vehicles stability and maneuverability under simulated conditions approximating escape from a catastrophic failure of a launch vehicle. The tests, which followed the completion of Septembers PAD Preliminary Design Review, marked a significant success in the development of a safe and effective crew-escape system, clearing the way for the initial testing of the vehicles engine in November 2003 and the first set of parachute drop tests in December 2003. NASA had not pursued the PAD Project to integrate crew-escape capability into spacecraft design since the Apollo program ended.(NASA, NASA Conducts Successful Pad Abort Demonstration, news release 03-359, 6 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03359_pad_abort_demo.html (accessed 5 February 2009). 551 Agence France-Presse, France, Russia Sign Deal for European Space Pad, 7 November 2003.)
The White House unveiled the U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy, which President George W. Bush had approved on 25 April to replace former President William J. Clintons 1994 Presidential Decision Directive-23. The new policy loosened government restrictions on the collection and sale of commercial satellite imagery, directing military and civilian agencies first to approach the commercial sector to fulfill satellite imagery needs. The NSC had created the new guidelines as part of a review of U.S. national space policy, which the White House had directed the NSC to conduct in June 2002 with the support of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The new policy retained the governments ability to restrict operations of commercial satellite imaging companies for national security reasons, but emphasized that the U.S. military should plan actions in the knowledge that adversaries also had access to commercial satellite imagery. The policy encouraged companies to use the most capable systems possible. However, at the same time, the government retained the right to restrict the sale of the most advanced imagery to U.S. government customers. The policy named the U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) as the interface between government and industry for national security applications of commercial satellite imagery. The U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Interior, and NASA would fulfill that role for civilian applications.(Jason Bates, White House Loosens Curbs on Commercial Satellite Imaging, Space News, 13 May 2003; Dan Caterinicchia, Commercial Satellite Policy Released, Federal Computer Week, 15 May 2003.)
NASA awarded its Kennedy Space Center Integrated Communications Services (KICS) contract, valued at approximately US$190.7 million, to InDyne Inc. of McLean, Virginia. Under the cost- plus-award fee/firm-fixed price, indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity contract, InDyne would provide communications services at NASAs KSC in support of the Space Shuttle Program, ISS Program, Payload Carriers Program, and Launch Services Program Office payloads. The KICS contract was the first of five work packages in NASAs space mission communications and data services solicitation, which succeeded the NASA consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) and incorporated the requirements of the visual information technical contract as well as the telephone service requirements of the outsourcing desktop initiative.(NASA, First Contract in SMCDS Solicitation Awarded To InDyne, Inc., contract release c03-ff, 17 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_c03ff_indyne_contract.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA announced that it had awarded US$39.9 million in additional work under the consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) with Lockheed Martin Space Operations Company, to fund NASAs JPLs maintenance and operation of the Deep Space Network in the United States, as well as to provide technical support to the Spanish and Australian Deep Space Network complexes. The additional work brought the total value of the CSOC to US$2.1 billion.(NASA, NASA Awards $39.9 Million Contract Addition to Lockheed Martin, news release c03-i, 25 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03i.html (25 August 2008).)
The CAIB questioned NASA flight managers and tank engineers about damage from launch debrisa key concern of the CAIBduring 4 hours of technical testimony at a public hearing. The CAIB sought to uncover why NASA officials had considered the recurrent problem of foam falling during launches a maintenance issue rather than a flight safety concern. NASA testimony included the description of the layers of checks, justifications, and paperwork required to certify a Shuttle for launch, as well as evidence of NASA engineers collective conviction that the shedding foam did not present a threat to flight safety and, therefore, was not a sufficient reason to cancel a launch. In October 2002, foam falling from the bipod area of its external tankthe area where two metal struts connect the fuel reservoir to the orbiterhad struck Space Shuttle Atlantis. The foam that had fallen from Space Shuttle Columbia striking its wing had come from the same area of Columbias external tank as the foam that had struck Atlantis. However, engineers and managers had examined Atlantiss debris incident and had determined that falling foam did not present a safety-of-flight concern for Columbia. Nevertheless, because of the Atlantis incident, managers had requested that engineers responsible for the Shuttles external tank develop a plan to prevent debris from breaking away from the bipod area of the tank. Engineers had not completed the plan at the time of Columbias flight.(Todd Halvorson, Engineers: Launch Debris Troublesome Since Start, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Foam Problem, 8 April 2003.)
JAXA officials announced that mission controllers had lost contact with the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite 2 (ADEOS 2), nicknamed Midori 2. The environmental research satellite was conducting a joint mission of the United States and Japan designed to study ocean winds, sea surface temperatures, sea ice, and water vapor distribution in the atmosphere; to monitor plant life and vegetation in marine areas; and to monitor Earths ozone layer. The craft had launched 14 December 2002 to replace Midori 1, which had been lost in 1997 when a solar-array malfunction had left it with no power supply.(Justin Ray, Earth Monitoring Satellite Goes Silent, Spaceflight Now, 25 October 2003; Jason Bates, Japan Loses Contact with ADEOS-2 Satellite, Space News, 27 October 2003.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to continue providing scientific and operational support for the Chandra X-ray Observatory. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had provided scientific and operational support since Chandras launch in July 1999. The follow-on contract, valued at US$373 million, funded support through 31 July 2010. NASA had planned Chandras mission to last five years from the time of its launch, but had extended the mission to 10 years because of Chandras success.(NASA, NASA Awards Chandra X-ray Observatory Follow-on Contract, contract release c03-z, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_C03z_Chandra_Contrct.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
NASA filed a request for proposal with Federal Business Opportunities, inviting companies to define their schedules for Orbital Space Plane (OSP) design completion, development, testing, and delivery. NASA requested the completion of a crew-rescue vehicle by 2008 and a crew- transfer vehicle by 2012, despite congressional requests that NASA slow down its work on the OSP project. The Boeing Company and a Lockheed MartinNorthrop Grumman team had both been developing concepts for the OSP, a vehicle anticipated as the next space vehicle to ferry astronaut crews to and from the ISS. NASA had hoped to award the prime contract in August 2004 at the earliest. On 29 October, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, responsible for authorizing NASA programs, had restated its position that NASA should halt work on the OSP Program until the White House, Congress, and NASA had agreed on the direction the U.S. human spaceflight program would take after completion of the ISS. Congressional leaders had also questioned NASAs funding profile for the program.(Jason Bates, NASA Releases Request for Orbital Space Plane Plans Despite Congressional Concern About the Program, Space News, 4 November 2003.)
NASA announced the selection of the Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services Atlas 5 expendable launch vehicle for the Pluto New Horizons mission scheduled to launch in January 2006. The agreement with Lockheed Martin stipulated a firm fixed-price, launch-service task order under the terms of NASAs launch services contract with Lockheed Martin. NASA planned for its Pluto New Horizons mission to conduct the first reconnaissance of the binary planet system of Pluto-Charon, gathering information about the surfaces, atmospheres, interiors, and space environments of Pluto and Charon.
SuccessfulI.html (accessed 19 September 2008); The Boeing Company, Boeing-Built AsiaSat 4 Communication Satellite Successfully Launched, news release, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/
While moving NOAAs 14-foot (4.3-meter) NOAA-N Prime weather satellite from a vertical to a horizontal position, workers at a Lockheed Martin plant dropped the nearly completed US$239 million craft, causing serious damage. Lockheed Martin spokesperson Buddy Nelson stated that the cart holding the spacecraft was not in the proper configuration for the planned activity. NASAs GSFC was responsible for overseeing the construction and launch of the satellite, and NOAA would assume control of the craft once it was in orbit. Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company had been building weather satellites since the NOAA satellites initial launch in the early 1960s.(Associated Press, $239M Satellite Damaged at Lockheed Plant, New York Times, 10 September 2003.)
NASA announced the successful completion of the systems-requirement review for the OSP program, evaluating the contractor teams concept designs for providing crew rescue and transfer for the ISS according to Level 1 requirements. The Boeing Company, Lockheed Martin, and a team composed of members from Orbital Sciences Corporation and Northrop Grumman had conducted systems analysis, trade studies, and concept feasibility in preparation for the review. The review had also set Level 2 requirements, addressing guidelines for safety, launch, emergency-return and crew-transfer missions, mission frequency, on-orbit mission duration, contingency cargo requirements, and docking and interfacing with the ISS.(NASA, NASA Completes Orbital Space Plane Design Review, news release 03-299, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03299_orbital_plane.html (accessed 28 January 2009))
Four witnesses appeared before the CAIB at its first public hearing. Director of NASAs JSC Jefferson D. Howell Jr. and Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore spoke about workforce issues, particularly, about NASAs concern regarding the erosion of its skill base. Keith Chong, a senior scientist at the Boeing Company, discussed Boeings work on the foam insulation applied to large propellant tanks such as the Shuttles external tank and the Boeing Delta 4 booster. Henry McDonald, former Director of NASAs ARC, discussed the Space Shuttle Independent Assessment Team (SIAT), which he had led before leaving NASA. The SIAT report had identified problems within the Shuttle program. McDonald expressed disappointment that NASA had not implemented some of the SIATs recommendations. He said that he believed some of the recommended improvements, such as modernized records, could have significantly influenced decisions that NASA had based on risk assessments.(Leonard David, Columbia Accident Hearing Probes NASA Workforce Erosion, Shuttle Safety Issues, Space.com, 6 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_hearing_030306.html (accessed 29 August 2008); Matthew L. Wald, NASA Records in Disarray, Study Leader Tells Board, New York Times, 7 March 2003. 385 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593, 1 April 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx593.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Reuters, Delta 4 Sends Up Its First U.S. Air Force Satellite, 10 March 2003.)
NASA announced the completion of tests, which had taken place on 27 August at Edwards Air Force Base in California, demonstrating the possibility of reducing the impact of sonic booms. The research team showed that modifying an aircrafts shape alters the shape of its sonic boom, thus reducing the sound level. Northrop Grumman Corporation had modified the fuselage and nose of an F-5E fighter jet for the demonstration. The modified jet and a regular F-5E had each flown at Mach 1.36 from the same supersonic corridor. The two aircraft had demonstrated no difference in performance except that the modified jets sonic boom was 33 percent less intense than that of the unmodified F-5E. Analysis and wind tunnel tests had predicted the outcome, but NASA had never before flight-tested the theory. Richard Weizman of NASAs Office of Aerospace Technology remarked that the demonstration was the culmination of 40 years of work by visionary engineers. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had managed the Shaped Sonic Boom Demonstration (SSBD) program under its Quiet Supersonic Platform Initiative. NASAs LaRC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC), as well as Northrop Grumman Corporation, had been partners in the SSBD program under a US$7 million cooperative agreement.(NASA, NASA Opens New Chapter in Supersonic Flight, news release 03-283, 4 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03283_supersonic_flight.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Irene Mona Klotz for United Press International Science News, Test Shows Shape Sheds Sonic Booms Bang, 22 September 2003.)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASAs KSC, to head NASAs LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a natural selection to lead the Agencys premiere center for aviation and space research, according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director, news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred, 13 June 2003.)
The Japanese probe Muses-Crenamed Hayabusa (Falcon) after its deploymentlaunched from Kogoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu, aboard an M-5 solid- fuel rocket. The probes mission was to rendezvous with the asteroid 1998 SF36, gather surface samples, and return to Earth. Japans Institute of Space and Astronautical Science expected the 510-kilogram (1,124-pound) spacecraft to arrive at the asteroid in June 2005. The craft would then skim the surface several times over three months, collecting 1 gram (0.04 ounces) of surface material from various sites. The Institute had designed the mission to return the samples to Earth in a capsule in June 2007. If the probe succeeded, the samples would be the first space rocks collected since the end of the U.S. Apollo Lunar Exploration Program 30 years before.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japan Launches Rocket To Probe Asteroid, 9 May 2003.)
Japan launched two reconnaissance satellitesInformation Gathering Satellites (IGSs), IGS 1A and IGS 1Batop an H-2 rocket from Tanegashima Space Center. The pair, the first of at least four such spacecraft that Japan intended to place in orbit as part of a US$2.05 billion program, were capable of monitoring global natural disasters and hurricanes, as well as observing nuclear explosions and missile launches in nearby countries. Because the craft were able to monitor weather events, the launch did not violate the terms of the Japan-North Korea Declaration of September 2002. However, Japanese space officials acknowledged that Japan had developed the program in reaction to the Taepodong shock, when a North Korean Taepodong ballistic missile flew over Japans main island in 1998. North Korea protested the IGS program as a hostile act that violates the spirit of the countries bilateral agreement. One of the IGS craft carried optical cameras with 1-meter (3.3-foot) resolution and the other carried synthetic-aperture radar to capture images with resolutions of several meters. Japanese space officials provided no information about which craft carried which instrument.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japans First Spy Satellites Reach Earth Orbit, 27 March 2003.)
NASA opened its inaugural annual Service Life Extension Program (SLEP) Summit at the NASA Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. SLEP was part of the new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) established to ensure the viability of the Space Shuttle Program. NASA intended the annual summit to provide a forum to aid the U.S. spaceflight community in shaping long-range strategy, setting priorities, and determining the selection and recommendation process to sustain the Shuttle system. In the wake of the Columbia tragedy, the summit also addressed return-to-flight issues in its first meeting. The summit brought together approximately 200 government and aerospace industry professionals who heard from seven SLEP panels: Safety, Sustainability, Infrastructure, Aerospace Industry, Performance, Operations, and Resources. Panels consolidated and submitted their recommendations to NASAs Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which then identified 60 candidate projects for further consideration and chartered a team to prepare an internal submission, which SLEP would vet over the summer, during NASAs upcoming FY 2005 budget process. SLEP intended to refine its long-term strategy further at the following years summit.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Holds First Summit, news release n03-030, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_n03030.html (accessed 25 August 2008); NASA, NASA Develops Long-Term Planning Process for Space Shuttle, news release 03-119, 24 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03119.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
Boeing announced that its Integrated Defense Systems unit had signed a contract with the Japan Defense Agency and the trading company ITOCHU Corporation to build the first aircraft of the Japan Air Self Defense Force 767 Tanker Transport Program, comprising four aircraft and support. For its 767 Tanker Transport, Japan had selected the military derivative of the 767- 200ER commercial aircraft, reconfigured with an advanced Boeing air-refueling boom and an advanced remote aerial refueling operator system. With its selection of the convertible freighter configuration, Japan would have the flexibility to carry either cargo or passengers. The 767 Tanker Transport Program would enable Japan to meet its commitment to international cooperative efforts, such as delivering humanitarian aid and meeting the air-refueling needs of Japan and other countries around the world. (The Boeing Company, Boeing, Japan Sign 767 Tanker Transport Contract, news release, 4 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030404m.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
Lockheed Martin announced it had teamed up with Argon Engineering to conduct a flight test and evaluation of Argons Lighthouse Communications Intelligence (COMINT) processing capability in a high-density urban environment. The test team had flown the Lighthouse COMINT sensor in the area of Phoenix, Arizona, for more than 24 hours, during eight flights ranging in altitude from 5,000 to more than 20,000 feet (1,524 to more than 6,096 meters). The series of flights confirmed that the sensor was capable of handling the high dynamic signal densities of urban and military environments. Wes Colburn of Lockheed Martin ISR Systems remarked that Argons open architecture Lighthouse COMINT system provided a dynamic sensor suite capable of meeting fighters needs in complex and modern electromagnetic threat environments. The flight tests had validated that the Lighthouse COMINT system was extremely capable in an airborne environment, as well as on submarines, ships, and land sites where it was already in use.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin and Argon Engineering Team Up for the First Flight of the Lighthouse COMINT System, news release, 21 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/LockheedMartinArgonEngineeringTeamU.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
NASA announced the results of its own mishap investigation boards review of the loss of the X- 43A Hyper-X research vehicle during its launch on 2 June 2001. The experimental plane was the first of three that NASA had developed and produced in a US$185 million program. The board concluded that the flight had failed because the vehicles control system design was deficient in several analytical modeling areas, which overestimated the systems margins. For the test flight, the X-43A had launched aboard the nose of a modified Pegasus launch vehicle carried by NASAs modified B-52 bomber. The bomber had released the Pegasus at an altitude of 24,000 feet (7,315.2 meters), igniting its solid rocket motor (SRM) and sending the research-vehicle payload on its test flight. After beginning its planned pitch-up maneuver, the X-43A had experienced a control anomaly leading to a structural overload of the starboard elevon. The vehicle had then deviated significantly from its planned trajectory, and NASA had destroyed it 48.6 seconds after its release. The mishap investigation board, which had found a number of modeling inaccuracies, had been able to reproduce the flight mishap only after incorporating all of the inaccuracies into its analysis, leading the board to conclude that no single factor or potential contributing factor had caused the mishap. The board also found that preflight analyses, including wind tunnel tests, had failed to predict how the rocket would perform in flight.(NASA, NASA Mishap Board Identifies Cause of X-43a Failure, news release 03-246, 23 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03246_X43A_Mishap.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Associated Press, Rocket Failure Doomed Hypersonic NASA Jet, Investigation Finds, 23 July 2003.)
The Boeing Company announced that, because commercial launches were costly and in relatively low demand, it would not seek commercial satellite launch contracts for five years, focusing instead on providing service for the U.S. military and NASA. However, Boeing was a member of the consortium International Launch Services (ILS), which would continue to offer commercial launch services. ILS used Russian-made Zenit 3-SL rockets to launch commercial payloads from a floating platform known as Sea Launch. Boeing indicated that it would accommodate customers that preferred to use Delta rockets instead of the Russian-made rockets. The company stated that the change in business strategy would not affect any employees who worked on the launch programs.(Brian Monroe and Wayne T. Price, Boeing To Bail Out of Commercial Launches, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 July 2003.)
NASA successfully launched its Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Lockheed Martinbuilt SIRTF was the fourth and final of NASAs Great Observatories, following the HST, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. NASA had designed the 110-pound (50-kilogram), 33.5-inch (85-centimeter) telescope to measure heat from celestial objects. SIRTF would study some of the same deep space objects as the other Great Observatories, as well as studying other parts of the cosmos. Michael Jura, SIRTF interdisciplinary scientist for planetary science at the University of California at Los Angeles, remarked that one of SIRTFs main scientific goals was to develop a better understanding of star and planet formation. The project, originally proposed in the mid- 1970s, had faced repeated budgetary cutbacks and delays. NASA planned for SIRTFs mission to last a minimum of 30 months, at an anticipated cost of US$1.19 billion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, NASA Launches Rocket with Infrared Scope, 25 August 2003. 154)
NASA selected the University of Arizonas Phoenix lander concept for a US$325 million mission to Mars in 2007, beating out finalists from Arizona State University, NASAs JPL, and NASAs LaRC. The Phoenix concept, aptly named for the mythical bird that rose from ashes, drew on the technology of past expeditions, such as the canceled 2001 Mars Surveyor Program. Phoenixs purpose was to search for evidence of water and carbon dioxide gasa robotic arm would scoop soil samples, small on-board ovens would heat the samples, and on-board instruments would analyze them, checking the soil for organic compounds. NASA called the Phoenix mission the first of a type of mission it had designated as Scout missions. If funding remained available, NASA planned to hold competitions every four years to select relatively small missions like Phoenix as Scout missions.(Chris Kridler, Mission Will Look for Mars Ice, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 5 August 2003)
The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systemsbuilt, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket, news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of Steven J. Dick as NASAs Chief Historian, to succeed Roger D. Launius, who had departed in July 2002 to become Historian of the National Air and Space Museum. An astronomer and historian of science, Dick had served as the first Historian of the U.S. Naval Observatory and, just before his NASA appointment, had been Acting Chief of the Naval Observatorys Nautical Almanac Office. As an expert in the field of astrobiology and its cultural implications, Dick had served on a panel examining the potential societal implications of the discovery of life in the Mars rock. He had received the NASA Group Achievement Award in recognition of his contributions to the establishment of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), including the definition of the field of astrobiology. Dick had authored more than 100 works, including a history of the Naval Observatory, Sky and Ocean Joined: The U.S. Naval Observatory, 18302000, which had won the John Lyman Award of the North American Society for Oceanic History for best book in 2002 in Science and Technology and the U.S. Naval Observatorys Captain James Melville Gilliss Award for extraordinary dedication and exemplary service. At the time of his appointment, Dick served on the editorial boards of several journals and was an associate editor of the International Journal of Astrobiology. From 1993 to 1994, Dick had served as Chairperson of the Historical Astronomy Division of the American Astronomical Society, and between 1997 and 2000, he had been President of the History of Astronomy Commission of the International Astronomical Union.(NASA, NASA Names New Historian, news release 03-327, 10 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03327_new_historian.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASAs plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition, news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission, Space News, 19 August 2003.)
Northrop Grumman Corporation, Raytheon Company, and the Boeing Company formed a team to develop the U.S. Air Force E-10A Multi-Sensor Command and Control Aircraft (MC2A), a next-generation aircraft that could replace the Airborne Warning and Control System and the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System aircraft. The initial agreement called for the production of five MC2A craft for the U.S. Air Force, but the program could increase to allow for production of as many as 50 such aircraft. Boeing would provide its twin-jet 767-400 transport aircraft as a platform for powerful multifunction radar with the capability of detecting enemy forces on the ground, as well as low-flying cruise missiles. Northrop Grumman and Raytheon would develop a radar and electronic self-defense system to integrate with a Battle Management Command and Control System produced under a separate contract.(Northrop Grumman, Northrop Grumman, Boeing and Raytheon Announce Teaming Agreement for Next- Generation Air Force Surveillance System, news release, 12 May 2003, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=40216 (accessed 8 December 2008); Congress Daily, Aerospace Giants To Team Up On Air Force Project, 12 May 2003.)
Israeli scientists announced that, while traveling aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, astronaut Ilan Ramon had successfully captured images of smoke from a burning rain forest, a dust storm above the Mediterranean Ocean, and a small dust plume off the African coast over the Atlantic Ocean. Operating a twin-camera multispectral instrument in Columbias payload bay, Ramon had scanned dust and other aerosol particles, which storms had blown from deserts and high winds had carried across the globe. The instrument had also operated during the night, capturing images of the tops of thousands of thunderstorms. The team of scientists from Tel Aviv Universitys Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) intended to use the images to develop a better understanding of climate change, one of the goals of Columbias research flight, which had encountered two years of delays. Joachim Joseph, a principal researcher on the project, remarked that the experiment had gathered very good data, very unique data. The purpose of the US$2 million experiment was to provide a better understanding of how migrating dust plumes affect climate. (NASA, Shuttles Desert Dust Experiment Delivers, news release N03-010, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/note2edt/2003/n03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2003); Associated Press, Astronaut Photographs Dust Storm, 31 January 2003; Warren E. Leary,  Space Shuttle Crew Completes Israeli Dust and Cloud Studies, New York Times, 31 January 2003.)
NASA released the first pictures from its Space Infrared Telescope Facility and officially renamed the craft Spitzer Space Telescope. NASA had named the telescope for one of the 20th centurys most influential scientists, Princeton University astronomer Lyman Spitzer Jr., who in 1946 had first proposed placing telescopes in space. Spitzer had been a major force behind the 1990 launch of the HST, the first of NASAs Great Observatories. With the release of the Spitzer Space Telescopes first observationsa glowing stellar nursery; a swirling, dusty galaxy; a disc of planet-forming debris; and organic material in the distant universeProject Scientist Michael Werner of NASAs JPL remarked that the telescope was working extremely well. The fourth of its Great Observatories, NASA had designed the craft with powerful infrared detectors to capture never-before-seen cosmic features. Unlike its predecessor Great Observatories, which circle Earth, NASA had deployed the Spitzer Space Telescope in a novel trajectory that placed it in an orbit closely trailing that of Earth.(NASA, NASA Releases Dazzling Images from New Space Telescope, news release 03-411, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03411_newly_named_prt.htm (accessed 23 March 2009); Patty Reinert, Stargazers Delight: NASAs New Space Infrared Telescope Puts On a Dazzling Show, Houston Chronicle, 19 December 2003.)
For the first time, NASA quantified the costs related to the loss of the Shuttle, stating that, in the six months since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, it had spent US$152.4 million to conduct the investigation and recover debris. The figure included US$111.9 million for NASA to support the CAIBs inquiry with research and analysis, including the expensive high-speed, foam-impact tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, which had provided evidence that foam striking Columbia after lift off had caused the hole in the left wing. NASA had spent US$18.7 million to fund the 13-member investigative board, paying the salaries of the five civilian members, office rent, travel expenses, and the expense of holding public hearings and maintaining the CAIBs Web site. NASA had also spent US$21.8 million recovering debris from the Columbia accident, compared to the US$30 million it had spent salvaging pieces of Challenger. Shortly after the tragedy, the U.S. Congress had approved US$50 million to cover expenses, and it was considering a supplemental appropriation of US$50 million. John Scofield, spokesperson for the House Committee on Appropriations, remarked that nobody had criticized NASAs spending, because nobody wanted to do the necessary work on the cheap. Scofield added that the committee was conducting its own analysis to confirm that NASA had correctly estimated its expenditures, but that Congress would likely reimburse NASA for much of the cost. NASA had spent a total of US$62 million (adjusted for inflation) to investigate the 1986 explosion of Challenger.
The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellations mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck, Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement, Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
GenCorp Inc.s company Aerojet, a member of the Rocket Based Combined Cycle Consortium (RBC3), announced that NASA and RBC3 had successfully completed the first in a series of tests of a full-scale rocket thrust. Conducted at Aerojet facilities in Sacramento, California, the test demonstrated the first successful hot fire of a thruster using a mix of decomposed peroxide, liquid peroxide, and JP-7 jet fuel to generate combustiona key milestone in NASAs Integrated System Test of an Air-breathing Rocket (ISTAR) program. The ISTAR program sought to flight- test a self-powered hypersonic flight vehicle at more than six times the speed of sound by the end of the decade. The program was part of NASAs effort to develop hypersonic technologies by 2025, to create flight vehicles that could provide safe, routine, and affordable space access and air transportation to anywhere on the globe in less than 2 hours.(Aerojet, NASA, Industry Consortium Successfully Test Full-Scale Hypersonic Engine Thruster, news release, 7 January 2003, http://www.aerojet.com/program/news/nr_010703_nasa_industry_consortium_ successfully_tests_thruster.htm?program_ID=45 (accessed 30 July 2008); NASA, NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel, news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/ pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
NASA engineers and investigators, together with members of the CAIB, watched as engineers fired foam insulation at a mockup of the leading edge of an orbiter wing, creating a 16-inch-wide (40.6-centimeter-wide) hole in the reinforced-carbon-carbon panel. Engineers used a compressed nitrogen gas cannon to fire a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam at the wing mockup at a speed of 530 miles per hour (853 kilometers per hour), duplicating the force exerted on Columbias wing when a piece of foam of the same size hit the orbiter during launch. The test results showed that it was possible that a foam block falling from the external tank could have breached the orbiters leading edge, allowing hot gases to penetrate the wing structure during reentry and resulting in the breakup of Columbia.(Alan Levin, Shuttle Foam Test Leaves Hole, USA Today, 8 July 2003; John Kelly, Foam Punches Large Hole in Wing: Test is Smoking Gun, Shuttle Panel Says, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 July 2003.)
The CAIB and members of the U.S. Congress reached an agreement giving selected members and staff of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology access to confidential interviews that CAIB had conducted with 225 witnesses, including NASA managers and others involved with Columbias mission. Because the most sensitive testimony about management decision making and engineering practices was contained in privileged statements, CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. had resisted unfettered congressional access, fearing the potential effect on witnesses in future investigations of accidents if the CAIB were to release privileged testimony. Gehman had argued that privacy was critical to the Boards ability to elicit full, frank, and timely information, citing U.S. Supreme Court decisions supporting privileged interviewing, which was a common practice in military aircraft accident investigations. The agreement had granted committee members and a select list of staff access to the statements at the CAIBs office andin limited circumstances and under the supervision of a CAIB representativeto those at congressional offices. The CAIB retained the right to refuse to make information from statements to the Board available to the public. In addition, the CAIB would keep a record of those who viewed the information.(Kathy Sawyer, Congress To Review Shuttle Interviews, Washington Post, 16 June 2003.)
SpaceShipOne broke the sound barrier during its first powered flight, but a partial landing gear collapse caused the privately built supersonic aircraft to veer off its desert runway. Test pilot Brian Binnie was not injured during the landing. Scaled Composites LLC, which built the craft, stated that engineers could easily repair the damage the craft had sustained. The test flight represented a milestonethe first piloted supersonic flight of an aircraft developed by a small private company. SpaceShipOnes specially designed jet aircraft, the White Knight, carried SpaceShipOne to an altitude of 48,000 feet (14.63 kilometers) before releasing it. Traveling near Mach 1.2, the rocket shut down after firing for 15 seconds. Binnie then placed the craft into a vertical climb to reach 68,000 feet (20.72 kilometers). Nine seconds into the climb, the craft broke the sound barrier. Binnie then reconfigured the craft to its conventional shape, and glided to touchdown, at which time the landing gear collapsed.(Associated Press, Private Rocket Plane Breaks Sound Barrier, 18 December 2003; Leonard David, Privately Funded SpaceShipOne Breaks Sound Barrier, Space.com, 18 December 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/rutan_update_031217.html (accessed 30 March 2009).)
CAIB Chair Harold W. Gehman Jr. and three other Board members appeared before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss the CAIBs findings. Gehman testified that budgetary pressures that the U.S. Congress and the White House ultimately controlled had been partly responsible for NASAs management failures. House Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) concurred that Congress shared some of the blame in the 1 February loss of Columbia but reiterated that NASA needed to make changes. Many of the committees questions focused on prospective remedies for NASAs poor risk management. While agreeing that NASA had a tendency to be overly optimistic in risk assessment, Gehman and other investigators explained to the committee that, because of the age of the Shuttle fleet, risk calculations were little more than estimates. Boehlert expressed concern that NASA was rushing to meet unrealistic return-to-flight datesNASA had proposed a March 2004 launch daterather than studying the CAIB report carefully and taking deliberate steps toward returning the Shuttles to flight.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, Shuttle Probe Rips White House, Congress, Washington Post, 5 September 2003; Patty Reinert and Mark Carreau, Dont Rush New Launch, Lawmakers Warn NASA, Houston Chronicle, 5 September 2003.)
NASA awarded a US$9.7 million grant to Colorado State University to study radiation and cancer. The grant was one of three that NASA awarded to institutions as part of a new initiative to establish national centers studying risks associated with deep space travel. The grant established the NASA Specialized Center of Research (NSCOR) at Colorado State University, which would investigate the risk of the development of cancer associated with radiation exposureparticularly with the development of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), which has a direct correlation with radiation exposure. The research, which would study threats to astronauts from radiation in space, would directly benefit cancer patients who develop AML as a secondary cancer after radiation therapy treatments of the initial cancer.(Christiana Nelson, NASA Grants CSU Almost $10 Million, Rocky Mountain Collegian (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO), 22 October 2003.)
NASAs ARC in Mountain View, California, closed three wind tunnels until the end of FY 2003 because of budget cuts, fewer defense contracts, and the increased use of computer simulations. NASA reported that, unless it received major contracts from the DOD or from the private sector within a year from October 2003, ARC would close the wind tunnels permanently. Two of the wind tunnels, the largest and second-largest wind tunnels in the world, had operated for nearly six decades, testing dozens of aircraft and spacecraft, including Korean Warera fighter planes, helicopters, and the Space Shuttle. The largest wind tunnel, known as 80 by 120 in reference to its height and width, was the only wind tunnel in the world that could accommodate full-size aircraft. With the closure of the three tunnels, ARC dismissed 23 contractors and reassigned 23 employees, changes that would save ARC US$12 million per year in operational costs.(Joshua L. Kwan, NASA/Ames Center Shuts Wind Tunnels, San Jose Mercury News (CA), 19 May 2003.)
NASA announced the creation of the first detailed map of the water contained in Earths atmosphere, a map that would help scientists better understand the nature of atmospheric water vapor and its implications for climate change and ozone depletion. In July 2002, NASA had taken detailed measurements of water isotopes in the atmosphere using Alias, an aircraft laser infrared absorption spectrometer flying aboard NASAs WB-57F high-altitude jet aircraft. The new laser technique had enabled scientists to map the water isotopes with sufficient resolution for researchers to use the map to study water transport, as well as to examine the detailed microphysics of cloudskey parameters necessary for understanding atmospheric composition, storm development, and weather prediction. The resulting map showed heavy hydrogen and heavy oxygen atoms, from Earths surface to 25 miles (40.2 kilometers) above the planet. NASAs Earth Science Enterprise had funded the mission, which had used six aircraft provided by NASA and other federal agencies, to record observations above, in, and below the clouds.(NASA, The Measure of Water: NASA Creates New Map for the Atmosphere, news release 03-394, 5 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03394_water_map.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeings ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeings efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space stations design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASAs development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
As part of its first efforts to meet the objectives of President George W. Bushs Vision for Space Exploration, NASA awarded contracts to 11 companies to provide research on human lunar exploration and the development of a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. The Vision for Space Exploration called for NASA to engage in human and robotic exploration of the solar system and regions beyond. NASA awarded three contracts of approximately US$1 million each to Raytheon, Science Applications International Corporation, and the SPACEHAB Corporation for preliminary studies of human lunar exploration. An additional eight companiesAndrews Space, The Boeing Company, Draper Labs, Lockheed Martin, Northrup Grumman, Orbital Sciences Corporation, Schafer, and Transformational Space Corporationreceived contracts of approximately US$3 million to conduct preliminary research on human lunar exploration and on the development of a new crewed exploration vehicle.
NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), launched on 25 August 2003, had made several new discoveries. The SSTformerly called the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, or SIRTFwas the largest infrared telescope ever launched. Among the SSTs specific findings was the discovery of nearly 300 new stars in RCW 49, a region in the constellation Centaurus, 13,700 light-years from Earth. In addition, the SST had revealed high quantities of icy organic materials in planets forming around young stars in the constellation Taurus, located 420 light- years from Earth. The presence of organic materials in the newly forming planets could explain the origins of similarly icy bodies, such as comets. Scientists theorized that comets might have provided the water and other organic materials that enabled life to form on Earth.(NASA, Raw Ingredients for Life Detected in Planetary Construction Zones, news release 04-167, 27 May 2004; Warren E. Leary, NASA Spots New Youngest Planet, Just a Million Years Old, New York Times, 28 May 2004; NASA JPL, About Spitzer, http://www.spitzer.caltech.edu/about/index.shtml (accessed 31 March 2009).)
NASA researchers discovered a previously unknown property of Arctic sea ice, challenging conventional models of climate change that had incorporated data on Arctic sea ice. A group of scientists led by Ronald Kwok of NASAs JPL had used satellite data from Canadas RADARSAT and NASAs ICESat to examine changes in Arctic sea ice. In the past, scientists had tended to examine data from ocean buoys to determine changes in Arctic sea ice, rather than using satellite data. The NASA researchers had discovered that, during 12-hour intervals, Arctic sea ice makes subtle, back-and-forth motions, which result in approximately 20 percent of ice growth during the Arctic winter. Although conventional models of the dynamics of Arctic sea ice had incorporated data regarding the ices motion, those models had not incorporated ice motion occurring during such brief periods and, thus, may have inaccurately simulated large-scale changes in the ice and underestimated the production of Arctic sea ice.(NASA, NASA Arctic Sea Ice Study May Stir Up Climate Models, news release 04-132, 22 April 2004; Ronald Kwok, H. Jay Zwally, and Donghui Yi, ICESat Observations of Arctic Sea Ice: A First Look, Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 16 (18 August 2004): L16401L16405.)
NASA scientists published research showing that the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the single most important factor in interannual rainfall variability throughout the world. The scientists had used data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite to identify geographic areas with the greatest variations in rainfall between 1998 and 2002. After comparing the TRMM data with rainfall patterns over the previous 50 years, they had found that changes in the ENSO directly correlated with local changes in rainfall patterns around the world. The TRMM satellite, a joint project of NASA and JAXA, used microwaves to measure precipitation over the tropics.(NASA, TRMM Satellite El Nino Holds the Reins on Global Rains, news release 04-369, 8 November 2004; Z. S. Haddad et al., Global Variability of Precipitation According to the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission, Journal of Geophysical ResearchAtmospheres 109, no. D17 (16 September 2004): D17103.)
A piloted rocket called SpaceShipOne reached the highest altitude ever attained by a privately funded vehicle. After its release from a plane flying over the Mojave Desert in California, the winged rocket flew to an altitude of 211,400 feet (40 miles or 64 kilometers). The vehicles pilot Michael W. Melvill landed SpaceShipOne at Mojave Airport. The event was a test flight in preparation for the planned official launch of SpaceShipOne on 2 June 2004. Scaled Composites, the company that had built the rocket, intended SpaceShipOne to become the first privately funded, piloted vehicle to achieve suborbital flight. Scaled Composites had built SpaceShipOne for use in commercial spaceflightsspaceflights in which customers pay a fee for a brief trip to outer space.(Peter Pae, In Capital Venture, Rocket Reaches the Edge of Space, Los Angeles Times, 14 May 2004; Scaled Composites, Historic Space Launch Attempt Scheduled for June 21, news release, 2 June 2004, http://www.scaled.com/projects/tierone/062104.htm (accessed 27 March 2009).)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASAs first Director of Manned Space Flight Safety, died at the age of 101. Lederer, an aviation-safety expert, had introduced notable aviation-safety technologies, such as blinking anticollision lights and flight-data recorders. Lederer had started his career in aviation safety in 1926 as an aeronautical engineer for the U.S. Air Mail Service, where he had redesigned the services airplanes to prevent them from igniting after crashes, a frequent cause of death of the pilots. In the 1950s, he had helped establish the agency that later became the FAA. In 1967, after a fire on Apollo 1 had killed three astronauts during a launchpad test, NASA had asked Lederer to establish an Office of Manned Space Flight Safety. In 1970 NASA had appointed Lederer as the safety director for all NASA activities. Lederer had retired two years later. Later, Lederer had taught at the University of Southern California and had served two three-year terms on the Advisory Council for the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations.(Stuart Lavietes, J. F. Lederer, 101, Dies; Took Risk Management to the Sky, New York Times, 9 February 2004.)
The airline company Virgin Atlantic conducted the first successful test flight of its Globalflyer airplane. The company had designed the Globalflyer to conduct a flight around the world in 3.3 days without refueling, which, if achieved, would create a worlds record for the length of an unrefueled flight. During a test flight lasting 112 hours, the Globalflyer aircraftalso known as the Model 311 Capricornexhibited no significant mechanical problems. However, the experimental aircraft had required several modifications, such as the development of a cabinpressurization system, to reach its final design parameters. Previously, the longest duration for an unrefueled flight around the world had been nine days, a record set by Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager in 1986.(Michael A. Dornheim, Globalflyer Airborne, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 38.)
NASA announced that the Mars Exploration Rover Spirit was malfunctioning because of problems related to its flash memory that could take several weeks to repair. Flash memory, a type of memory commonly installed in electronic devices, such as digital cameras, retains data when the devices power is off. The mobile robotic geological laboratory Spirit had landed on Mars on 3 January 2004 and had performed satisfactorily until it had abruptly terminated communications with NASA on 21 January 2004. On 23 January 2004, Spirit had reestablished contact with NASA, but, according to major newspapers, NASA scientists doubted that the robotic spacecraft would regain full functionality.(Mark Carreau, NASA Declares Spirit Rover Broken, Houston Chronicle, 24 January 2004; NASA, Spirit Condition Upgraded as Twin Rover Nears Mars, news release 04-036, 24 January 2004.)
Sirpa Hakkinen of NASAs GSFC announced that a research team had discovered changes in the North Atlantic Ocean indicating significant changes in the oceans climate. Using data from several NASA and European satellites, the researchers had found a dramatic weakening in a particular current in the ocean, which circulates water between Ireland and Canada. The change in the current indicated substantial climate variability in high-latitude areas, but the research remained uncertain of whether or not the change related to global warming. However, the scientists emphasized that the North Atlantic Ocean region is key for analyzing climate and that changes in the oceans current could influence the circulation of the entire Atlantic Ocean system.(NASA, Satellites Record Weakening North Atlantic Current, news release 04-130, 15 April 2004; Sirpa Hakkinen and Peter B. Rhines, Decline of Subpolar North Atlantic Circulation During the 1990s, Science 304, no. 5670 (23 April 2004): 555559.)
ESAs Mars Express orbiter relayed information between ground-based NASA engineers and NASAs Mars Exploration Rover Spirit, the first in-orbit communication between ESA and NASA spacecraft and the first successful international communications network outside of Earth. As part of their general efforts to cooperate in space exploration, the two space agencies had planned the information relay to enable future cooperative use of their communications technologies during Mars missions. In this particular communication sequence, Spirits operation personnel at NASAs JPL transferred commands for the rover to ESAs Space Operations Centre in Germany, which then transmitted the instructions to the Mars Express. The Express successfully commanded Spirit and, subsequently, relayed telemetry information from the rover to JPL via the Space Operations Centre.(NASA, International Interplanetary Networking Succeeds, news release 04-060, 12 February 2004.)
The GAO released its assessment of NASAs efforts to upgrade the Space Shuttle fleet in the wake of the Columbia tragedy. NASA planned to implement the recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, as well as those of its own Space Shuttle Service Life Extension Program (SLEP). The GAO report stated that before NASA determined the upgrade requirements and priorities for the Shuttles, it should first determine the Shuttles operational life and the requirements for meeting the objectives of the Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP). Before the announcement of the new Vision for Space Exploration, the ISTP had encompassed the space policy of the United States. However, GAO noted that the establishment of President Bushs new Vision for Space Exploration, which formally changed the duration of operations for both the Space Shuttles and the ISS, had largely invalidated the recommendations offered in GAOs assessment.(U.S. General Accounting Office, Space Shuttle: Further Improvements Needed in NASAs Modernization Efforts (report no. GAO-04-203, Washington DC, 15 January 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04203.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
A NASA-funded study provided the first direct evidence that aerosols affect the absorption and release of carbon by ecosystems. Because carbon, in the form of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, acts as a heat-trapping greenhouse gas, the research team sought to identify the factors that influence carbon transfer between the atmosphere and soils. Led by Dev S. Niyogi of North Carolina State University, the scientists had used NASA satellite data to examine atmospheric aerosol content and carbon absorption in different ecosystems. They had discovered that high aerosol levels increase carbon absorption in croplands and forests but decrease carbon absorption in grasslands. The researchers suggested that this variation occurs because of the way that aerosols interact with different types of vegetation canopies to affect the dispersion of radiation from sunlight. In the dense vegetation canopies of croplands and forests, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that enables more radiation to reach a greater quantity of plant leaves and increases carbon absorption through plant photosynthesis. However, in the less dense vegetation canopy of grasslands, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that raises ground temperatures, causing the soil to release more carbon dioxide.(NASA, NASA Study Finds Tiny Particles in Air May Influence Carbon Sinks, news release 04-394, 16 December 2004; D. Niyogi et al., Direct Observations of the Effects of Aerosol Loading on Net Ecosystem CO2 Exchanges over Different Landscapes, Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 20 (29 October 2004): L20506.)
NASAs X-43A research vehicle established an unofficial world speed record for aircraft of nearly 7,000 miles per hour (11,265 kilometers per hour) or Mach 1010 times the speed of sound. The X-43A contained an experimental enginecalled a supersonic combustion ramjet or scramjet. The scramjet engine had no moving parts and did not use fuel from an on-board tank, as is the case with rockets. Instead, the engine used oxygen from the atmosphere, passing through the vehicle, to ignite fuel. NASA had explored the use of scramjets as an alternative to rocket power for space-access vehicles, with the hope that scramjet vehicles would operate more like an airplane than a rocket. The mission lifted off from NASAs DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:30 p.m. (PST). A NASA B-52 carried the unpiloted X-43A to an altitude of 40,000 feet (7.6 miles or 12.2 kilometers). Before the X-43A had attained at an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers), a Pegasus rocket booster launched from the B-52, providing an initial acceleration that enabled the X-43A to attain an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers). The experimental aircraft flew for nearly 10 seconds at that altitude before descending into the Pacific Ocean as planned, nearly 800 miles (1,287 kilometers) off the coast of California.(John Johnson, X-43A Aircraft Sets Speed Record at 6,500 MPH, Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2004; NASA, NASAs X-43A Scramjet Breaks Speed Record, news release 04-373, 16 November 2004.)
NASA hosted representatives from 30 countriesincluding Chinain talks about how to accomplish President George W. Bushs Vision for Space Exploration. Experts and participants described Chinese participation in the talks as a small but significant advance toward the goals of global security and space explorationChinas presence at the talks indicated its interest in collaborating with other countries, particularly the United States. According to analysts, Chinese contributions to space exploration could include expendable rockets, piloted spacecraft, and space robotics.(Mark Carreau and Patty Reinert, NASA Makes First Overture to China, Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2004.)
NASAs Stardust spacecraft performed a flyby of comet Wild 2, obtaining particle samples, as well as the most detailed, high-resolution images ever taken of a comet. Stardust was the first robotic mission created to collect material from outside the Moons orbit. Scientists planned to analyze the particle samples of the comet in January 2006, once the spacecraft had returned to Earth. During the flyby, Stardust flew within 240 kilometers (149 miles) of Wild 2, capturing images of the comets nucleus at resolutions ranging from 6.5 to 32 kilometers (4 to 20 miles) per pixel. NASA scientists hoped that the images would help them better understand conditions on comets and that the particle samplescomposed of materials identical to those that had formed planetswould reveal information about how comets and Earths solar system formed.(NASA JPL, NASA Spacecraft Makes Great Catch . . . Heads for Touchdown, news release 2004-001, 2 January 2004; NASA JPL, Stardust: NASAs Comet Sample Return MissionEncounter with Comet Wild 2, http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/details2.html (accessed 9 January 2009).)
Kevin L. Petersen, Director of NASAs DFRC, appointed Steven G. Schmidt as DFRCs Deputy Director. Schmidt had served as Special Assistant to NASAs Administrator since January 2002. In addition, Schmidt had previously worked in numerous programs at DFRC, such as the X-33, X-43A, and the F-15 programs. Schmidt, who had begun working for NASA in 1994, had also served as Executive Director of the Presidents Space Commission and as Executive Secretary for Management on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board.(NASA, NASA Names Dryden Flight Research Center Deputy Director, news release 04-188, 10 June 2004. 199)
A prototype of the Phoenix reusable launch vehicle (RLV), a joint project of European public and private funders, successfully completed its first atmospheric test flight. According to major media sources, European space agencies hoped eventually to use the Phoenix to launch payloads. The vehicle prototype was approximately 23 feet (7 meters) long and weighed 2,640 pounds (1,200 kilograms). During the test flight, a helicopter released the vehicle prototype from an altitude of 8,000 feet (2,400 meters). The Phoenix landed 90 seconds later at an airport in Vidsel, Sweden. EADS Space Transportation, along with German aerospace company OHB-System AG, the German Aerospace Center, and the government of Bremen, Germany, had funded the Phoenix.(Frank Morring Jr., In Orbit, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 20 (17 May 2004): 17; Frank Morring Jr., In Orbit, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 17; Mattias Karen for Associated Press, Europeans Test Space-Shuttle Prototype, 9 May 2004.)
Maxime A. Faget, who had contributed to the designs of every U.S. spacecraft built to transport humans from Mercury to the Space Shuttle, passed away at age 83 in Houston, Texas. Born on 26 August 1921 in British Honduras, Faget had graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering from Louisiana State University in 1943. He had begun his career with NASA in 1946 as a research scientist at the NASAs LaRC in Hampton, Virginia. In 1958 he had joined the Space Task Grouplater, NASAs JSCwhere he had helped to design the spacecraft for the Mercury project and had led a team studying the feasibility of a lunar mission. Faget had also worked on the original feasibility study for the Space Shuttle, later contributing to the development of the Shuttles. After retiring from NASA in 1981, Faget had helped found Space Industries Incorporated, a private space company that had developed a Shuttle project for processing material in a near-perfect vacuum.(NASA, Legendary Spacecraft Designer Dr. Maxime A. Faget Dies at 83, news release 04-350, 10 October 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bushs new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, First Woman Directs Launch, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
President George W. Bush formally established the Presidents Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, to provide recommendations on implementing elements of his recently announced Vision for Space Exploration. The Commission would make recommendations regarding the type of scientific research U.S. scientists would conduct on the Moon, the development of technologies to enable human and robotic exploration of the Moon and the planets, and the criteria for selecting future destinations for human space explorers. The appointed members of the Commission were Edward C. Aldridge Jr., Carleton S. Fiorina, Michael P. Jackson, Laurie A. Leshin, Lester L. Lyles, Paul D. Spudis, Neil deGrasse Tyson, Robert S. Walker, and Maria T. Zuber.(The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Executive Order Creating the Presidential Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, news release, 30 January 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/aldridge_executive_order.html (accessed 30 January 2009); The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Members of the Presidential Space Exploration Commission, news release, 30 January, 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/ aldridge_members.html (accessed 30 January 2009). 591 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 603, 1 February 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx603.html (accessed 31 January 2009).)
A NASA-funded study revealed evidence of newly discovered relationships between climate change, ice sheets, and sea-level rise. Researchers led by Ian R. Joughin of NASAs JPL found that, between 1992 and 2003, the speed of the ice movements of Greenlands Jakobshavn Isbr glacierwhich has the fastest flow of ice from land to ocean of any glacierhad doubled. The increased ice flow from this single glacier had led to nearly a 4 percent increase in the rate of global sea-level rise during the 20th century. Furthermore, remote-sensing data from Canadian, European, and NASA satellites indicated that the glaciers accelerated ice flow was largely the result of the warming of Earths climate.(NASA, NASA Study Finds Glacier Doing Double Time, news release M04-192, 1 December 2004; Ian Joughin, Waleed Abdalati, and Mark Fahnestock, Large Fluctuations in Speed on Greenlands Jakobshavn Isbr Glacier, Nature 432, no. 7017 (2 December 2004): 608610.)
NASA and ESA jointly announced that scientists had obtained evidence of a black hole consuming a star, an event known as stellar tidal disruption. Previously, scientists had only theorized the existence of such an event. Using observations from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESAs XMM-Newton orbiting observatory, an international team of scientists had discovered a star that had been thrown from its orbit after a close encounter with another star and, subsequently, had moved into the gravitational field of a black hole. The black hole, with a mass estimated at 100 million times greater than the Sun, had exerted a gravitational pull on the star that led to its eventual disintegration. Stefanie Komossa of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany led the group of scientists that had made the discovery.(John Noble Wilford, Black Holes Vast Power Is Documented, New York Times, 19 February 2004; Stefanie Komossa, Jules P. Halpern, and Suvi Gezari, Follow-up Chandra Observations of Three Candidate Tidal Disruption Events, Astrophysical Journal 604, no. 2 (1 April 2004): 572578.)
Scientists revealed the first observations of the merger of two galaxy clusters, providing crucial support for a theory of the universes formation. The scientists, led by J. Patrick Henry of the University of Hawaii, used ESAs XMM-Newton orbiting observatory to obtain data showing that the galaxy cluster Abell 754 formed from the collision of two distinct clusters. Galaxy clusters such as Abell 754 contain hundreds of galaxies and are the universes largest gravitationally bound structures. Measurements of Abell 754s density, pressure, and temperature indicated that it is still in formation. Moreover, the evidence showed that Abell 754 had emerged from the collision of galaxy clusters, supporting the theory that the universes hierarchical structure had resulted from small galaxies and galaxy clusters merging into relatively larger ones.(NASA, Massive Merger of Galaxies is the Most Powerful on Record, news release, 23 September 2004.)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda, Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond, New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe provided testimony concerning NASAs FY 2005 budget request to the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies. In his testimony, OKeefe highlighted NASAs planned efforts to achieve the goals that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration. According to major media, although several House subcommittee members were supportive of NASAs goals, they also expressed doubts about whether Congress would give NASA its requested FY 2005 budget, which included an increase of 5.6 percent over its FY 2004 budget.(NASA, Administrator OKeefes House Testimony, 21 April 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/ speeches/okeefe_house_testimony_042104.html (accessed 23 march 2009); Patty Reinert, Lawmakers Warn NASA Fund Boost May Be Modest, Houston Chronicle, 22 April 2004.)
NASA announced the selection of six proposals to provide research and payload instruments for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), the first spacecraft that NASA would build under the new Vision for Space Exploration. NASA planned the LRO as a robotic mission, which would orbit near the Moon, obtaining measurements to use in planning future human and robotic landing sites. The selected proposals included remote-sensing instruments, such as the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter, which would conduct high-resolution measurements of landing-site slopes, and the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector, which would measure the Moons radiation.(NASA, NASA Selects Investigations for Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, news release 04-407, 22 December 2004.)
Scientists announced research demonstrating that planets form according to a different process than scientists had previously thought. Comparing recent observations from NASAs Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) with data obtained earlier from other satellites, George H. Rieke of the University of Arizona at Tucson had led a team of scientists examining images of the dust clouds surrounding 266 stars of similar size. The prevailing theory of planetary formation held that small rocky planets collide to form larger planets, and the collisions produce a substantial quantity of dust, which steadily fades away over time. However, the teams SST observations had significantly challenged that theory, revealing that some relatively younger stars have no surrounding dust clouds and that older stars tend to have large, bright discs of orbiting dust. The presence of dust clouds around the older stars indicated that planetary collisions continue far after initial planetary formation. The team concluded that planetary formation is a longer and more chaotic process than scientists had previously assumed.(NASA, Astronomers Discover Planet Building Is Big Mess, news release 04-347, 18 October 2004; John Noble Wilford, A New Look at How Planets Are Formed, New York Times, 19 October 2004.)
NASA scientists reported that many of the samples from the Genesis space capsule had survived the spacecrafts crash on 8 September 2004. NASA had launched Genesis in 2001 to obtain particle samples from solar winds, planning to use the particles in a study of the chemical composition of the solar system during its creation billions of years ago. However, Genesiss sample-return capsule had failed to land on Earth as planned. Instead, it had crashed into the Utah desert, risking the destruction of the particle samples. However, although the crash had complicated the extraction and processing of the capsules fragile, wafer-like, sample-collection plates, NASA scientists had found many of the samples intact and usable for subsequent analyses.(Warren E. Leary, Space Specimens Saved from Wrecked Capsule, New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
Japans Mobile Broadcast Corporation and South Koreas Sun Kyung Telecom launched the Loral Mobile Broadcasting Satellite (MBSAT), which the two companies had designed to provide the worlds first digital multimedia broadband broadcasting system. The MBSAT, launched on a Lockheed Martin Atlas 3 rocket, carried a 40-foot-diameter (12.2-meter-diameter) antenna designed to provide audio, video, and data services to users of portable audio and visual devices in Japan and South Korea. International Launch Services (ILS), a U.S.-Russian private company, provided the launch services for the Japanese-South Korean joint venture.(Craig Covault, Mobile Milestone, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 12 (22 March 2004): 35; International Launch Services, About Us, http://www.ilslaunch.com/about-us/ (accessed 18 March 2009).)
Scientists from NASAs ARC and Yale University announced that they had designed a complete map of gene activities in human tissue. The researchers had affixed pieces of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences from the human genetic blueprintknown as the genometo specially patterned glass slides. Using these slides, they had measured levels of ribonucleic acidbiochemical copies of DNA, which activating genes produce to make proteins. Among their findings, the scientists had discovered that certain DNA sequences, which they had previously believed are nonfunctioning, are actually functioningthey are encoding active genes. The NASA scientists hoped their results would enable other researchers to analyze genes for human diseases and to develop new treatments for them. In addition, their research had a specific benefit for NASA: the NASA scientists hoped it would help them understand how human genes respond to spaceflight, so that they would be better able to protect the health of astronauts.(NASA, NASA Scientists Help Create Complete Human Genome Activity, news release 04-376, 15 November 2004; Viktor Stolc et al., A Gene Expression Map for the Euchromatic Genome of Drosophila Melanogaster, Science 360, no. 5696 (22 October 2004): 655660.)
Astronomer Fred Lawrence Whipple, a pioneering comet researcher, died at the age of 97. Whipple, born on 5 November 1906 in Red Oak, Iowa, had begun his research at Harvard University in 1931, studying meteors and Earths atmosphere. During his career, Whipple had contributed to many significant scientific achievements, including a meteor bumper known as the Whipple shielda device that protects spacecraft from meteor collisions. However, Whipple was best known for research defying conventional scientific theories about comets: whereas many scientists had suspected that comets were composed of sand and rock bound by gravity, Whipple had theorized that comets are discrete bodies with a frozen nucleus that heats up and emits propulsive jets of gas and dust. Later spacecraft missions to comets had proven his theory correct.(Adam Bernstein, Fred L. Whipple, 97, Dies; Comet Research Pioneer, Washington Post, 1 September 2004. 679 NASA, NASA Selects Contractors for Vision for Space Exploration Studies, news release C04-s, 1 September 2004.)
NASA launched an Earth-observation satellite called Aura from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 3:01 a.m. (PDT). The spacecraft was one of three satellites in NASAs Earth Observing System (EOS)the two others were Terra, which monitored land, and Aqua, which monitored the planets water cycle. NASA had created Aura to collect scientific data on global air quality, ozone recovery, and climate change, equipping the satellite with four instruments: the High Resolution Dynamics Limb Sounder, the Microwave Limb Sounder, the Ozone Monitoring Instrument, and the Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer. Project engineers hoped that the instruments would enable the spacecraft to collect the most detailed measurements to date of atmospheric pollution, climate change, and the ozone layer.(NASA, Aura Launched, To Better Understand the Air We Breathe, news release 04-217, 15 July 2004; Eric D. Tytell, Satellite To Study Atmospheric Pollutants, Los Angeles Times, 16 July 2004.)
NASA succeeded in landing the first of two robotic laboratories on the planet Mars. The robotic rover Spirit was one of two mobile laboratoriesMars Exploration Roversthat NASA had designed to collect and analyze geological samples on Mars. Analysis of the samples would help scientists determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to support life. The twin rovers, part of NASAs Mars Exploration Program, would land at sites on opposite sides of the planet, where scientists believed that liquid water might have existed in the past. To conduct geological research on the planet, NASA scientists had equipped each rover with a microscopic imager, a panoramic camera, and a variety of spectrometers. NASA had scheduled Opportunity, the second rover, to land on Mars later in January.(NASA, Spirit Lands on Mars and Sends Postcards, news release 2004-003, 4 January 2004; NASA, Mars Exploration Rover Mission: Summary, http://marsrover.nasa.gov/overview/ (accessed 11 January 2009).)
Researchers announced that they had found a new type of celestial object, which they suspected was a new class of black holes. A group of scientists led by Rosanne Di Stefano of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics had examined data collected by NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory. The team had studied x-rays emitted by enigmatic objects located in nearby galaxies, finding that the volume of x-rays emanating from these objects was comparable to or greater than the volume emitted by relatively warmer, larger hard x-ray sources, such as neutron stars and supermassive black holes. The findings indicated that the newly discovered objects could be a type of black hole that the researchers termed quasi-soft x-ray sources.(NASA, Enigmatic X-ray Sources May Point To New Class of Black Holes, news release 04-067, 1 March 2004; Frank Morring Jr., In Orbit, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 10 (8 March 2004): 19.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concluded a hearing on the final report of the Presidents Commission on Implementation of the U.S. Space Exploration Policy. The report, which the commission had released the previous day, addressed ways in which the federal government and private companies could implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Individuals testifying before the committee included Edward C. Aldridge Jr., who had led the Presidents Commission; Paul D. Spudis of the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory; Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Earth Atmospherics and Planetary Sciences; Laurie A. Leshin of Arizona State University; and retired U.S. Air Force General Lester L. Lyles, formerly Commander of the Air Force Materiel Command at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Final Report on the Presidents Commission on Implementation of U.S. Space Exploration Policy, 108th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 June 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, OKeefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive, http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
NASAs Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which was overseeing NASAs efforts to resume Shuttle flights, announced that NASA would not launch another Space Shuttle before March 2005. NASA had delayed a Shuttle launch because of a new requirement that launches occur during daylight hours, to enable photographing the liftoff from multiple angles. Because of the limited number of days available in which a launch could take place in daylight, the next Shuttle launch could occur no earlier than March 2005. In addition, NASA announced that, when Shuttle launches recommenced, one Shuttle would function as a standby rescue vehicle in case the Shuttle carrying the crew sustained damage during flight. NASA announced that, although rescue vehicles would not necessarily be positioned on the launchpad, they would be ready for launch within 45 to 90 days, the maximum length of time that seven astronauts could survive on the ISS before their supplies ran out.(NASA, NASA Updates Space Shuttle Return to Flight Plans, news release n04-065, 19 February 2004; Warren E. Leary, Shuttle Wont Fly Before March Next Year, New York Times, 20 February 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced that, effective 1 August 2004, NASA would restructure its organization to render it better able to implement President George W. Bushs Vision for Space Exploration. Among many other announced changes, NASA planned to restructure its Earth Science, Space Science, and other Strategic Enterprises into four Mission DirectoratesAeronautics Research, Exploration Systems, Science, and Space Operationswith clearer organizational roles and responsibilities. In addition, to improve communication and clarify responsibilities, functional offices of NASA Headquarters and its field officesincluding the office of the Chief Financial Officerwould become mission support offices.(Warren E. Leary, New Look for NASA for the Next Space Age, New York Times, 25 June 2004; NASA, Administrator Unveils Next Steps of NASA Transformation, news release 04-205, 24 June 2004.)
NASAs X-43A Hyper X plane set a new record for flight speed, traveling at Mach 7, which is nearly 5,000 miles (8,050 kilometers) per hour and seven times the speed of sound. The flight was also the first free flight of an aircraft powered by a supersonic combustion ramjet enginea scramjeta type of engine that provides thrust by funneling air and fuel into a hollow chamber at extremely high speed. The 12-foot-long (3.7-meter-long) unpiloted, experimental aircraft flew for approximately 11 seconds over the Pacific Ocean, at an altitude of 95,000 feet (approximately 29,000 meters), before NASA deliberately landed the aircraft in the ocean. NASA used a modified B-52 aircraft to carry the X-43A into the sky, launching the X-43A into flight using a Pegasus rocket mounted to the B-52. The test flight, which took place near San Nicolas Island off the California coast, originated from NASAs DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California.(Peter Pae, Fast Times at 12 OClock High: 5,000 MPH, Los Angeles Times, 28 March 2004; NASA, X-43A Soars on Scramjet Power, 27 March 2004.)
A group of astronomers reported new findings concerning two prominent enigmas of physicsdark energy and the expansion of the universe. Steve Allen of Cambridge University led a group of scientists who had used NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory to examine 26 clusters of galaxies, located 1 to 8 billion light-years from Eartha span of time covering the universes initial explosion and subsequent expansion. Previously, many scientists had theorized that a force called dark energy might have counteracted gravity, causing the expansion. Chandras observations of the distances between the galaxy clusters indicated that the universes expansion had accelerated, and Chandras data on the ratio of hot gas to dark matter within the galaxy clusters indicated that the density of dark energy had not changed. Both findings were contrary to many previous hypotheses. The astronomers stated that, although their findings were inconclusive, the data suggested that the constant density of dark energy causes the universe to expand eternally. This finding is consistent with Albert Einsteins concept of cosmological constant, which states that the universe expands constantly and gradually.(NASA, Chandra Opens New Line of Investigation on Dark Energy, news release 04-163, 18 May 2004; Guy Gugliotta, Astronomers Find More Evidence of Dark Energy, Washington Post, 19 May 2004.)
The U.S. Air Force awarded the Boeing Company a US$472 million contract to develop a military satellite system capable of secure, high-capacity global communications for NASA, the U.S. intelligence community, and the DOD. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would lead a team of companies that would conduct risk-reduction and system-definition studies for the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM (Military Satellite Communications) Space Segment, which uses laser communications, advanced processors, and other advanced technologies to provide communications for airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The companies selected to conduct research on the project included Ball Aerospace, Cisco Systems, and Raytheon.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Awarded $472 Million for Next-Generation Military Satellite System, news release, 23 January 2004, http//www.boeing.com/news/releases/2004/q1/nr_040123s.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Former astronaut Robert D. Cabana became Deputy Director of NASAs JSC, replacing Brock R. Stone, who had retired after a 36-year career with NASA. Cabana had previously served on four Space Shuttle missions and in many management positions supporting the Astronaut Office and the ISS Program. Before becoming Deputy Director of JSC, Cabana had served as Director of Flight Crew Operations. NASA had appointed former astronaut Kenneth D. Bowersox to fill that position.(NASA JSC, NASA Fills Key Space Flight Positions, news release I-I04-080, 3 March 2004.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bushs exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASAs possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort, Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space concerning NASAs budget request for FY 2005. NASA had requested US$16.2 billion for FY 2005, an increase of 5.6 percent over its budget for FY 2004. Much of OKeefes testimony and the Senate subcommittee members questions were concerned with the likelihood of NASAs achieving the objectives that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration, announced in January 2004. Those objectives included human flights to the Moon and replacing the Space Shuttles with a new space-exploration vehicle.(NASA, Administrator OKeefes Senate Testimony, news release, 1 April 2004; Gwyneth K. Shaw, NASA Chief Faces Lawmakers Queries, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 April 2004.)
A commission created by President George W. Bush released its report outlining how NASA and other organizations might implement President Bushs new policy: the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration. The Presidents Commission, led by Edward C. Aldridge Jr., endorsed the Vision for Space Explorations goalsto explore Mars and the Moon. In addition, the commission recommended that, to meet those goals, NASA needed to make numerous changes; the federal government needed to establish a permanent council to develop and coordinate space exploration policies; and the private sector needed to become more involved in space operations. Specific changes that the commission recommended were that NASA should focus on the research and development of space technology, and that private industry should conduct operational activities, such as launching payloads to low Earth orbit. The report also recommended that NASA pursue partnerships with the scientific community and with foreign space agencies.(Presidents Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, A Journey To Inspire, Innovate, and Discover: Report of the Presidents Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (Washington, DC, June 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/news/reports/index.html (accessed 6 April 2009); Warren E. Leary and John Schwartz, NASA Is Urged To Widen Role for Business, New York Times, 15 June 2004.)
Shana L. Dale became Deputy Administrator of NASA, replacing Frederick D. Gregory, who had announced his resignation from NASA in September 2005. Before joining NASA, Dale had worked at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, serving as Chief of Staff, General Counsel, and, finally, as Deputy Director for Homeland and National Security. In addition, Dale had served as Staff Director for the House Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1995 to 2000.(NASA, Dale Sworn In as NASA Deputy Administrator, media advisory M05-186, 29 November 2005; NASA, Griffin Applauds Confirmation of Dale as NASA Deputy Administrator, news release 05-386, 4 November 2005.)
JAXA successfully tested an experimental aircraft capable of flying at Mach 2, which is twice the speed of sound. JAXA launched the aircraft, formally known as the Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport (SST), on a rocket from Australias Woomera Test Range at 7:06 a.m. (local time). After its release from the rocket, the SST flew for nearly 15 minutes at speeds of Mach 1.9 to 2 (1,446 to 1,522 miles per hour or 2,327 to 2,449 kilometers per hour) and at altitudes ranging from 12 to 19 kilometers (7.5 to 11.8 miles). Mitsubishi Heavy Industries had developed the SST as part of a US$10 million program to create an aircraft capable of transporting 300 passengers between Los Angeles and Tokyo in approximately 4 hours.(Meraiah Foley, Flying High: Speedy Japanese Jet Passes Test, Houston Chronicle, 11 October 2005; JAXA, Flight Trial Result of Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport, news release, 10 October 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/10/20051010_sst_e.html (accessed 15 July 2009).)
The Boeing Company announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power business to Pratt & Whitney, a United Technologies Corporation unit, for about US$700 million in cash. Rocketdyne, primarily a rocket engine developer and builder that provided booster engines for the Space Shuttle and the Delta series of expendable launch vehicles, had helped pioneer space exploration in the 1950s and1960s. The sale reflected Boeings struggle to make a profit in the space-launch business and marked the companys latest move toward focusing on large-scale weapons and aerospace systems. United Technologies intended the acquisition to broaden the product line at Pratt & Whitney, which, in recent years, had lost market share in its core business of providing jet engines.(The Boeing Company, Boeing To Sell Rocketdyne Propulsion Unit to Pratt & Whitney; news release, 22 February 2005, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2005/q1/nr_050222o.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Los Angeles Times, Maker of Rocket Engines Is Sold, 23 February 2005.)
Scientists published research based on data from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory, which provided the first observational evidence that black holes not only destroy stars, but also create them. Sergei Nayakshin of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom and Rashid A. Sunyaev of the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Garching, Germany, compared x-ray emissions from stars in the Orion nebula with x-ray emissions from stars orbiting within one light-year of the central Milky Ways black hole Sagittarius A*. According to current scientific theories, a black holes immense gravity is able to pull millions of stars close to the black hole and to destroy stars. However, Nayakshin and Sunyaev had discovered that Sagittarius A* is not consuming its surrounding stars. Furthermore, the number of stars near the black hole is around 10,000, far less than scientists would expect if the black holes gravity had drawn the stars toward it. Therefore, the scientists had concluded that the Chandra data supports an alternative theory of why stars are near black holes. This theory holds that dust around a black hole creates dense gas clouds. The gravity of the clouds counteracts the gravity of the black hole, thereby creating an environment in which stars form.(NASA, NASAs Chandra Reveals New Star Generation, news release 05-344, 10 October 2005; Sergei Nayakshin and Rashid Sunyaev, The Missing Young Stellar Objects in the Central Parsec of the Galaxy: Evidence of Star Formation in a Massive Accretion Disc and a Top-Heavy Initial Mass Formation, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 364, no. 1 (13 October 2005): L23L27.)
NASA and its partner the Spaceward Foundation, a publicly funded, nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing the cause of space access, announced prizes totaling US$$400,000 for four competitions. The competitions would be the first under NASAs Centennial Challenges program, designed to promote technical innovation in support of the Vision for Space Exploration and NASAs goals. The first two competitions, the Tether Challenge and the Beam Power Challenge, would challenge innovators to focus on developing lightweight, yet strong, tether materials and wireless power transmission technologies. Winners of each of the initial 2005 challenges would receive a prize of US$50,000. The Tether Challenge would require teams to make the strongest tether of a specified diameter. Competing in a tournament-style bracket system, the tethers would be stretched until they broke, with the overall winner competing against NASAs house tether to win the cash. The Beam Power Challenge would require teams to use wireless technology to lift a weight off the ground. NASA planned a second set of Tether and Beam Power challenges, with a greater degree of difficulty, for 2006.(NASA, NASA Announces First Centennial Challenges Prizes, news release M05-083, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_m05083_Centennial_prizes.html (accessed 2 September 2005); Robert Roy Britt, NASA Details Cash Prizes for Space Privatization, Space.com, 24 March 2005, http://www.space.com/news/050323_centennial_challenge.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
A California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN) research team successfully launched and recovered the Prospector 6 (P6) test vehicle at the Mojave Test Area owned and operated by the Reaction Research Society. The test was part of a joint industry/academic effort to develop a low-cost Nanosat Launch Vehicle, a booster capable of delivering 22-pound (10- kilogram) payloads to low Earth orbit. Researchers at Garvey Spacecraft Corporation of Long Beach, California, and California State University at Long Beach had designed and built the partially reusable 27-foot (8-meter) P6 test vehicle, which had flown to just under 3,000 feet (914 meters), a milestone toward the teams goal. P6 had also carried student payloads from across the country: a mini-DV camera to capture on-board video of the entire flight sequence; a real-time telemetry system that adapted off-the-shelf Wi-Fi technology to relay key propulsion- system parameters; and a measurement-logging package to record acceleration, pressure, and temperature data that the research team would use to assess the vehicles performance.(Leonard David, High Hopes for Low-Cost Rocket After Successful Launch Test, Space.com, 27 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050526_prospector6_test.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
An international group of astronomers led by Debra A. Fischer of San Francisco State University announced that they had discovered the largest solid core yet found in an exoplanet. The planet, called HD 149026b, has a solid core that is approximately 70 times larger than Earths mass. The discovery was the first observational evidence of the core accretion theory of planetary formation, which posits that planets begin as small rock-ice cores and acquire additional mass through gravitational attraction of gas and other matter. The competing gravitational instability theory holds that planetary formation occurs after the rapid gravitational collapse of large gas clouds. Fischer and the other astronomers reported that they had determined that the mechanism of gravitational instability was unlikely to have produced the large, rocky core of HD 149026b.
NASAs Space Shuttle Program reached another milestone: filling a 154-foot-high (47-meter- high) external tank with fuel and oxygen. The test, intended to assure engineers that all changes to the tank operated as expected, marked the first time since Columbias accident that NASA had prepared an external tank for flight. The foam was necessary to keep the liquid fuel cool and to reduce ice build-up on the tank, but NASA and Lockheed Martin had redesigned the tank to reduce the amount of foam debris during launch. Changes to the tank design included removing the foam from the bipod ramp and replacing the foam with heaters. The designers had also added a drip-lip to reduce ice accumulation on the joints that permit the adjustment of the tanks fuel line. In a dress rehearsal for Discoverys upcoming launch, engineers pumped more than 500,000 gallons of fuel into the tank, monitoring the tank and the Shuttles systems down to the T-minus 31-second mark in a mock countdown. N. Wayne Hale Jr., Deputy Manager of the Space Shuttle Program and Chair of NASAs Mission Management Team, remarked on the outstanding performances of the newly modified external tank, the Shuttle, and the launchpad.(Philip Chien, NASA Tests Tank on Space Shuttle, Washington Times, 15 April 2005; William Harwood, NASA Managers Elated with Shuttle Fueling Test, Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2005; Kelly Young, Shuttles External Fuel Tank Tested Successfully, New Scientist, 15 April 2005, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn7270-shuttles-external-fuel-tank-tested-successfully.html (accessed 25 November 2009); Physorg.com, NASA Puts Space Shuttle External Tank to the Test, 15 April 2005, http://www.physorg.com/news3738.html (accessed 25 November 2009).)
NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar stormsextremely powerful explosions in the Suns atmospherecan affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASAs Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmospherecurrents associated with changes in solar magnetic fieldsare the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts, news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field, Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501513.)
NASA selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Broomfield, Colorado, to develop, manufacture, and provide prelaunch and postlaunch support for the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Microwave Imager (GMI) instrument. The total contract value was approximately US$100.2 million over a period of seven years and nine months. The GMI, a conical-scan microwave radiometer, would fly on the GPM Core spacecraft as part of a multinational collaborative effort to measure global precipitation. The spacecraft, which NASA had not yet built, would be the first in a constellation of spacecraft deployed under NASAs GPM mission. The GMI instrument would make calibrated, radiometric measurements from space at multiple microwave frequencies and polarizations. NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that scientists need to know the amount and distribution of precipitation worldwide so that they can assess the quantity and quality of fresh water resources for food and fiber production, human consumption, and other societal needs. Experts in water resource management, agriculture, transportation, forestry, weather forecasting, and other fields, would be able to use future research findings based on GMI data.(NASA, NASA Selects Firm To Provide GPM Microwave Imager Instrument, news release c05-g, 15 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_c05g_gpm_imager.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Matt Branaugh, Ball Gets In On NASA Mission, Boulder Daily Camera (CO), 16 March 2005.)
Astronomers announced that they had discovered the source of short gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), which had been an enigma for decades. Gamma rays are the most energetic and deadly form of electromagnetic radiation. Although scientists had already discovered that supernovas cause long GRBs, which last for approximately 2 seconds, they had remained uncertain of the causes of short GRBs, which last less than 1 second. Using data from numerous NASA satellites, 130 astronomers from around the world found that short GRBs originate from neutron stars and notas some theories had suggestedfrom supernovas. More specifically, satellite data showed that short GRBs originate from collisions involving a neutron star and either another neutron star or a black hole. However, the data was not conclusive regarding the exact type of collision that causes short GRBs, because the brevity of these events makes them difficult to observe directly.(Luigi Pir, Short-Burst Sources, Nature (London) 437, no. 7060 (6 October 2005): 822823; Dennis Overbye, Scientists Trace Gamma Rays to Collision of Dead Stars, New York Times, 6 October 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bushs plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet, 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, Space Policy Goes Private, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, White House Releases New Space Strategy, Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists had finally agreed that Voyager 1, launched in 1977, had reached the solar systems final frontier, passed through the termination shock regionthe point at the edge of the solar system where the solar wind slows abruptly, and entered the heliosheatha frontier of unknown thickness defining the border with interstellar space. In November 2003, the Voyager team had announced unusual events in the missions history, signaling that Voyager 1 had reached the edge of the solar system. However, scientists disagreed as to whether the craft had actually encountered termination shock or was merely approaching the region at the edge of interstellar space. NASA explained that scientists had based the evidence that Voyager 1 had encountered termination shock on the crafts measurement of a sudden increase in the strength of the magnetic field carried by the solar wind, combined with an inferred decrease in speed, which happens when the solar wind slows down. Additionally, Voyager had observed an increase in the number of high-speed, electrically charged electrons and ions, as well as a burst of plasma-wave noise, which scientists had expected to occur when Voyager 1 passed the termination shock. Eric Christian, Discipline Scientist for the Sun-Solar System Connection Research Program at NASA Headquarters, remarked that Voyagers observations over the past few years had shown that termination shock is far more complicated than previously thought. When Voyager 1 entered the heliosheath, the craft was 8.7 billion miles (14 kilometers) away from Earth, the farthest any human-made object had traveled.(NASA, Voyager Spacecraft Enters Solar Systems Final Frontier, news release 05-131, 24 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05131_Voyager_agu.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Guy Gugliotta, Voyager at Edge of Solar System, Washington Post, 25 May 2005.)
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected the most powerful eruption measured in the universe to date, generating a supermassive black hole that is growing at a remarkable rate. The eruption in the galaxy cluster MS 0735.6+7421 had been in process for more than 100 million years, generating energy equal to that of hundreds of millions of gamma- ray bursts (GRBs). In the past, scientists had usually detected the rapid growth of supermassive black holes by observing very bright radiation from galaxies. However, MS 0735.6+7421 had no detectable bright, central radiation, and the galaxy clusters radio jets were faint. Chandras x-ray observations of the hot cluster gas had revealed the true nature of the black hole. Michael R. Wise of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology remarked that, until Chandra had captured this information, scientists had no idea that the black hole was gorging itself. Chandras discovery demonstrated that, to observe and understand some of the most violent events in the universe, astronomers need x-ray telescopes.(NASA, Most Powerful Eruption in the Universe Discovered, news release 05-004, 5 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05004_chandra.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASAs FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttles retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
The American Academy of Arts and Sciences released United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities, a research paper highly critical of the Vision for Space Exploration. In the paper, former Director of NASAs JSC George W. S. Abbey and former White House science advisor Neal F. Lane stated that the Vision for Space Exploration does not address major obstacles to the United States progress in space exploration and science. Those problems include predicted shortfalls in the U.S. engineering and science workforce and declining international cooperation on existing and planned space missions. Abbey and Lane also stated that the United States would be unlikely to realize the Visions objectives because of the diminishing U.S. commitment to the countrys commercial space industry and the declining role of basic science in the U.S. space program and in the national economy. NASA officials did not comment on the paper, stating that they had not yet seen it.(John Schwartz, Report Says Space Program Is Lacking Money and Focus, New York Times, 23 June 2005; George W. S. Abbey and Neal F. Lane, United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities (Occasional Paper, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, 2005), 12.)
NASA and the Florida Space Research Institute (FSRI) announced the third Centennial Challenges competition: the Moon Regolith Oxygen (MoonROx) challenge. The MoonROx challenge would require teams to develop hardware, within mass and power limits, able to extract a minimum of 5 kilograms (0.005 tonnes or 0.006 tons) of breathable oxygen from simulated lunar soila volcanic ash called JSC-1within a period of 8 hours. The first team to accomplish the oxygen-production goal before June 2008 would win US$250,000. Existing state-of-the-art technologies were incapable of extracting oxygen from simulated lunar soil. FSRI Executive Director Samuel T. Durrance remarked that oxygen-extraction technologies would be critical for robotic and human missions to the Moon.(NASA, NASA Announces New Centennial Challenge, news release 05-128, 19 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05128_Centennial_Challenge.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Jeremy McGovern, Astro Bytes: Extracting Oxygen from Lunar Soil, Astronomy News, 24 May 2005.)
NASA announced the inauguration of SERVIR, an innovative regional monitoring system designed to provide early warnings to Central American decision makers about various ecological and climatic changes. SERVIR, Spanish for to serve, is the acronym for the Spanish phrase, Sistema Regional de Visualizacion y Monitoreo (Regional Visualization and Monitoring System). The purpose of the system was to aid the governments and industries of the seven countries of Central America and the southern Mexican states. NASA scientists had developed the system to track weather, climatological, and ecological eventsfor example, to monitor wildfires, red tides, and toxic algae bloomsusing NASAs research in Earth sciences and space-based observations. Daniel E. Irwin, SERVIR Project Manager at NASAs MSFC, remarked that the system was an excellent tool for gauging slow or periodic shifts in climate that could lead to drought or other long-term problems, in addition to identifying quick-forming weather phenomena that threaten human lives.(NASA, NASA Develops Central American Monitoring System, news release 05-038, 4 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05038_panama.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope had captured the light from two known planets that are orbiting stars other than the Sun, enabling scientists to measure and compare extrasolar planets directly. This event marked the beginning of a new era in planetary science. Previously, scientists had confirmed the existence of extrasolar planets using one of two techniques of indirect discoverythe wobble technique or the transit technique. The wobble technique detected the gravitational tug that a planet exerts on its parent star, and the transit technique inferred the presence of a planet when the planet passed in front of its star, causing the star to dim. Both techniques depended on visible-light telescopes. By contrast, Spitzer observed infrared light, enabling astronomers to contrast a planet against the glow of its parent star. If detected using the transit technique, the glow of the parent star would have overwhelmed the glimmer of light reflected by the planet.(NASA, NASAs Spitzer Marks Beginning of New Age of Planetary Science, news release 05-082, 22 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05082_Spitzer_First_Light.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
J. Stephen Fossett landed the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer experimental aircraft in Salinas, Kansas, after flying the first solo, nonstop, non-refueled, around-the-world airplane trip. The flight had lasted three days, during which Fossett had not slept and had only consumed 12 milkshakes. The craft, designed by X Prizewinning SpaceShipOne creator Burt Rutan, carried NASAs advanced experimental Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) transceiver, the Low Power Transceiver (LPT) that NASA researchers believed would provide a flexible and inexpensive option for relaying information between spacecraft. NASA had placed the new transceiver on board GlobalFlyer to test the devices function during a real flight, especially its performance in delivering a constant video feed. NASA had loaned GlobalFlyer a modified version of its Personal Cabin Pressure Monitor to alert the pilot of potentially dangerous or deteriorating cabin pressure. Because the background noise in GlobalFlyers cockpit was too loud for the pilot to hear an alarm, the modified monitor vibrated to signal a problem. The mission had successfully overcome periodic failures of GlobalFlyers navigation system. Furthermore, while passing through Japanese airspace, the aircraft had appeared to be running out of fuel too quickly, but a solid tailwind had helped Fossett avoid making a landing in Hawaii.(NASA, NASA Technology Supports Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer, news release 05-068, 3 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05068_globalflyer_congrats.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, NASA Helps Record Flight, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2005.)
Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASAs JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director, news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, NASA Center Directors, 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
NASA scientists announced the first measurements ever taken of changes in sea level that were unrelated to changes in land height. Although researchers believed that rising sea levels were related to global warming, they were unsure of how much sea levels had changed, the degree to which sea-level changes were attributable to upward and downward land movements, and the causes of those changes. However, using data from numerous satellites, NASA scientists had discovered that global sea levels had increased during the previous 50 years, at an estimated rate of 1.8 millimeters (0.07 inches) annually, and that the rate of increase had accelerated to 3 millimeters (0.12 inches) annually in the previous 12 years. The scientists attributed half of the rise in sea levels to the expansion of water from warmer ocean temperatures and the remainder to various other sources, such as the melting of ice covers in Antarctica, Greenland, and elsewhere.(Juliet Eilperin, NASA Able To Pinpoint Changes in Sea Levels, Washington Post, 8 July 2005; NASA, NASA Satellites Measure and Monitor Sea Level, news release 05-175, 7 July 2005.)
NASA signed a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in an effort to improve global conservation through increased use of NASAs Earth science research and remote-sensing data. Under the agreement, UNESCO would use NASA-generated data to share scientific information about how Earth functions. In addition, the MOA would further an existing partnership between the NASA- supported Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) education program and UNESCOs World Heritage Centre. NASA and UNESCO would train teachers in UNESCO-member states to work with UNESCOs Natural World Heritage Site managers on collaborative conservation program activities.
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASAs budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASAs space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASAs Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASAs aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASAs intentions regarding issues contained in the Presidents budget request, including NASAs plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIBs critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASAs own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bushs intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 35; Guy Gugliotta, NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13, Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core, news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bunei Sato et al., The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core, Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465473.)
Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company announced the formation of a joint venture called United Launch Alliance, combining the production, engineering, testing, and launch operations associated with U.S. government launches of Boeing Delta and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. The merger ended a two-year legal battle between the two largest government contractors, in which Lockheed Martin had accused Boeing of cheating to win rocket-launch work. The venture eliminated market competition for launching weather satellites for NOAA, scientific satellites for NASA, spy satellites for the National Security Agency, and communications satellites for the U.S. Air Force. According to the agreement, the joint venture would produce both Boeings Delta and Lockheeds Atlas rockets, consolidating production at Boeings Decatur, Alabama, facility. Lockheeds Denver, Colorado, office would serve as headquarters, housing the engineering and administrative functions. Lockheed Martins Vice President of Financial Strategies Jeffrey D. MacLauchlan remarked that the preservation of the two separate rocket families was the crux of the ventures appeal to the federal government.(Lockheed Martin, Boeing, Lockheed Martin To Form Launch Services Joint Venture, news release, 2 May 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/BoeingLockheedMartin FormLaunchServi.html (accessed 17 September 2009); Renae Merle, Boeing, Lockheed Join Rocket Division, Washington Post, 3 May 2005.)
The FAA published the first proposed regulations on commercial human spaceflight, a growing industry often referred to as space tourism. The Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492) required the U.S. Department of Transportation, which oversees the FAA, to implement regulations on commercial human spaceflights. Congress had passed the bill for to establish a balanced and clear regulatory regime that promoted the development of the growing commercial human spaceflight industry. Most of the FAAs proposed regulations addressed passengers informed consent and crew members qualifications, as well as the training of both passengers and crew. The proposed regulations would remain subject to public comment for 60 days (until 27 February 2006). The FAA was required to issue the final regulations by 23 June 2006.(Darlene Superville for the Associated Press, Govt Issues Proposed Space Tourism Rules, 29 December 2005; Human Space Flight Requirements for Crew and Space Flight Participants, 70 Fed. Reg. 77, 262 (29 December 2005) (to be codified at 14 C.F.R. pt. 401, 415 et al.).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASAs detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
ESAs CryoSat spacecraft was destroyed during a failed launch from Russias Plesetsk Cosmodrome. ESA had intended CryoSat as one of a series of Earth-observation spacecraft called Earth Explorers. ESA had built CryoSat to monitor the thickness of land and sea ice, to determine whether climate change is reducing Earths ice masses. Initial assessments of the launch failure indicated that the rocket launching the satellite had experienced a problem with its on-board flight-control system, a problem that had prevented the rockets upper stage from separating from its second stage.(ESA, CryoSat Mission Lost Due to Launch Failure, ESA news release 44-2005, 8 October 2005. http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMR3Q5Y3EE_index_0.html (accessed 14 July 2009); New York Times, Arctic Study Satellite Crashes into Ocean, 9 October 2005.)
Astronomers using NASAs Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) detected, for the first time, a large population of black holes known as type-2 quasars. Quasarssupermassive black holesare the universes brightest objects. Although scientists had observed the light from type-1 quasars, they had never before been able to detect type-2 quasars because, despite the brightness of type-2 quasars, the gas and dust rings that surround them obscure the quasars visible light and block their emission of x-rays. Space telescopes and other scientific instruments rely on x-ray emissions to detect and to analyze these celestial phenomena. However, Alejo Martinez-Sansigre of the University of Oxford led a team of astronomers who used the SST to detect infrared light emitted by type-2 quasars, thereby capturing evidence of 21 quasars. The research also indicated that the growth of black holes has been concentrated in obscure regions of the universe and has tended to occur in the cores of forming galaxies during brief, highly productive periods. The new data suggested that thousands more such quasars might exist in the universe.(NASA, NASAs Spitzer Finds Hidden, Hungry Black Holes, news release 05-211, 3 August 2005; Alejo Martinez-Sansigre et al., The Obscuration by Dust of Most of the Growth of Supermassive Black Holes, Nature 463, no. 7051 (4 August 2005): 666669.)
Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it had finalized an agreement with the Boeing Company to compete as a team to develop NASAs new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and related human lunar-exploration systems, in anticipation of NASAs formal request for proposals (RFPs). NASA intended the CEV to serve as the central human space-transportation system within the Project Constellation, which would incorporate human and robotic space systems, ferrying astronauts to the Moon and beyond. According to the agreement, Northrop Grummans Integrated Systems sector would serve as team leader and prime contractor during the initial development phase, Spiral 1. During the Spiral 1 phase, the team hoped to demonstrate the CEVs ability to operate safely in low Earth orbit with astronauts aboard. Boeing NASA Systems, an operating unit of Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, would serve as principal subcontractor. The two companies roles would reverse to implement the second phase, Spiral 2. During the Spiral 2 phase, NASA intended to begin to expand human space exploration to the Moon and beyond.(Northrop Grumman, Northrop Grumman, Boeing Finalize Space Exploration Teaming Agreement, news release, 24 January 2005, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=71298 (accessed 17 August 2009); Los Angeles Business Journal, Northrop, Boeing Finalize Deal To Team for NASA Contract, 25 January 2005.)
President of Canadian Arrow Geoff Sheerin and Indian-American entrepreneur Chirinjeev Kathuria joined forces to create a new corporation called PlanetSpace. The companys goal was to make spaceflight available to the public within two years. Canadian Arrow was creating a rocket based on the German World War II V-2 rocket. Although the company had not completed its rocket in time to compete for the US$10 million X Prize in 2004, it had successfully completed a drop test of the vehicle in August 2005 and expected to complete the rocket within one year. PlanetSpace planned to charge US$250,000 per person for a suborbital flight that would include 14 days of training and 15 minutes of flight time. The rocket would launch from a Canadian site with a pilot and two passengers and would reach a maximum velocity of four times the speed of sound. The rocket would coast to a maximum height of 70 miles (112 kilometers), providing a few minutes of weightlessness and a view of the curving Earth with a black sky above. Finally, a crew capsule would separate from the rocket during its descent and would parachute down to a water landing.(PlanetSpace, Canadian Arrow Partners with Leading American Entrepreneur To Launch First Commercial Passengers to Space, news release, 17 May 2005, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/ps-press-rel-001.pdf (accessed 17 September 2009); Alan Boyle, Space Partners Plan Flights in 2007, MSNBC.com, 18 May 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7879142/ (accessed 17 September 2009).)
NASA-funded researchers reported that they had discovered that lightning in clouds a few miles above the ground clears a safe zone in the Van Allen Beltthe radiation belt located thousands of miles above Earth. Without this zone, satellites would have no safe area in which to orbit. The discovery, which NASA described as unexpected, resolved a 40-year debate about how the safe zone forms and how the region clears after magnetic storms fill it with radiation. Previously, the prominent theory held that turbulence in the zone generates radio waves in space, which clear the radiation. However, lightning also generates radio waves. The research team had confirmed the lightning theory using a global map of lightning activity created from data that the Micro Lab 1 spacecraft had collected. The team had also collected radio-wave data from the Radio Plasma Imager aboard the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft, combining that data with archival data from the Dynamics Explorer spacecraft. These two data sets showed that radio-wave activity in the safe zone closely follows terrestrial lightning patterns; if the radio waves had originated in space rather than Earth, no such correlation would exist. Therefore, the team had concluded that lightning clears radiation within a few days following magnetic storms. According to NASA, engineers could eventually design spacecraft that generate radio waves at the correct frequency and location to clear radiation belts around other planets, enabling humans to explore planets and moons such as Jupiters Europa.(NASA, NASA Finds Lightning Clears Safe Zone in Earths Radiation Belt, news release 05-070, 8 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05070_radiation_belt.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Agence-France Presse, Lightning Cuts Safe Zone Between Earth Radiation Belts: NASA, 9 March 2005.)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns, news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns, Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
NASA launched a 40 million-cubic-foot (12.2 million-cubic-meter) balloon, the Deep Space Test Bed facility, from Fort Sumner, New Mexico, carrying an automobile-sized aluminum gondola containing scientific experiments prepared by university and elementary school students. NASA had collaborated with the students to carry out research to analyze characteristics of Earths atmosphere from the unique laboratory traveling 30 miles (48.3 kilometers) above Earth. The primary payload was the High Energy Replicated Optics (HERO), a hard x-rayfocusing telescope. Engineers from NASAs MSFC had designed HERO to create images from high- energy x-ray light. Undergraduate students from Pennsylvania State University, Montana State University, the University of Alabama, and Auburn University in Alabama had prepared experiments for the new laboratory. The experiments would identify pollution-related aerosols in the atmosphere, measure radiation and its impact on the integrity and behavior of the balloon, measure the external temperature of the balloon material, and gather magnetic-field data. Students from eight grade schools had prepared experiments to observe the effect of the flight environment on microscopic organisms and seeds, placing their experiments in brick-size plastic containers inside two large containers on board the balloon.(NASA, NASA and Students Partner for High Altitude Research, news release 05-121, 11 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05121_Student_Experiments.html (accessed 14 September 2009). 792 Richard M. Jones for the American Institute of Physics, New NASA Administrator Appears Before Senate Appropriators, FYI Bulletin 69, 17 May 2005, http://www.aip.org/fyi/2005/069.html (accessed 17 September 2009).)
JAXA launched its Suzaku astronomy satellite at 3:30 a.m. (GMT) from Uchinoura Space Center (formerly called the Kagoshima Space Center) on an M-5 rocket. Suzaku, known as Astro-E2 before the launch, was JAXAs replacement for its first Astro-E satellite, which had been lost during launch in 2000. JAXA and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science had built the satellite to monitor space in conjunction with NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESAs XMM-Newton. The Suzaku satellite was equipped with three telescopes: a Hard X-ray Detector, an X-ray Spectrometer, and an X-ray Imaging Spectrometer.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 621, 1 August 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx621.html (accessed 12 June 2009); NASA, Suzaku: Mission Overview, 3 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/astro-e2/ main/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
The NASA Advisory Council (NAC), responsible for providing counsel and policy advice to the NASA Administrator on important programs and issues, held its first meeting after its organizational restructuring. NASA had restructured the NAC to provide it with better support as NASA implemented the Vision for Space Exploration. Under the reorganization, the NAC had incorporated standing committees that it had previously chartered. The six committees composing the restructured Council were Aeronautics, Audit and Finance, Exploration, Human Capital, Science, and Space Operations. Each committee was responsible for examining particular subject areas and providing findings to the full Council, which would consider the findings and supply specific recommendations to the Administrator. Former U.S. Senator and Apollo program astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt chaired the 24-member NAC, which also included former Apollo program astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first person to walk on the Moon.(NASA, New NASA Advisory Council Holds Inaugural Meeting, news release 05-416, 29 November 2005; NASA, NASA Advisory Council (NAC), 19 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/nac/home/ index.html (accessed 22 July 2009).)
The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecrafts sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the publics knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann DruyanSagans widowhad founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particlesphotonson the spacecrafts large, triangular, mirror-like solar sails were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine, 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, Projects: Solar Sailing, http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
Japan successfully launched a geostationary weather satellite MTSAT-1R aboard an H-2A rocket from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima prefecture, after a glitch in communications between the rocket and ground systems had caused a 76-minute delay. The launch was Japans first launch of a heavy-lift vehicle since November 2003, when one of the H-2As solid boosters had failed to jettison as expected after completing its burn, causing the launch to fail. In the failed launch, Japan had lost the second pair of the four spy satellites that it had built after North Korea had fired a missile into Japanese territory in 1998. The other pair of the four satellitesone optical and one radar-sounding satellitewere all Japan had left to monitor its threatening neighbor. Furthermore, the launch failure had dashed Japans plans to enter the commercial satellite-launch business and had caused Japan to lose its international credibility. The successful launch of the MTSAT-1R restored morale to Japans rocketry program. A second mission of the MTSAT-1R was to replace a satellite lost in November 1999 when the final H-2 rocket, the predecessor of H-2A, had failed to reach orbit. Japan had designed the MTSAT-1R to service the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency, fulfilling the two missions of facilitating air-traffic management and obtaining satellite imagery for meteorologists.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616; James Brooke, After Failures, Space Effort in Japan Gets a Lift, New York Times, 28 February 2005; Justin Ray, Beleaguered H-2A Rocket Roars Into Orbit, Spaceflight Now, 26 February 2005.)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASAs 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean OKeefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five masters degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASAs decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASAs development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bushs Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator, news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, NASA Nominee Says Hell Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope, New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-108, legislation that provided US$16.5 billion in appropriations to NASA for FY 2006. In the bills conference report, Congress noted some specific programs that it wanted NASA to pursue. For example, Congress specified that NASA use the funds to develop the Crew Exploration Vehicle and Crew Launch Vehicle, as described in the Exploration Systems Architecture Study, NASAs master plan for meeting the goals of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, Congress also directed NASA to make more effective use of NASA TelevisionNASAs own television station, which it had primarily used for internal communicationsto promote public knowledge about and interest in space exploration.
NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASAs HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenitecomposed of iron, oxygen, and titaniumas a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source, New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals, Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
NASA officially refuted news reports that had circulated on 16 February claiming that NASA scientists affiliated with ARC had found strong evidence that life might exist on Mars. According to the news reports, during a private meeting in Washington, DC, two astrobiologists from Ames had told a group of space officials that they had found strong evidence, in the form of methane signatures, that life currently exists on Mars, hidden in caves and sustained by pockets of water. NASA stated that it did not have any observational data from any current Mars missions to support the claim. NASA further stated that the work the scientists had conducted did not directly support any conclusion regarding the existence of life on Mars but, rather, that the scientists research could help formulate a strategy for searching for such life. The scientists had not submitted any research papers asserting the existence of Martian life to any scientific journal.(NASA, NASA Statement on False Claim of Evidence of Life on Mars, news release 05-052, 18 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05052_mars_claim.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Bloomberg News, NASA Says Claims of Evidence of Current Life on Mars Are False, 19 February 2005; Brian Berger, Exclusive: NASA Researchers Claim Evidence of Present Life on Mars, Space.com, 16 February 2005, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/mars_life_050216.html (accessed 28 August 2009).)
NASA launched its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) at 7:43 a.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida on an Atlas 5 launch vehicle. The occasion marked the first time that NASA had used an Atlas 5 to launch an interplanetary mission. NASA had designed the MRO to conduct highly detailed analyses of Marss atmosphere, surface, and subsurface. From low orbit, the MRO would evaluate landing sites for future Mars missions and search for sites where water might have previously existed. NASA planned to examine the MRO data to seek evidence of previous life on the planet and to study planetary climate change. After two years of gathering data, the MRO would relay the information to Earth, using two robotic probes scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2008 and 2010.(NASA, NASAs Multipurpose Mars Mission Successfully Launched, news release 05-218, 12 August 2005; Thomas H. Maugh II, New Mars Orbiter Embarks on Ambitious Fact-Finding Mission, Los Angeles Times, 13 August 2005.)
A group of scientists led by David N. Burrows of Pennsylvania State University announced that they had found evidence of black holes behaving in a manner previously unknown. Using observations from NASAs Swift satellite, the scientists had discovered newly formed black holes that were simultaneously consuming matter while propelling away other material. They also observed that, after the black holes had emerged from large star explosions, the energy from the black holes initial formative activities had caused several subsequent explosions during the following minutes, with a gamma-ray burst (GRB) from the first explosion followed by x-ray flares from later explosions. Previously, scientists had believed that black holes and GRBs were only associated with single explosions of collapsing stars, rather than with a rapid succession of explosions. The scientists had been able to conduct their analyses because NASAs Swift satellite could observe GRBs within minutes after their occurrence, whereas other satellites had only been able to observe GRBs hours after they had occurred.
ESA successfully launched the Venus Express on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4:33 a.m. (CET). ESA had created the spacecraft to analyze Venuss atmosphere, chemistry, and structure, while the craft was orbiting the planet. ESA planned to use the analysis of Venuss surface and its hot, stormy atmosphere to study climate change on Earth, as well as to help determine why Venus had evolved so differently from Earth, despite numerous structural similarities between the two planets. The spacecraft was ESAs second probe designed to orbit a specific planet, the first being Mars Express, which ESA had launched in 2003.(ESA, Venus Express En Route To Probe the Planets Hidden Mysteries, ESA news release 50-2005, 9 November 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM56Q638FE_index_0.html (accessed 19 July 2009); Melissa Eddy for Associated Press, European Space Agency Launches Venus Probe, 9 November 2005.)
Russian Space Agency Chief Anatoly N. Perminov and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed an agreement allowing Russia to use ESA sites for space launches and enabling Russia and Europe freely to exchange research and development information. Specifically, ESA would permit Russia to conduct Soyuz launches from Kourou, French Guiana. In addition, the two would share information on the design of new launchers and fuelsinformation once closely guarded by both sideswith the intention of developing new launchers jointly. For example, Russia and Europe had studied the option of developing new reusable launchers and new propulsion systems.
NASAs Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASAs KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASAs first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission, news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, STS-114: Return to Flight, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, Return to Flight: Mission Overview, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, NASA Grounds Shuttles, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
Alliant Techsystems announced the successful completion of the first in a series of ground tests for solar-sail technology, developed to enable solar-powered interplanetary probes and solar observatories. At NASAs GRCs Plum Brook Station in Ohio, NASA engineers fully deployed a 20 x 20 meter (65.6 x 65.6 feet) version of the solar-sail system, in a 100-foot-diameter (30.5- meter-diameter) vacuum chamber, to test the systems functional deployment and attitude control. The test marked a critical milestone in the development of in-space propulsion technology using the Suns energy, instead of fuel propellant, to provide thrust. The In-Space Propulsion Program of NASAs Science Mission Directorate was developing the solar-sail propulsion system.(Alliant Techsystems, ATK and NASA Successfully Test First Solar Sail Propulsion System, news release, 6 May 2005, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=447 (accessed 16 September 2009).)
Woodrow Whitlow Jr. became Director of NASAs GRC, replacing the retiring Julian M. Earls. Whitlow had served as Deputy Director of NASAs KSC since September 2003. Before that, he had served as Director of Research and Technology at GRC. Whitlow, who held bachelors, masters, and doctoral degrees in aeronautics and astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had begun working for NASA in 1979 as a research scientist at LaRC.(NASA Glenn Research Center, Center Director: Dr. Woodrow Whitlow Jr., 10 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/about/bios/whitlowbio.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-155, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005, which authorized NASAs appropriations for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 and directed NASA to pursue particular programs during that period. More specifically, the new law directed NASAs Administrator to ensure that NASA would pursue a balanced set of programs related to aeronautics research and development, human spaceflight, and scientific researchincluding robotic missions to the Moon. Among the specific programs the law directed NASA to pursue was the launch of the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) at a date as close to 2010 as possible, and the landing of Americans on the Moon by 2020. Both objectives were components of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, the law specifically authorized appropriations for only two yearsUS$17.9 billion for FY 2007 and US$18.7 billion for FY 2008.(H.R. Rep. 109-354, at 22 (2005) (Conf. Rep.).)
NASA announced findings from research exploring the impact of black carbon or soot on Earths climate, findings that provided new and additional evidence that pollution generated through the process of incomplete combustion contributes to the accelerated melting of sea ice and snow, as well as to the changing atmospheric temperatures in the Arctic region. Dorothy M. Koch, of Columbia University and NASAs Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), and James E. Hansen, also of GISS, coauthored the study, using satellite data and computer models to recreate the climate and to track pollution. In addition to confirming past findings regarding the relationship between pollution and climate change in the Arctic region, the study had found that most of the pollution in the environment and the atmosphere of the Arctic did not originate in the developed world, but rather in southern Asia, which had the highest level of industrial soot emissions in the world. Using the GISS General Circulation Model (GCM) to locate the origins of Arctic soot, Koch and Hansen had found that one-third of the pollution originated in southern Asia, one-third was the result of burning vegetation and natural materials around the world, and the remainder originated in Russia, Europe, and North America.(NASA, NASA Study Finds Soot May Be Changing the Arctic Environment, news release 05-084, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05084_arctic_soot.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Miguel Bustillo, Airborne Soot Adds To Arctic Melting, Study Finds, Los Angeles Times, 24 March 2005.)
Scientists using NASAs Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) reported the first measurements of day and night temperatures ever made on an extrasolar planet. Previously, astronomers had been able to measure extrasolar planets global traits, such as mass and size, but had not been able to measure characteristics of particular portions of those planets. The scientists had observed a Jupiter-like gas giant, called Upsilon Andromedae b, which orbits very close to a star called Upsilon Andromedae. Gas giants are planets composed primarily of gas, rather than solid matter. The astronomers had discovered that Upsilon Andromedae b might be extremely hot on one side and extremely cold on the other. The observed temperature difference of 2,550oF (1,400oC) on the planets two sides indicates that the planets atmosphere absorbs and re-radiates sunlight127 rapidly, so that that gas circling the planet cools quickly, forming a stratosphere of cool gas.
A team of European astronomers, led by Christophe Lovis of the Observatoire de Geneve in Switzerland, reported in Nature their discovery of a new system of three extrasolar planets in the constellation Puppis. The discovery of the three planets orbiting the Sun-like star HD 69830, which is approximately 41 light-years from Earth, marked the first time that astronomers had identified a system composed of several planets, each planet possessing a mass approximating that of Neptune. Theoretical calculations of the complexion of the three planets had indicated that the two closest to HD 69830 have a rocky composition similar to the planet Mercury. The astronomers reported that the outermost planet likely has a significant gaseous envelope, surrounding a core composed of rock or ice or a combination of the two, and that the temperatures of the planet are moderate enough to allow the existence of liquid water. The team had discovered the planets using the European Southern Observatorys 3.6-meter (11.8-foot) telescope at the La Silla Observatory in Chile. The telescope was equipped with a precise spectrograph to detect small wobbles induced by the Puppis planets in the HD 69830 star. The technique of detecting and studying these wobbles enabled astronomers to measure the 64 gravitational influence of a planet on its parent star and, thereby, to infer the planets presence.
In a comprehensive survey published in the Journal of Glaciology, H. Jay Zwally, of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Maryland, and a team of NASA scientists confirmed
NASAs Genesis Mission Mishap Investigation Board, chaired by Michael Ryschkewitsch of NASAs GSFC, released its findings on why the drogue parachute and parafoil systems had failed to deploy properly, to slow the Genesis Sample Return Capsules re-entry. With nothing to slow its descent, the capsule had crashed into Utahs desert landing zone on 8 September 2004. The fifth in its series of Discovery missions, NASA had launched Genesis on 8 August 2001, to collect samples of solar wind and to return them to Earth. The Board had determined that the proximate cause of the mishap was an erroneous design, namely, the installation of the G-switch (gravity-switch) sensors in an inverted position, rendering them unable to sense sample return capsule deceleration during atmospheric entry and [to] initiate parachute deployments. The report identified root causes of the accident, as well as major contributing factors. It cited JPL project managers lack of critical oversight during Lockheed Martin Space Systems design, review, and testing of the spacecraft. The report also found that NASAs systems engineering processes were inadequate and recommended adding a thorough review of all project Systems Engineering progress, plans, and processes as part of existing major milestone reviews. Furthermore, the Board criticized NASAs decision to use its faster, better, cheaper approach to select and develop the Genesis mission, an approach that NASA had previously applied in other failed missions. The Board found that this approach had impaired JPLs insight into the projects technical progress and increased the element of risk.(Amir Alexander, Genesis Mishap Investigation Board Releases Final Report, The Planetary Society, 13 June 2006, http://www.planetary.org/news/2006/0613_Genesis_Mishap_Investigation_Board.html (accessed 22 February 2010) 14 June 2006; NASA, Genesis Mishap Investigation Board Report, (Washington, DC, June 2006), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/149414main_Genesis_MIB.pdf (accessed 22 February 2010); NASA, NASA Releases Genesis Accident Report, media advisory M06-097, 13 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/ HQ_M06097_Genesis_update.html (accessed 22 February 2010).)
NASAs Stardust mission return capsule landed at the U.S. Air Force Utah Test and Training Range at 5:10 a.m. (EST). The spacecraft, which had launched on 7 February 1999, flying 2.88 billion miles (4.63 billion kilometers) and circling the Sun three times, was the first to bring comet material from outer space. On 2 January 2004, Stardust had flown within 149 miles (239.79 kilometers) of comet Wild 2s nucleus, to collect microscopic dust particles. During the voyage, the spacecraft had captured bits of interstellar dust streaming into the solar system from other parts of the galaxy. NASA expected that the 100-pound (45.36-kilogram) capsule ejected from Stardust would contain approximately 1 million samples of comet and interstellar dust particles, trapped in a material like spun glass, called aerogel. NASA would transfer the capsule to a laboratory at its Johnson Space Center (JSC), where scientists would examine the samples. According to Principal Investigator for the mission, Donald E. Brownlee, of the University of Washington, Seattle, this has been a fantastic opportunity to collect the most primitive material in the solar system. We fully expect some of the comet particles to be older than the Sun.(Guy Gugliotta, Stardust Capsule Brings First Comet Sample to Earth, Washington Post, 17 January 2006; Warren Leary, Space Capsule Bearing Comet Dust Lands in Utah, New York Times, 17 January 2006; NASA, NASAs Comet Hunter on Final Approach for Sunday Landing, news release 06-028, 12 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06028_stardust.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Albert Scott Crossfield, legendary test pilot and aeronautical engineer, died at the age of 84, when his single-engine Cessna plane crashed. During his five-year tenure (19501955) as a research pilot for NASAs forerunner, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Crossfield had flown most of the experimental aircraft tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California. In 1953, at the controls of a Douglas D-558-2 Skyrocket, he had been the first person to fly at twice the speed of sound, achieving a speed of Mach 2more than 1,320 miles per hour (2,124 kilometers per hour). Crossfield had later become the chief test pilot for North American Aviation, where he was the consultant for the revolutionary X-15 rocket-powered airplane. One of his two-dozen flights aboard the X-15 had reached Mach 2.97, almost three times the speed of sound. In 1993 Crossfield had received the NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal for his contributions to aeronautics research and development. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin described Crossfield as not only one of the greatest pilots who ever flew, but also an expert aeronautical engineer, aerodynamicist, and designer who made significant contributions . . . to systems testing, reliability engineering, and quality assurance for the Apollo command and service modules and Saturn V second stage.(Dennis McLellan, Scott Crossfield, 84; 1st Man To Fly at Twice the Speed of Sound Helped Craft X-15 Rocket Plane, Los Angeles Times, 21 April 2006; NASA, NASA Administrator Statement Regarding the Tragic Loss of Aviation Pioneer A. Scott Crossfield, news release 06-191, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/apr/HQ_)
Japan launched into space the Advanced Landing Observing Satellite (ALOS), known as Daichi, on an H-IIA rocket, from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima in southern Japan, at 10:33 a.m. (JST). ALOS had the capability to produce maps of a scale of 25,000 to 1, without using reference points on Earths surface. Japan would also use the satellite for precise regional land- coverage observation, disaster monitoring, and resource surveying. Three instruments aboard ALOS would accomplish these tasks: the Panchromatic Remote-Sensing Instrument for Stereo Mapping (PRISM), an optical camera measuring land elevation; the Advanced Visible and Near Infrared Radiometer type 2 (AVNIR-2), observing the material that covers land surfaces; and the Phased Array type Lband Synthetic Aperture Radar (PALSAR), enabling day-and-night and all- weather land observation. Japan had designed ALOS to operate for at least three years, with a program objective for a mission lasting up to five years.(Stephen Clark, New Earth Observer Launched into Orbit, Spaceflight Now, 24 January 2006; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), Satellites and Spacecraft: Advanced Land Observing Satellite DAICHI (ALOS), 25 February 2009, http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/alos/index_e.html (accessed 12 November 2009); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 627, 1 February 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/ spx627.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
NASA launched the US$700 million New Horizons spacecraft aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 5 rocket, on a 3-billion mile (4.83-kilometer), 9-year journey to Pluto, at 2:00 p.m. (EST) from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The spacecraft left Earths orbit at a speed of 36,000 miles per hour (57,936 kilometers per hour). After the spacecrafts planned February 2007 flyby of Jupiter, to receive a gravity-assisted velocity boost, NASA projected that it would reach a top speed of 47,000 miles per hour (75,639 kilometers per hour), thereby reducing the flights duration by three to five years. NASA expected that the New Horizons spacecraft would have its closest approach to Pluto and its moons in July 2015. Powered by 24 pounds (10.9 kilograms) of plutonium, New Horizons carried seven scientific instruments. Three of these were cameras, which would capture visible-light, infrared, and ultraviolet images of the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon. Also on board were three spectrometers, to study the composition and temperatures of Plutos thin atmosphere and surface features. After flying past Pluto, the spacecraft would penetrate deeper into the Kuiper Belt, an outer zone of the solar system 9 comprising thousands of icy, rocky objects, including comets and small planets, such as Pluto.
At a hearing on NASAs FY 2007 budget request for its Science Mission Directorate, the House Committee on Science received testimony from the Directorates Associate Administrator Mary L. Cleave. NASAs FY 2007 budget request for science programs was US$3.1 billion less for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 than its FY 2006 budget request had projected. The request reflected NASAs decision to slow the rate of growth for scientific missions by 1.5 percent in 2007 and by 1 percent thereafter. Cleave defended this decision against concerns of the House committee that the policy would result in the delay or cancellation of numerous missions, and insufficient funds to initiate new missions. She stated that, to comply with NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffins directive to provide a robust and executable program that can be implemented in this resource-constrained environment, the Directorate would be selecting, developing, and launching a slate of Science missions within cost and schedule targets. NASA would have to delay, but not abandon, new scientific missions, such as the mission to Jupiters moon Europa. Democrats on the committee joined the scientists testifying before the House panel in opposing the proposed cuts to NASAs science programs, particularly in the areas of research and analysis. Opponents of the budgetary reduction argued vehemently that the cuts could potentially cause long-term damage to the health of NASAs science program, and that the continuance of university-based research was critical to training the next generation of scientists and engineers.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA Budget Puts Key Science Priorities at Risk, news release, 2 March 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1057 (accessed 12 July 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA Science Mission Directorate: Impacts of the Fiscal Year 2007 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 2 March 2006, 3, 4, 24, http://www.gpo. gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId= CHRG-109hhrg26204&packageId=CHRG-109hhrg26204&fromBrowse=true (accessed 30 December 2010).)
NASA announced major personnel changes at three of its centers, Ames Research Center (ARC) in California, Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida, and Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. G. Scott Hubbard, Director of ARC, announced his resignation, stating that he had agreed to assume the Carl Sagan Chair for the Study of Life in the Universe at the SETI (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California. Hubbard had worked at Ames since 1987, serving as Director since 2002, and had previously served on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board and as the first Director of the NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA appointed William W. Parsons Jr., Director of Stennis since 2005, as Deputy Director of KSC. Parsonss tenure at NASA had spanned 16 years. As Space Shuttle Program Manager after the Columbia accident, he had directed NASAs return-to-flight efforts, which had culminated, in the summer of 2005, in the successful flight of Discovery in STS-114. Parsons had also led NASAs recovery efforts after Hurricane Katrina. NASA appointed Richard J. Gilbrech, who had worked at Stennis since 1991, as Director of SSC. He had served as Deputy Director of LaRC in Virginia, as Deputy Director of NASAs Engineering Safety Center, and had worked at various NASA flight centers.(NASA, NASA Announces Senior Management Changes, news release 06-031, 23 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06031_personnel_changes.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Picayune Item (MS), NASA Announces Management Changes at Stennis Space Center, 25 January 2006.)
Scientists using NASAs HST reported research demonstrating how an enigmatic form of energy called dark energy has helped shape the universes structure. Unable to observe dark energy directly, scientists analyze it by measuring its effects on matter. Previous research had revealed that dark matter causes the universe to expand by counteracting the collapsing gravitational pull of matter throughout the universe. However, several properties of dark matter had remained a mystery, such as how strong it is and when it began to exert its expansive effects. Attempting to solve some of these puzzles, a team of scientists, led by Adam G. Reiss of the Space Telescope Science Institute, had examined HST data on the luminosity distances of the farthest known supernovaea type of ancient exploding starto measure the universes rate of expansion. The scientists found that dark energy had begun to accelerate the universes expansion as long ago as 10 billion years, and that the expansive force of dark energy, although weak, had been sufficiently consistent to counteract gravity. In addition, the research supported Albert Einsteins theory of the existence of a cosmological constant that works against gravity to create equilibrium in the universe.(Adam G. Riess et al., New Hubble Space Telescope Discoveries of Type Ia Supenovae at z  1: Narrowing Constraints on the Early Behavior of Dark Energy, Astrophysical Journal 659, no. 1 (10 April 2007): 98121, http://iopscience.iop.org/0004-637X/659/1/98 (DOI 10.1086/510378; accessed 29 April 2010); Dennis Overbye, 9 Billion-Year-Old Dark Energy Reported, New York Times, 17 November 2006.)
Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne announced the completion of the assembly of the first Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) demonstrator, a deep-throttling 15,000-pound-thrust-class engine, fueled by a mixture of liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. Built in support of NASAs Vision for Space Exploration, the CECE would validate key component technologies that high- energy, in-space propulsion systems would require for future space exploration. The CECE program would focus on descent propulsion for the Lunar Surface Access Module, as well as demonstrating technologies for other applications, such as the Earth Departure Stage and in- space transfer systems. In June 2005, NASA had awarded Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne the first portion of a US$40 million four-year contract to develop CECE.(Pratt & Whitney, Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne Completes Assembly of First Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine Demonstrator, press release, 5 April 2006, http://www.pw.utc.com/Media+Center/Press+Releases/ Archive+-+2006 (accessed 27 April 2010).)
Using images from the HST, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, were able for the first time to witness the birth of a second red spot (dubbed Red Spot Jr.) on the planet Jupiter. The Great Red Spot, which dates at least to the seventeenth century, is a storm rising as high as 5 miles (8.05 kilometers) above Jupiters cloud level. The Great Red Spot is large enough to contain two or three planets the size of Earth. The new red spot, roughly half the diameter of the Great Red Spot, had begun as three white ovalscooler, upper-level storms. Observers had first seen two of the ovals in 1915, and astronomers had seen the third in 1939. The three storms had merged between 1998 and 2000. Astronomers believed that Red Spot Jr., like the Great Red Spot, rises above the top of the main cloud deck on Jupiter. Scientists had theorized that the change in color of the oval to red, which occurred earlier in 2006, was the result of the storms exposure to the Suns ultraviolet light. They surmised that, when the storm dredged up material deep below Jupiters clouds and lifted it above Jupiters cloud deck, the Suns ultraviolet light chemically altered the material, giving it a red hue. Astronomers also speculated that the HST images could indicate a major climate change in Jupiters atmosphere, related to the new spot.(HubbleSite, Hubble Snaps Baby Pictures of Jupiters Red Spot Jr. news release STScl-2006-19, 4 May 2006, http://hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/releases/2006/2006/19 (accessed 26 March 2010); John Johnson Jr., Astronomers See Spots Runt, Clue of Jupiter Climate Change, Los Angeles Times, 5 May 2006; Space Daily, Hubble Takes Sharpest Shot Yet of New Red Spot on Jupiter, 5 May 2006.)
GAO released a report criticizing NASAs plans to acquire rockets and spacecraft for the Vision for Space Exploration program and recommending that the U. S. Congress restrict some of its funding until NASA had completed its review of the program. NASA expected to finish the review during the following year. The report addressed NASAs plans to sign long-term agreements with the contractors for the project in late 2006. NASA planned for the contractors to design, develop, and produce both the CEVthe the crew exploration vehicle, which would replace the Space Shuttleand the rocket that would launch it. The report stated that NASA had not completed the first phase of its ongoing design and cost estimates for these projects, and that signing the contracts would place the projects at risk for cost, performance, and schedule problems. GAO recommended postponing the contracts until after NASA had completed its preliminary design reviews for those projects. NASA expected to complete the final phase of the ongoing review by March 2008. The report specifically recommended that Congress restrict NASAs appropriations and obligations for the CEV, providing only the funds needed to complete the preliminary review.(Mark Carreau, GAO Warns NASA of Problems with Moon, Mars Strategy, Houston Chronicle, 27 July 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Long-Term Commitment To and Investment in Space Exploration Program Requires More Knowledge (report no. GAO-06-817R, Washington, DC, 17 July 2006): 19, http://www. gao.gov/new.items/d06817r.pdf (accessed 22 January 2010).)
transport up to six persons to the ISS, and to support crew transfers for Mars missions. The contracts estimated value was US$3.9 billion. NASA expected work on Orion to occur between 8 September 2006 and 7 September 2013. Although all of NASAs 10 centers would provide technical and engineering support for the project, Lockheed Martin would perform the majority of the engineering work at NASAs JSC and would complete the final assembly at NASAs KSC. NASA planned for Orions first crewed launch to occur no later than 2014 and for the CEVs
A team of scientists, led by Harold A. Weaver Jr. of Johns Hopkins University, S. Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute, and Richard P. Binzel of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, reported in Nature their discovery of two small satellites orbiting Pluto. The team had sighted the moons, which had diameters of an estimated 60 kilometers (37 miles) and 50 kilometers (31 miles), respectively, in May 2005, using the HST. Both small moons circle on the same orbital plane as Plutos large moon Charon. In addition, the durations of all three bodies orbital rotations are simple ratios of one another. These facts led scientists to conclude that the same collision event created all three moons. Furthermore, the evidence raised the possibility that the distant Kuiper Belt, which includes Pluto, could contain other multiple-body systems. The researchers also speculated that debris from impacts in the Pluto system could have formed rings or arcs around Pluto. Thus far, scientists have only documented ring systems around gas giant planets, such as Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.(Ker Than, Pluto Might Have Rings, Space.com 22 February 2006, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/ 060222_pluto_moons.html (accessed 8 September 2010); see also H.A. Weaver et al., Discovery of Two New Satellites of Pluto, Nature 439, no. 7079 (23 February 2006): 943945; S. A. Stern et al., A Giant Impact Origin for Plutos Small Moons and Satellite Multiplicity in the Kuiper Belt, Nature 439, no. 7079 (23 February 2006): 946948; and Richard P. Binzel, Planetary Science: Plutos Expanding Brood, Nature 439, no.7079 (23 February 2006): 924-925.)
Isabella Velicogna and John Wahr, scientists at the University of Colorado, Boulder, who had conducted the first-ever gravity survey of the entire Antarctic ice sheet, reported their findings in the journal Science. Using data from two of NASAs GRACE (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment) satellites, Velicogna and Wahr had determined that the ice sheets mass had decreased significantly between April 2002 and August 2005by 152 cubic kilometers (36 cubic miles) of ice annually, plus or minus 80. The scientists had concluded that the Antarctic melting, an indicator of climate change, was causing the global sea level to rise 0.4 millimeters (0.16 inches) per year. The twin GRACE satellites, which orbit Earth more than a dozen times each day at an altitude of 310 miles (498.9 kilometers), measure variations in Earths mass and gravitational pull. Increases or decreases in the Antarctic ice sheets mass alter the distance between the satellites as they fly in formation.(Juliet Eilperin, Antarctic Ice Sheet Is Melting Rapidly, Washington Post, 3 March 2006; NASA, NASA Mission Detects Significant Antarctic Ice Mass Loss, news release 06-085, 2 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06085_arctic_ice.html (accessed 14 September 2009); see also Isabella Velicogna and John Wahr, Measurements of Time-Variable Gravity Show Mass Loss in Antarctica, Science 311, no. 5768 (24 March 2006): 17541756.)
Scientists published research indicating that the number of galaxies in the universe had sharply increased 700 million to 900 million years after the Big Bang. The finding provided important information about the formation of galaxies and the composition of stars. Rychard J. Bouwens and Garth D. Illingworth of the University of California, Santa Cruz, had used data from NASAs HST to determine that, beginning 700 million years after the Big Bang, the number of galaxies had increased tenfold in 200 million years. Another team of researchers, led by Masanori Iye of the National Astronomical Observatory in Tokyo, had found a similar increase in galaxy formation during the same period. These findings supported a prevailing theory of galaxy formation, which held that luminous galaxies were rare in the universes earliest times. As heavy elements, such as carbon, iron, and oxygen emerged, these new elements had formed the building blocks for stars and galaxies. The team cautioned that astronomers would need to make further observations to determine more certainly how galaxies had formed during the universes nascent years.(Dennis Overbye, The Boom in Galaxies After the Big Bang, New York Times, 14 September 2006; Rychard J. Bouwens and Garth D. Illingworth, Rapid Evolution of the Most Luminous Galaxies During the First 900 Million Years, Nature 443, no. 7108 (14 September 2006): 189192, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v443/n7108/ abs/nature05156.html (DOI 10.1038/nature05156; accessed 29 June 2010).)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing on NASAs FY 2007 budget proposal, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. Griffin reiterated NASAs budgetary priorities, which he had outlined on 6 February when President George W. Bush submitted the federal budget to Congress. NASA had proposed using money previously allocated for science, lunar exploration, and aeronautics programs to fund the programs that would now take precedence, according to the Vision for Space Exploration. Priorities would include supporting human spaceflight programs, completing the assembly of the ISS, and placing the CEV in operation by 2014. Committee chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) and ranking member Bart Gordon (D-TN) were equally critical of the proposed budget. Boehlert stated that the budget was bad for space science, worse for Earth science, perhaps worse still for aeronautics. It basically cuts or de-emphasizes every forward looking, truly futuristic program of the agency to fund operational and development programs to enable us to do what we are already doing or have done before. Although he expressed support for the Vision for Space Exploration, Boehlert said that he saw no need to accelerate the deadline for an operational CEV to a date earlier than 2014. Gordon criticized the Bush administration for sending Congress a budget request for funding that was inadequate to implement NASAs exploration initiative and other programs.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASAs Fiscal Year 2007 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 16 February 2006, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath= 109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG-109hhrg25937&packageId=CHRG- 109hhrg25937&fromBrowse=true (accessed 30 December 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASAs Stated Goals Dont Match Budgetary Realities, press release, 16 February 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1044 (accessed 12 July 2010); Brian Berger, Congress Criticizes NASA Budget Request, Space.com, 16 February 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060216_griffin_ nasa.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
GAO released a report examining federal government agencies progress toward implementing a government panels recommendations to obviate anticipated problems in the U.S. aerospace industry. In 2002 the Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry had stated that the nations aerospace industry could face various economic and security problems unless federal agencies performed several innovations. These included the creation of new aerospace technologies and the development of a space policy incorporating public-private partnerships. GAO stated that federal agencies had made preliminary efforts to implement some of the Commissions recommendations but had taken little action on others, such as the creation of a government-wide management structure for aerospace activities. The report noted that NASA had created a directorate to implement the Vision for Space Exploration. However, some aerospace experts believed that NASAs efforts to implement the Vision might have a negative effect on existing space exploration programs with demonstrated benefits.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, U.S. Aerospace Industry: Progress in Implementing Aerospace Commission Recommendations, and Remaining Challenges (report no. GAO-06-920, Washington, DC, 13 September 2006), 15, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06920.pdf (accessed 17 March 2010).)
NASAs JPL awarded Lockheed Martin a preliminary start-up contract for the design and concept of the aeroshell system for Mars Science Laboratory (MSL). Scheduled for launch in the fall of 2009, MSL would support NASAs exploration for water on Mars, in preparation for human exploration missions. The aeroshell system, which Lockheed Martin had built, included the thermal protection system (heat shield) that would encapsulate and protect the MSL rover from the intense heat and friction generated during the systems descent through the Martian atmosphere. In addition, the aeroshell system included a parachute system and a crane, which would lower the rover to a soft landing on the surface of Mars.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Design the Mars Science Lab Aeroshell, 29 March 2006, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2006/LOCKHEEDMARTINAWARDEDCONTRACT DESIGN.html (accessed 21 April 2010); Associated Press, Lockheed Martin Making Mars Heat Shield, 30 March 2006.)
ISROs launch of a Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) failed when the GSLV malfunctioned, taking with it an INSAT-4C communications satellite. ISRO had created the GSLV series of rockets to put heavy satellites weighing 2.02.5 tonnes (2,0002,500 kilograms or 2.22.8 tons) into geosynchronous orbit. The Indian National Satellite system, INSAT, is a series of domestic communications satellites. ISRO launched the rocket (formally designated GSLV-F02) from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, an island off the coast of the southern state of Andhra Pradesh in India. Soon after liftoff, the GSLVs first stage failed to separate, causing the rocket to veer from its trajectory, falling into the Bay of Bengal. The 85 unsuccessful launch, ISROs fourth launch of a GSLV, was the first GSLV launch ever to fail.
Ohio University astronomers Thomas S. Statler and Steven Diehl, who had analyzed images of 56 elliptical galaxies, which NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory had made, reported that the data from the images had revealed an unsuspected turmoil in the galaxies, which appear calm in optical light. Statler and Diehl had determined that the previously held assumptionthat the equilibrium shape of the multimillion-degree gas clouds in these galaxies would correlate with the shape of its starshad been erroneous. Searching for an energy source for the explosive activity, the astronomers had drawn a correlation between the shape of the hot gas clouds and the power produced at radio wavelengths by high-energy electrons. Scientists can trace this power output back to the centers of the galaxies, where supermassive black holes are located. Statlers and Diehls analysis indicated that the phenomena of repetitive explosive activity, fueled by the in-fall of gas into central black holesa process known to occur in giant elliptical galaxies located in galaxy clusterswas also occurring in isolated elliptical galaxies. According to Statler, these results are part of an emerging picture that shows the impact of supermassive black holes on the environment is far more pervasive than previously thought.(Chandra X-ray Observatory, NGC 0507: Black Holes Stir Up Galaxies, http://chandra.harvard.edu/photo/ 2006/galaxies (accessed 17 December 2009); NASA, NASAs Chandra Finds Black Holes Stirring Up Galaxies, news release 06-006, 10 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06006_Chandra_AAS_ update.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Eileen M. Collins, who had joined the astronaut corps in 1990, announced her retirement from NASA. In February 1995, Collins had served as NASAs first female Shuttle pilot on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-63, the first Shuttle mission to rendezvous with the Russian Mir space station. In May 1997, she had served as pilot on Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-84 flight to Mir, and in July 1999, she had become NASAs first female Shuttle commander on Space Shuttle Columbia STS-93, which had launched the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. In JulyAugust 2005, she had served as commander of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-114, the first Shuttle flight since the 2003 loss of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin described Collins as a brave, superb pilot, and NASA Flight Crew Operations Director Kenneth D. Bowersox called her a gifted leader.(NASA, NASA Astronaut Eileen Collins Completes Career of Space Firsts, news release 06-208, 1 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06208_Collins_retires.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Tariq Malik, NASAs First Female Shuttle Commander Retires from Spaceflight, Space.com, 1 May 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060501_collins_retirement.html (accessed 18 June 2010).)
Speaking at the 22nd National Space Symposium, in Colorado, Vice Administrator of China National Space Administration (CNSA) Luo Ge reviewed the landmark achievements of the Peoples Republic of China and outlined its ambitious future space exploration plans. Luo Ge recapped Chinas accomplishments to date46 consecutive successful launches since 1996, including 23 satellites and six Shenzhou spacecraft, the most recent of which were crewed missions. He stated that Chinas total annual investment in space programs was equivalent to US$500 million. China planned to achieve a lunar flyby in 2007, to develop a nonpolluting launch vehicle by 2010, to land a rover on the Moons surface by 2012, to establish an orbiting space laboratory by 2015, and to launch robotic lunar-sample-return missions by 2017. Furthermore, Luo Ge stated that China expected to launch approximately 100 Earth-orbiting satellites over the next five to eight years, ranging from oceanographic, navigation, and telecommunications satellite systems to constellations of Earth-observing and disaster-mitigation spacecraft. (Leonard David, China Unveils Ambitious Space Plans at National Space Symposium, Space.com, 5 April 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060405_nss_china.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Xinhua News Agency, China Reveals Space Exploration Plans, 6 April 2006.)
James A. Van Allen, a major figure in physics and space exploration, died at the age of 91. Born in 1914, Van Allen had played a prominent role in early American rocket research, including the development of the radiation detectors contained in the United States first successful satellite, Explorer 1. Launched January 1958, Explorer 1 had captured data revealing two belts of charged particles above Earths magnetic fieldphenomena later known as the Van Allen radiation belts. The finding was among the first major scientific discoveries of the early space age. In 1958 Van Allen had chaired a group of scientists who recommended that the United States create an independent national space agency by 1960 and launch a human mission to the Moon by 1968. Van Allen later became involved in several NASA projects, including the development of Galileo, Pioneers 10 and 11, and several Mariner spacecraft. During his lifetime, Van Allen had received numerous awards, including the National Medal of Science and NASAs Medal of Exceptional Achievement.(Walter Sullivan, James A. Van Allen, Discoverer of Earth-Circling Radiation Belts, Is Dead at 91, New York Times, 10 August 2006; NASA, James A. Van Allen (19142006), http://history.nasa.gov/sputnik/vanallen.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
An Ariane 5-ECA rocket launched from the space center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 21:09 (GMT), placing two telecommunications satellites into geostationary transfer orbit at 36,000 kilometers (22,400 miles) above Earths equator. The two satellites, Mexicos Satmex 6 and Thailands Thaicom 5, had a combined mass of 8.2 tonnes (8,200 kilograms or 9.04 tons), the largest payload ever carried by a European rocket. Satmex 6 would provide telecommunications and television services to North America and South America, and Thaicom 5 would provide those services throughout the Asia-Pacific region.(Space Daily, Ariane 5 Rocket Launches Two Satellites into Orbit, 30 May 2006; ESA, Ariane 5 ECA Carries Record Payload Mass to GTO, news release, 28 May 2006, http://www.esa.int/easCP/SEMXIO9ATME_index_). html (accessed 26 March 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631.)
A team of researchers reported in the journal Science that images from NASAs Cassini spacecraft revealed evidence of towering plumes of water vapor and ice particles erupting from the surface of Saturns moon Enceladus. Cassini had conducted three flybys of the moon in 2005. According to Carolyn C. Porco, leader of the Cassini Imaging Team at the Space Science Institute, Boulder, Colorado, the scientists surmised that Enceladus possessed water reservoirs under high pressure below its icy exterior. When the ice ruptured, the subsurface water shot out and froze into icy crystals. Porco stated that, if this assumption were correct, the discovery had significantly broadened the diversity of solar system environments where we might possibly have conditions suitable for living organisms. The Imaging Team reported that the discovery of water plumes on Enceladus was unique because the pockets of liquid water may be no more
NASAs KSC selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services to build the Atlas V rocket that would launch the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission. The mission, scheduled for launch in fall 2009 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, would carry to Mars a six-wheeled rover, equipped with cameras mounted on a mast. Twice as long and three times as heavy as the Mars Exploration rovers Spirit and Opportunity, MSL would explore Mars for two years, collecting Martian soil samples and rock cores and analyzing them for organic compounds and for environmental conditions capable of supporting microbial life, now or in the past. Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which had entered Marss orbit in March 2006, had transmitted to Earth images that NASA scientists would use to select a landing site for MSL. MRO would serve as a communications relay for MSL after the rover landed on the Martian surface.(Chris Bergin, Another Mars RoverAtlas V Chosen, NASASpaceflight.com, 2 June 2006, http://www. nasaspaceflight.com/2006/06/another-mars-rover-atlas-v-chosen (accessed 9 August 2010); Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martins Atlas V Selected To Launch Mars Science Laboratory in 2009, news release, 6 June 2006, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2006/LOCKHEEDMARTINSATLASVSELECTEDLAUNCH. html (accessed 9 August 2010).)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center in Moscow, announced that a rocket carrying an Arabsat 4A telecommunications satellite had failed to reach its proper orbit. The Russian Proton Breeze M rocket, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:10 p.m. (EST), failed to burn its upper-stage engine for as long as its designers had planned, leaving the satellite stranded in low orbit. EADS Astrium engineers had designed Arabsat to expand and optimize capacity for direct-to-home TV broadcasting, telephony, and data transmission over a coverage zone encompassing North Africa, the Middle East, and part of Western Europe. If the launch had been successful, it would have placed Arabsat in a geostationary transfer orbit with an apogee of 36,000 kilometers (22,369 miles). ILS announced that it would form a failure-review oversight board to review reasons for the anomaly and define a corrective action plan. An investigatory Russian state commission would conduct a similar review.(Sergi Manstov, Proton FailureArian Re-sets, NASASpaceFlight.com, 1 March 2006; Jefferson Morris, Proton Launch Failure Leaves Arabsat 4A Stranded, Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 2 March 2006.)
Bruce T. Lundin, who had joined the Lewis Research Center (LeRC) in Ohio in 1943, and had served as its Director from 1969 to 1977, died at the age of 86. At Lewis, Lundin had conducted research on aircraft enginecooling heat transfer; directed the development of turbojet engines, chemical rockets, and electric thrusters for spacecraft propulsion; and helped to develop electrical powergenerating systems for spacecraft, using chemical, solar, and nuclear energy sources. According to NASA officials, Lundins work during his tenure as the chief of the Engine Research Division had contributed to the increased performance and reliability of modern-day commercial transport and supersonic aircraft engines. Lundin had received NASAs Distinguished Service Medal twice.(Wally Guenther, Bruce Lundin, 86, Was Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 30 January 2006.)
NASA launched the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO) mission from Cape Canaveral in Florida at 00:52 (UT). The STEREO mission consisted of two nearly identical observatories that would orbit the Sun, collecting data that scientists could use to predict the arrival of coronal mass ejections (CMEs) on Earth. CMEs, solar eruptions of matter, can disrupt satellites and power grids on Earth. NASA had designed the two spacecraft to conduct stereographic imaging of the Sun and its emissions, in order to trace the flow of energy and matter from the Sun to Earth. One spacecraft, STEREO-A (Ahead), would orbit the Sun ahead of Earth, while the other, STEREO-B (Behind), would orbit the Sun behind Earth. Scientists would be able to use the observatories three-dimensional images of CMEs to predict with accuracy the arrival times of CMEs on Earth.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636; NASA, STEREO: Studying the Sun in 3-D, 17 February 2010, http://www.nasa. gov/mission_pages/stereo/main/index.html (accessed 2 April 2010).)
NASA announced that the aviation industry, including the Boeing Company, was using the unique wind-tunnel technology that NASA had developed to test new aviation concepts before applying them in flight. Unlike conventional wind tunnels, the National Transonic Facility at NASAs LaRC used super-cold nitrogen gas at high pressure to duplicate true-flight aerodynamics capability, even with models as small as 1/50th the size of the typical test aircraft. According to facility chief aerodynamicist Richard A. Wahls, this capability allows the aircraft manufacturers to produce better performing airplanes with less risk. Boeing had purchased wind-tunnel time to evaluate high-lift system designs for its new 787 jet aircraft.(NASA, Industry Uses NASA Wind Tunnels To Design New Airplanes, news release 06-060, 8 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06060_LaRC_wind_tunnel.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Scientists announced that images from the Cassini spacecraft had revealed the presence of lakes on Saturns moon Titan, the first time that astronomers had located lakes anywhere other than Earth. Cassini, a joint mission of NASA and ESA, had captured the images during a 22 July flyby of a region of Titan called Xanadu. The pictures indicated that Titan might have topographic features similar to those found on Earth, such as hills, valleys, and rivers emptying into lakes. NASA scientists theorized that, because temperatures on Titan are approximately - 180oC (-292oF), the liquid in the lakes is likely either methane or a combination of ethane and methane. Scientists speculated that the lakes could be the source of the hydrocarbon smog found in Titans frigid and thick atmosphere. NASA and ESA had created Cassini to explore Saturn and its system of moons, and Titans atmosphere was one of the missions major research topics.(Caitlin A. Griffith, Planetary Science: Titans Exotic Weather, Nature (London) 362, no. 1 (27 July 2006): 362 363, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v442/n7101/full/442362a.html (DOI 10.1038/442362a; accessed 15 March 2010); NASA, Cassini Finds Lakes on Titans Arctic Region, news release 06-274, 28 July 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jul/HQ_06274_cassini_lakes_itan_prt.htm (accessed 15 March 2010).)
NASA awarded contracts to two companies to develop commercial orbital transportation services for the ISS, creating the possibility of a commercial space transportation industry. The agreements also marked the first time that NASA had hired contractors to build a space transportation system for private-sector use, rather than for government use. Under the agreements, NASA would invest up to US$287 million in Rocketplane Kistler and US$207 million in Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, also known as SpaceX, enabling the two companies to develop a spacecraft that could provide crew and cargo services for the ISS. NASAs provision of the funds would be contingent on the companies completion of designated milestonesincluding launching and docking a spacecraft with the ISS. According to a NASA official, NASA hoped that private companies would be able to turn low-Earth-orbit services such as transportation of people or cargo to the ISSinto a profitable venture, thereby enabling NASA to focus on other objectives, such as missions to Mars and the Moon.(NASA, NASA Selects Crew and Cargo Transportation To Orbit Partners, news release 06-295, 18 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06295_COTS_phase_1.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Mark Carreau, Two Firms, Both Space Novices, Get Nod from NASA, Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2006. 102 NASA, Hubble Sees Faintest Stars in a Globular Cluster, news release 06-292, 17 August 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06292_HST_globular_clusters.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Harvey B. Richer et al., Probing the Faintest Stars in the Globular Star Cluster, Science 313, no. 5789 (18 August 2006): 936940, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/short/313/5789/936 (DOI 10.1126; accessed 29 June 2010).)
NASAs Voyager 1 achieved a milestone during its passage out of the solar system when it reached a distance of 100 Astronomical Units (AUs)nearly 9.3 billion miles (15 billion kilometers) from the Sun. An AU is the average distance between Earth and the Sun, measuring approximately 93 million miles (150 million kilometers). Voyager 1 was already the most distant human-made object from Earth when it reached 100 AUs from the Sun. NASA had launched Voyager 1 and its twin spacecraft Voyager 2 in 1977 to explore Jupiter and Saturn and had continued to extend the operations of the two spacecraft. In the Voyagers current missionthe Voyager Interstellar Mission (VIM)the spacecraft would explore the environment of the outer solar system and, eventually, that of interstellar space.(Von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2006; NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Voyager: Mission Overview, http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/mission.html (accessed 14 September 2010).)
NASA released to the public two long-term strategies for placing humans on the Moon and Mars. The first of these was the Global Exploration Strategy, which NASA had written at the request of the U.S. Congress. The Global Exploration Strategy outlined NASAs plan for accomplishing the objectives established in NASAs strategic plan and in President George W. Bushs Vision for Space Exploration. In this document, NASA stated that it intended to pursue human and robotic exploration of the Moon, as well as explaining what the planned lunar exploration mission would do when it reached the Moon. The second strategic plan that NASA made public was its proposal for lunar architecture, documenting requirements for implementing and enabling critical exploration objectives. The proposed architecture included robotic precursor missions to
NASA announced that its Cassini spacecraft had captured the first images ever taken of a hurricane-like storm on another planet. The images revealed a storm on Saturn with an eye ringed by towering clouds, winds blowing at a speed around 550 kilometers per hour (350 miles per hour), and a width of nearly 8,000 kilometers (5,000 miles)nearly two thirds of the diameter of Earth. Despite its hurricane-like appearance, scientists did not classify the storm as a hurricane, because hurricanes on Earth form over water and drift around Earths surface. The storm on Saturn remained at the planets south pole and could not have formed over water, since Saturn is primarily composed of gases. Cassini had obtained the photographs over a 3-hour period on 11 October 2006.(Will Dunham, An Eye on Saturn Drawing the Focus of Astrophysicists, Houston Chronicle, 12 November 2006; NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA Sees into the Eye of a Monster Storm on Saturn, 9 November 2006, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/newsreleases/newsrelease20061109/ (accessed 21 April 2010).)
NASA announced plans to decommission the oceanography satellite known as the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation, or Topex/Poseidon, a joint mission between NASA and Frances space agency, Centre National dEtudes Spatial (CNES). Mission managers had decided to end the spacecrafts 13-year, 62,000-orbit mission, following the failure in October 2005 of its pitch-reaction wheel, which maintained the satellites orientation. According to Lee- Lueng Fu, Project Scientist at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the satellite had allowed scientists to compare models of ocean circulation with global observations and to improve climate predi os. Topex had also enabled the mapping of the elevation of the oceans surface. Fu noted that, although Topex/Poseidon was built to fly up to five years . . . it became historys longest Earth-orbiting radar mission.(John Antczak for Associated Press, U.S.-French Oceanography Satellite Decommissioned After 13 Years, 6 January 2006; Ayinde O. Chase, NASA Satellite Ceases To Operate, All Headline News, 6 January 2006; CBC News (Canada), Ocean Satellite Ends 13-Year Mission, 6 January 2006.)
NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and the private company Gulfstream Aerospace conducted the first test of the Quiet Spike, a 24-foot-long (7.3-meter) retractable, lance-like rod, affixed to the nose of NASAs F-15B research aircraft and designed to suppress sonic booms during supersonic-jet flights. The term sonic boom refers to an accumulation of shock waves that develop around aircraft as they near the speed of sound (760 miles per hour or 1,223 kilometers per hour at sea level). Like an explosion, the sound energy generated by sonic booms can damage windows on the ground below a supersonic jets path. The FAA prohibits supersonic-jet flight over land, except in designated military flight corridors. DFRC and Gulfstream had designed the Quiet Spike, which created three small shock waves, traveling parallel to one another to the ground, thereby reducing the noise produced when supersonic jets break the sound barrier.(NASA, Dryden Flight Research Center, Gulfstream, NASA Dryden Joust with Supersonic Shockwaves, news release 06-39, 5 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/dryden/news/NewsReleases/2006/06-39.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
The U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy publicly released the U.S. National Space Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed on 31 August 2006. The first full revision of overall U.S. space policy in 10 years, this policy superseded the previous National Space Policy of 14 September 1996. U.S. national security issues were a prominent feature of the new policy, with many of its stated principles and goals addressing U.S. defense and intelligence activities in space. The policy also supported private enterprise in space and the implementation of human and robotic space exploration to extend human presence across the solar system.(Marc Kaufman, Bush Sets Defense as Space Priority, Washington Post, 18 October 2006; U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, U.S. National Space Policy, 31 August 2006, http://www.whitehouse.gov/ administration/eop/ostp/library/archives (accessed 2 April 2010).)
An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:27 p.m. (EDT), carrying the 4.3- tonne (4,300-kilogram or 4.74-ton) geostationary Astra 1KR telecommunications satellite. Lockheed Martin had designed and built the satellite for Luxembourg-based SES ASTRA. International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Center in Moscow, had marketed the mission. Once the satellite had achieved its final orbital slot over the equator at 19.2 east longitude, its 32 Ku-band transponders would transmit analog, radio, and digital television signals, as well as Internet and multimedia services throughout Europe.(United Press International, ASTRA Satellite Ready for Thursday Launch, 20 April 2006; Justin Ray, Atlas 5 Rocket Launches TV Broadcasting Craft for Europe, Spaceflight Now, 20 April 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630, 1 May 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx630.html (accessed 1 March 2010).)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to assess whether NASAs current workforce strategy was developing the tools needed to meet NASAs future needs. Subcommittee Ranking Member Mark Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that the proposed budget reductions to its aeronautics, microgravity life and physical sciences, and space and Earth sciences programs would further complicate NASAs efforts to create a workforce with an appropriate balance of civil servants and private contractors. NASAs Assistant Administrator for Human Capital Management Toni Dawsey testified that the overall objective of NASAs workforce strategy, submitted to Congress in April 2006, was to transform the composition of NASAs workforce so that it remained viable for the long-term goals of NASAs missions. She stated that NASA was addressing its two most pressing workforce challenges uncovered capacity, caused by program changes and cancellations and budget constraints, and retaining Space Shuttle employees through its retirement in 2010. NASA was maintaining sufficient work in house to protect and strengthen its core capabilities and had established a Shuttle Human Capital Working Group to oversee the complex Shuttle workforce issues. David C. Black, co- chair of the NRC committee that NASA had asked to explore long-range science and technology workforce needs to achieve the Nations long-term space exploration vision, also testified. In its interim report, the committee planned to recommend that NASA work with other government agencies involved in space-related work, as well as with the private sector, including universities, to assess the nature, scope, and possible solutions for its skill mix.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The NASA th Workforce: Does NASA Have the Right Strategy and Policies To Retain and Build the Workforce It Will Need? 109 Cong., 2nd sess., 13 June 2006, 14, 17, 81, 84, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath= 109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG-109hhrg27971&packageId=CHRG- 109hhrg27971&fromBrowse=true (accessed 21 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, What Will NASAs Future Workforce Look Like? news release, 13 June 2006, http://science.house.gov/ press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1140 (accessed 4 February 2010).)
Opportunityone of NASAs robotic Mars roversbegan exploring the Victor Crater, an area of Mars that NASA scientists hoped would provide researchers with the most useful data yet acquired about the planets history. Arriving at the craters rim, Opportunity began sending a volley of color panoramic images. However, before Opportunity actually entered the crater, NASA scientists planned for the robotic rover to circle it, determining a good location to enter and eventually to exit the site. The crater, which measures nearly 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) wide and 200 feet (61 meters) deep, is five times larger than any of the five craters the two Mars rovers, Opportunity and Spirit, had visited previously. Because of the craters size and depth, it has many layers of exposed rock. The images that the rover captured would enable scientists to view and analyze the rock layers. The study of these layers would provide clues to the planets geological and meteorological history, such as indications of when Mars had liquid water.(Marc Kaufman, Opportunity Panoramas of Martian Crater Thrill Scientists, Washington Post, 7 October 2006; Mark Carreau, On Mars, NASA Finds a Tremendously Important Scientific Discovery, Houston Chronicle, 7 October 2006.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and Rocket System Corporation (RSC) launched the Multi-Functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) from the Tanegashima Space Center at 06:55 (UT) aboard an H2-A rocket. The Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency jointly owned the 1,250-kilogram (2,756-pound) geostationary weather satellite, which carried an imaging telescope with detectors for five wavelength channels: visible band, micron infrared (IR1), micron (IR2), micron water vapor (IR3), and micron near infrared. After coming to rest over 145o east longitude, the satellite would commence its mission to capture data and images that scientists could use to determine weather patterns, and to relay that information to the Japanese Meteorological Agency.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 17 August 2010); JAXA, Launch Result of the Multi-functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) by the H-IIA Launch Vehicle No. 9 (H-IIA F9), press release, 18 February 2006, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2006/02/20060218_ h2a-f9_e.html (accessed 17 August 2010).)
NASAs Mercury Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) spacecraft performed the first of two scheduled flybys past the planet Venus, a maneuver intended eventually to steer the spacecraft to its final destination, Mercury. MESSENGER was the second spacecraft that NASA had launched to Mercury; the first had been Mariner 10, which had flown past the planet in 1974 and 1975. NASA had created MESSENGER to produce color maps of Mercurys surface and to conduct compositional analyses of the planets atmosphere, magnetosphere, and surface. NASA had sent MESSENGER past Venus to collect new information about the planetthe closest planet to Earthand to test equipment on the spacecraft. NASA had planned the Venus flyby as one of several planetary passages that, collectively, would help MESSENGER reach Mercury. During these planetary passages, the gravity of Venus and of the other planets would help decelerate MESSENGER, altering its trajectory so that the spacecraft would eventually attain orbit around Mercury. NASA planned for MESSENGER to fly past Venus again in June 2007, with the goal of reaching Mercury by 2011.(Britt Norlander, Dropping By, Science World, 23 October 2006, 6; Von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2006. 48)
Researchers announced at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) that, using NASAs Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had been able for the first time to observe directly the close companion star to Polaris (the North Star). The newly observed star, one of two in the near vicinity of Polaris, is approximately 3.2 billion kilometers (2 billion miles) from Polaris and hundreds of times fainter. Polaris is Earths nearest example of a Cepheid variable star. Scientists use the variations in the brightness of Cepheid stars to judge the distances of galaxies and the expansion rate of the universe. Imaging its companion star had enabled scientists to estimate Polariss mass at 4.3 times that of the Sun, but future measurements of the companion stars motion during its 30-year orbit would enable scientists to make a more accurate determination of Polariss mass. Knowledge of mass size is critical to understanding the composition and evolution of Cepheids.(NASA, Theres More to the North Star Than Meets the Eye, news release 06-004, 9 January 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/ja/HQ_06004_hubble.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Maggie McKee, Hubble Reveals Pole Stars Closest Companion, New Scientist, 10 January 2006.)
JAXA announced that it had successfully launched its ASTRO-F infrared astronomical satellite after a one-day weather delay. The 952-kilogram (2,099-pound) satellite blasted off from Uchinoura Space Center on an M-5 booster at 21:28 (UT). ASTRO-F carried a 67-centimeter- aperture (26-inch-aperture) infrared telescope, a Far-Infrared Surveyor, and the Infrared Camera. Its mission was to survey all the galaxies for infrared luminance indicating newly forming planets, stars, and protogalaxies, and to collect data on the structure, mass, and composition of new stars. This information would help scientists understand the formation process of stars, planetary systems, and galaxies. Part of a joint mission of JAXA, ESA, and Korean researchers, ASTRO-F was built to survey the cosmos at higher resolutions and with higher sensitivity than the worlds first infrared satellite, the Infrared Astronomy Satellite, which had launched in 1983.(JAXA, Infrared Imaging Satellite AKARI (ASTRO-F), http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/astro_f/index_e.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Tariq Malik, Japan Launches New Observatory for Infrared Sky Survey, Space.com, 21 February 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060221_jaxa_astrof_lnch.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 22 September 2010).)
NASA announced its selection of Lockheed Martin as the primary contractor to design, develop, test, and evaluate NASAs new CEV, Orion, which would replace the Space Shuttle as the crew transportation vehicle. Orion would be able to carry four crew members to the Moon, to
President George W. Bush submitted his US$2.77 trillion budget for FY 2007, which included US$16.8 billion to fund NASA, a 3.2 percent increase over FY 2006. According to NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, the priorities established by this budget reflected NASAs commitment to implement the Vision for Space Exploration, to complete the assembly of the ISS with the fewest possible spaceflights, and to deliver an operational Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) no later than 2014. The budget provided for a reduction in funding for the Shuttle program, from US$4.78 billion in FY 2006 to US$4.06 billion in FY 2007, and a 3 percent increase in funding for the ISS, to US$1.81 billion. NASA had requested funds of US$3.98 billion for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, a 30 percent increase from the previous fiscal year. The Directorate would develop the CEV, two new launchers, and the lunar landers needed to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA had estimated the cost of completing ISS assembly with the minimum number of Shuttle flights, while ensuring the safety of Shuttle flights, and had calculated a budget shortfall of US$35 billion. To make up this shortfall, the FY 2007 budget would cut funding for aeronautics research by 18 percent, to US$724.4 million. In addition, the budget would cap the increase for NASAs science budget, which funded deep- space probes and Earth-observation satellites, at 1.5 percent in FY 2007, and at 1 percent annually for the following four years.(NASA, NASA Administrators Statement About FY 2007 Budget, news release 06-056, 6 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06056_Budget_Statement.html (accessed 10 September 2010); Warren E. Leary, Unexpected Costs Force NASA Cuts, New York Times, 7 February 2006; Brian Berger, NASA Seeks 30-Percent Increase For Explorations Programs, Space News, 6 February 2006.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine NASAs development of the Orion CEV, NASAs planned replacement for the Space Shuttle. Hearing witness Allen Li of GAO testified that NASA had contracted with Lockheed Martin to develop Orion before it had established clear cost estimates and design requirements for the project. GAO had previously raised the same concerns in a July 2006 report. Li reported that, in response to the GAO reports criticism, NASA had made efforts to control the projects costs. However, he acknowledged that NASA needed to do more to control costs and to clarify the projects design requirements. The other hearing witness, NASAs Scott J. Horowitz, Associate Administrator of the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, reported that Orions design relied on proven technologies, whereas earlier projects had relied on anticipated technological breakthroughs. He argued that NASA would therefore be able to control the costs of building Orion more easily than it had controlled the costs of previous projects. Furthermore, Horwitz pointed out that NASA was developing Orion for multiple applications over several decades. Committee members concluded that they would continue to monitor development of the CEV and other elements of NASAs exploration initiative to ensure the completion of those projects in a fiscally responsible manner that did not interfere with other NASA programs.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Democrats Call for Increased Oversight of NASAs Exploration Program, press release, 29 September 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx? NewsID=1200 (accessed 15 April 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Implementing the Vision for Space Exploration: Development of the Crew Exploration Vehicle, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 28 September 2006, 4853, http://science.house.gov/commdocs/hearings/full06/Sept%2028/Horowitz.pdf (accessed 15 April 2010); U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Sound Management and Oversight Key To Addressing Crew Exploration Vehicle Project Risks (testimony of Allen Li before U.S. House Committee on Science; report no GAO-06-1127T, Washington, DC, 28 September 2006), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d061127t.pdf (accessed 15 April 2010).)
Four years behind its original schedule, JAXA successfully launched Kaguya, also called the Selenological and Engineering Explorer (SELENE), aboard an H-2A solid-fuel rocket from Tanegashima Island at 1:31 (UT). The 2.9-tonne (2,900-kilogram or 3.2-ton) lunar orbiter carried various instruments that would enable it to obtain detailed data about the lunar topography and surface-mineral composition. JAXA had promoted the mission as the most significant lunar expedition since Americas Apollo program of the 1960s and early 1970s, in terms of its scope and ambition. JAXA claimed that the mission would outpace the former Soviet Unions Luna program, NASAs Clementine mission of 1994, and NASAs Lunar Prospector mission of 1998 1999. Kaguyas launch occurred at a critical time for the Japanese space agency, which was facing accusations that it lacked a vision capable of challenging the ambition of the Peoples Republic of China to lead East Asia in space exploration. At the time of the launch, JAXA also lacked popular and political support. Japans citizens had such poor regard for the civilian space program that JAXA had to negotiate with the local fishermen of Tanegashima for acceptable launch times. Because September was one of two launch windows that Tanegashima fishermens unions had offered JAXA, Kaguyas launch took place during typhoon season. Kazuto Suzuki, a specialist in global space issues at Tsukuba University in Tokyo, explained that JAXA was only beginning to realize that, to enhance the political importance of Japans space initiatives, it would need to market Japans space program to appeal to the Japanese public.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647, 1 October 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx647.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Bruce Wallace, After Long Delay, Japan Launches Lunar Orbiter, Los Angeles Times, 14 September 2007; Associated Press, Japans Space Agency Launches Lunar Probe, 14 September 2007.)
NASA released findings from the collective efforts of its Chandra X-ray Observatory, HST, SST, and ground-based telescopesthe Very Large Array in New Mexico and the Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network (MERLIN) in the United Kingdom. The telescopes had captured imagery showing, for the first time, a powerful jet from a supermassive black hole striking a nearby galaxy. The system, called 3C321, contained two galaxies orbiting each other, each with a supermassive black hole at its center. However, NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory had shown a jet emanating from the black hole at the center of the larger galaxy and punching the smaller galaxy, which had swung into the larger galaxys path. The studys leader, Daniel A. Evans of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, remarked that, although scientists had seen many black holes produce similar jets, this was the first time scientists had observed such a jet punching into another galaxy. Coinvestigator Martin J. Hardcastle of the University of Hertfordshire in the United Kingdom added that, although these jets are common in the universe, scientists struggled to understand some of their basic properties. Hardcastle said that 3C321 had provided the chance to learn about the behavior of jets when they slam into a galaxy and about the subsequent effect of such events on jets.(NASA, Death Star Galaxy Black Hole Fires at Neighboring Galaxy, news release 07-280, 17 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07280_Death_Star_Black_Hole.html (accessed 20 October 2010). 184 Todd Halvorson, Whitson, The Queen of EVA: Commander Sets Record for Female Spacewalkers, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 2007; Robert Z. Pearlman, Astronauts Mark 100th Station Spacewalk, Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/news/cs-071218-100th-iss-spacewalk.html (accessed 29 November 2010); Tariq Malik, Spacewalkers Inspect Space Stations Solar Wing Joints, Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/071218-expedition16-fourth-spacewalk-wrap.html (accessed 29 November 2010).)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Qall CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)were technology demonstrators, including twoCalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSatCAPE 1with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) launched two ocean-surveillance spacecraft from Cape Canaveral aboard an Atlas-5 Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), marking the rockets first NRO secret mission. The NRO had designed the two craft to track ships that might be concealing al-Qaeda operatives and to monitor Iranian and Chinese sea-based military operations. However, the rocket had stopped firing prematurely, causing the craft to launch into the wrong orbit. Although the satellites separated safely from the malfunctioning booster, they did not have enough rocket propellant to reach the correct orbit. Lockheed Martin had built the Atlas 5 using a Lockheed Martin Centaur upper stage, with a Pratt & Whitney RL10 rocket engine powered with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. United Launch Alliance, which operated the Atlas program, managed the launch in conjunction with NRO and the U.S. Air Forces 45th Space Wing.(Craig Covault, NRO Spacecraft in Wrong Orbit, Aviation Week, 16 June 2007, http://www.aviationweek.com/ aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/mission06157.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to review the findings of two reports that NASA had made public on 27 July 2007. The reports examined NASAs medical and behavioral health care system for its astronauts. The NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review had identified a number of issues related to NASA culture, communication, and behavioral concerns, including some astronauts alleged preflight alcohol abuse. However, NASAs internal JSC review had contradicted the finding, stating that the investigators had been unable to verify any instance of alcohol abuse. At the hearing, Richard E. Bachmann Jr., Chair of the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, stated that NASAs rebuttal of reports and derision of the claims that astronauts had imbibed alcohol during the preflight alcohol-restriction period had discouraged open communication. Moreover, Bachmann expressed deep concern about NASAs apparent disregard of mental health and behavior issues among astronauts and about the reluctance of flight surgeons and astronauts alike to report improper conduct. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) remarked that the findings of the two panels seemed to describe two different organizations. Udall instructed
NASAs Science Mission Directorate awarded a US$9.3 million contract to Dartmouth College of Hanover, New Hampshire, to conduct a project using more than 40 high-altitude balloons to capture data about Earths Van Allen Belts. The Balloon Array for Radiation-belt Relativistic Electron Losses (BARREL) would fly in 2013 or 2014 in conjunction with NASAs Radiation Belt Storm Probes satellites, scheduled to launch in 2011. Under the terms of the contract, the missions Principal Investigator Robyn M. Millan and her team would conduct test flights of the balloons and their instrumentation. In 2013 the team would launch 20 balloons from South African and British research stations in Antarctica, at a rate of one per day. Each balloon, separated by approximately 620 miles (998 kilometers) and carried by winds, would float at an altitude of approximately 21 miles (34 kilometers) for as long as two weeks, forming a ring encircling the South Pole. In the first experiment of its kind working in tandem with a satellite mission, the balloons would use sensors to measure the influx of radiation from the Van Allen Belts into Earths atmosphere. Millan and her team would repeat the procedure with 20 more balloons the following year.(NASA, NASA To Use Balloon Flotilla To Study Radiation That Affects Earth, news release 07-265, 5 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07265_Balloons_and_Van_Allen_ Belts.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Kristen Senz, Dartmouth Professor Gets $9.3 Million NASA Grant, Manchester Union Leader (NH), 14 December 2007.)
107U. S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASAs Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs: Status and Issues, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 24 July 2007, 14, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE% 2FCommittee+on+Science+and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg36737&packageId=CHRG- 110hhrg36737&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee Examines Challenges Facing Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs, press release, 24 July 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle. aspx?NewsID=1928 (accessed 29 October 2010); Tamara Lytle, Space Stations Future in Doubt, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 26 July 2007.
NASA announced that it had selected proposals for future lunar-science activities and had established two new programs to enhance the research that the Vision for Space Exploration had made possible. Under the Lunar Sortie Science Opportunities (LSSO) Program, NASA had selected seven from among more than 70 proposals to develop simple, autonomous instrument packages that future astronauts could deploy on the lunar surface. Scientists planned to use these packages, known as suitcase science studies, to study the Moons interior; to examine lunar dust, which creates problems for astronauts; to search for natural resources on the lunar surface; and to use lasers to provide precise information about the position and features of the Moon. The studies complemented two new programs already established in the Science Mission Directorates Planetary Science Division at NASA Headquartersthe Lunar Advanced Science and Exploration Research (LASER) Program and the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Participating Scientist Program. The LRO mission, scheduled to launch in 2008, would help NASA prepare for long-duration human operations on the Moon. For that program, NASA planned to fund researchers analyzing data from the orbiters six instruments. Under the LASER program, NASA intended to solicit proposals for research investigating the lunar environment to determine how to enable humans to live and work on the Moon in the future.(NASA, NASA Prepares for Performing New Science on the Moon, news release 07-141, 21 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07141_moon_science.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, NASA Sets New Lunar Science Programs, Aviation Week, 28 June 2007, http://www. aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/lro062707.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
IBM announced that NASA had selected, for its James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), IBMs Rational Rose Real-time software, which used unified modeling language (UML). The choice marked a change in NASAs strategy for software development and management of its space- based telescopes. Because a number of organizations had used proprietary software to build components and instruments for the HST, the software had lacked a UML, preventing the software codes of the various programs from relating to one another. Furthermore, the contractors who had built the scientific instruments had not maintained them after the launch of the craft. Instead, NASA staff had assumed that responsibility. Glenn Cammarata, leader of NASAs Integrated Science Instrument Module (ISIM) flight-software development team at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), explained that the management of telescopes with instruments containing incompatible software was a nightmare. Resolving problems in the HST software had often required NASA to locate the person who wrote the code in the original software, whereas IBMs UML would allow any programmer to examine JWST software and to understand its system architecture. Additionally, the UML would allow close collaboration among the various developers working on individual components of the JWST.(IBM, NASA Eyes Open Standard Software for Next-Generation James Webb Space Telescope, press release, 19 January 2007, http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/20901.wss (accessed 30 October 2009); Jon Brodkin, The Software Plan for NASAs New Space Telescope, Infoworld, 23 January 2007.)
Jeanna Bryner, Twisted Solution to Suns Mystery Heat, Space.com, 21 March 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/070321_solarb_update.html (accessed 28 January 2010). NASA-AHS Robert L. Lichten Internship Award. The basis of the award was a paper that Greenwood had submitted to the AHS International 2007 Robert L. Lichten Competition, Helicopter External Noise Radiation in Turning Flight: Theory and Experiment. During his eight-week NASA-sponsored internship, Greenwood would divide his time between two NASA centers: ARC at Moffett Field, California, and Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia. Greenwood would work on NASAs science and technology projects involving rotary wings.(NASA, NASA Announces First Lichten Intership Award Winner, news release 07-79, 30 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07079_ARMD_Intern.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
South Korean Vice Minister of Science and Technology Chung Yoon announced the selection of Ko San, a 30-year-old expert on artificial intelligence, to visit the ISS as South Koreas first astronaut. Ko San had been one of two finalists. The other finalist, Yi So-yeon, was a 29-year- old female doctoral student in biotechnology. More than 36,000 South Koreans had applied to become the first person in South Korea to travel in space. Ko and Yi had been training in Russia when South Korean authorities selected Ko as the winner. They appointed Yi as his backup, in the event Ko was unable to participate in the mission. They selected Ko over Yi because he had performed better in certain experiments and had demonstrated a stronger capability of communicating with Russian cosmonauts. As backup, Yi would continue to train with Ko and would serve as a consultant in planning Kos mission.(Kurt Achin, S. Korea Names Astronaut for the Countrys First Voyage into Space, Voice of America, 6 September 2007; Space Mission To Help Boost Aerospace Research, Korea Times, 6 September 2007.)
NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced the successful completion of subscale-main-injector hardware, an early step in the development of the RS-68 engine that would power the core stage of NASAs Ares 5. Under the Constellation Program, Ares 5 would serve as NASAs cargo launch vehicle, delivering large-scale hardware and systems to space, in support of NASAs exploration missions to the Moon. MSFC engineers had conducted multiple hot-fire tests on the inject hardware, a major component of the engine. The hardware would inject and mix liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants in the engines combustion chamber, where they would ignite and burn to produce thrust. Because injector hardware for the RS-68 and the J-2X engine systems shared design features, engineers planned to use data collected during the tests to develop the J-2X engine systems for the upper stages of Ares 5 and for Ares 1, the crew launch vehicle (CLV) that would carry the Orion spacecraft.(NASA, NASA Successfully Completes Engine Hardware Tests for Ares V, MSFC news release 07-053, 8 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/marshall/news/news/releases/2007/07-053.html (accessed 1 April 2010).)
The Boeing Company announced that, on 20 July, the X-48B flight-test vehicle, a Blended Wing Body (BWB) experimental aircraft, had made its first test flight. Boeing Phantom Works had developed the BWB in cooperation with NASA and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory. The remotely controlled X-48B had taken off from NASAs Edwards Air Force Base in California, climbing to an altitude of 7,500 feet (2,286 meters) and landing 31 minutes after takeoff. Boeing had developed two X-48B research vehicles to gather detailed information about the stability and flight-control characteristics of the BWB design, particularly during takeoff and landing. Previously, Boeing had used Ship 2, the test-flight vehicle, for ground and taxi testing. Ship 1, which had completed extensive testing in 2006 at the Old Dominion Universitys NASA Langley Full-Scale Wind Tunnel in Virginia, was the backup vehicle for the flight-test program. The BWB design resembled a flying wing, but the wing blended smoothly into a wide, flat, tailless fuselage, helping the craft gain additional lift with less drag than a circular fuselage. NASAs DFRC had provided engineering and technical support for the BWB, based on its years of operating cutting-edge, remotely controlled aircraft. NASA had focused on developing fundamental flight dynamics and structural concepts for the BWB, as well as helping to validate and verify its hardware and software and to integrate and test the aircrafts systems and the pilots ground-control station. NASAs range group had provided critical command and control communications and telemetry during the test flight.
NASAs Ames Research Center (ARC) and Virgin Galactic signed a MOU, providing a framework to explore potential collaborations, such as developing spacesuits, heat shields for spacecraft, hybrid rocket motors, and hypersonic vehicles. The press also reported that the MOU included provisions for training NASA astronauts, for NASA to buy seats on a Virgin Galactic flight, and for NASA to provide technical advice to Virgin Galactic; however; these provisions were not, in fact, part of the agreement. A newly formed organization in the NASA Research Park at AmesNASAs Space Portalhad enabled the negotiation with Virgin Galactic to help NASA promote the development of the commercial space economy.(NASA, NASA, Virgin Galactic To Explore Future Cooperation, news release 07-49, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07049_Virgin_Galactic.html (accessed 14 October 2009); NASA, NASA Provides Additional Information on Agreement with Virgin Galactic, news release 07-50, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07050_Virgin_Galactic_info.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Associated Press, NASA, Virgin Galactic Sign Agreement, 22 February 2007; Matthew Moore, Virgin Galactic To Train NASA Astronauts, Daily Telegraph (London), 22 February 2007.)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA workforce issues and recommendations made in recently released reports of two independent review panelsthe National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA), and the NRC. The subcommittee noted a sizeable shift in NASAs programmatic activities, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration; retire the Shuttle by 2010; complete the ISS; develop the Orion CEV and the Ares CLV; and deal with the growing retirement-eligible workforce, all within the framework of a limited budget. NASA Assistant Administrator for Human Capital Management Toni Dawsey testified that NASAs Workforce Strategy, submitted to Congress in April 2006, articulated three underlying principles: building and sustaining ten healthy Centers; maximizing the use of NASAs current human capital capabilities; and evolving to a more flexible, scalable workforce. John G. Stewart, a member of NAPAs Panel on NASA Multi- Sector Workforce, summarized the panels major recommendations, including NASAs adoption of a longer range, risk-based planning strategy to anticipate and respond effectively to future program needs, budget shortfalls, and schedule revisions for [its] total multi-sector workforce. David C. Black, co-chair of NRCs Committee on Issues Affecting the Future of the U.S. Space Science and Engineering Workforce, testified that the committee had concluded that NASA did not currently have the in-house expertise, particularly in the areas of systems engineering and project management, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Black recommended that NASA adopt policies enabling it to obtain the highest quality personnel over the long term. Toni Dawsey acknowledged that NAPAs and NRCs reports confirmed NASAs assessments of the challenges facing us in the workforce arena and validate the actions that we have initiated to address the most critical and encompassing issues.(National Research Council, Committee on Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration, Building a Better NASA Workforce: Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007); National Academy of Public Administration, NASA: Balancing a Multisector Workforce To Achieve a Healthy Organization (report, Washington, DC, February 2007), 95101, in U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Building and Maintaining a Healthy and Strong NASA Workforce, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 17 May 2007; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee Focuses on Ensuring the Health and Vitality of NASAs Current and Future Workforce, news release, 17 May 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1833 (accessed 9 August 2010).)
NASA announced its selection of four research teams, which would receive five-year grants valued at approximately US$7 million per team. The teams would become new members of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), increasing the number of the NAIs members to 16. The University of Wisconsin team proposed to study organic and mineralogical environments and signatures of life on Earth and on other planets, focusing on technologies for detecting microbial life within rock chemistry. The team from the California Institute of Technology planned to extend the research it had conducted at NAI during 20012006, using the Virtual Planetary Laboratory that the team had developed to explore the habitability and biosignatures of extrasolar Earth-like planets. The Montana State University team would investigate the role of iron-sulfide compounds in the transition from the nonliving to the living world, supporting NASAs mission to investigate prebiotic chemistry and the development of signatures for terrestrial and extraterrestrial life. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology planned to investigate requirements for the development of multicellular life in Earths ancient past, concentrating on organic biosignatures preserved in the rock record and on the state of Earths early atmosphere.(NASA, NASA Selects New Members of Astrobiology Institute, new release 07-108, 9 May 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07108_Astrobiology_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA announced that it had begun testing two NASA robots in the Arctic Circle in preparation for a return to the Moon in 2020. For the mission to the Moon, scientists would need autonomous robots that could perform activities unsuitable for humans and could respond quickly to human commands. On 12 July, the research team had arrived at Haughton Crater at Devon Island, Canada, with two test robotsK10 Black and K10 Red. NASA planned to operate the robots until 31 July. The robots carried 3-D laser scanners, capable of mapping topographic features from 3,280 feet (1,000 meters), and ground-penetrating radar, which could map below ground to a distance of 16.4 feet (5 meters). The robots navigated using GPS, stereo cameras, laser scanners, and Sun trackers. For the practice session, the robots conducted a survey of an area called Drill Hill in Haughton Crater. Researchers sent commands to the robots from a base camp more than 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) away from Drill Hill. The key objective of the research expedition was to test the robots instruments and software, as well as the equipment and software that humans could potentially use to supervise the robots at lunar outposts. Scientists had chosen Haughton Crater as the test site because of its extreme environmental conditions, lack of infrastructure and resources, and geologic features. Haughton Crater bears geographic similarities to Shackleton Crater at the south pole of the Moonboth are impact craters measuring approximately 12.4 miles (20 kilometers) in diameter.(NASA, NASA Robots Practice Moon Survey in the Arctic Circle, news release 07-163, 20 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07163_Ames_Lunar_Sim_Robot_Survey.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Stefanie Olsen, NASA Tests Lunar Robots in Arctic Crater, CNET News.com, 20 July 2007, http://news. cnet.com/NASA-tests-lunar-robots-in-Arctic-crater/2100-11397_3-6198044.html?tag=mncol (accessed 8 July 2010). 106 Brian Berger, Pentagon Pulls Plug on Satellite Refueling Prototypes, Space.com, 25 July 2007, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/070725_darpa_orbitalexpress_end.html (accessed 9 June 2010); Stephen Clark, Satellite In-Space Servicing Demo Mission a Success, Spaceflight Now, 24 July 2007.)
NASA announced the completion of its Systems Requirement Review (SRR) of the Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV), marking the first major milestone in Orions engineering process. In conducting the review of Orions requirements data set, NASA scientists and engineers had discussed more than 1,700 topics, covering all aspects of Orions performance, design, and qualifications. The SRR would provide a baseline for the design, development, construction, and safe operation of the spacecraft that NASA would use to carry astronauts beyond Earth orbit. In November 2006, NASA had completed an overall review of requirements for the Constellation Program, which also included the Ares launch vehicles and systems for the human exploration of planetary surfaces.(NASA, NASA Completes Key Review of Orion Spacecraft, news release 07-58, 7 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07058_Orion_SRR.html (accessed October 14, 2009); Jefferson Morris, Baseline Requirements Completed by NASA for Orion, Aviation Week, 9 March 2007; NASAs Orion Spacecraft One Step Closer to Assembly, Aero-News Network, 9 March 2007.)
NASA announced a modification to its contract with Lockheed Martin to design, test, and build the Orion CEV. The modified contract had three significant changes, including the addition of two test flights of Orions launch-abort system and the deletion from the initial design phase of the production of a pressurized cargo carrier for the ISS. The contract also added two years to the development period, extending it to December 2013, and increased the contracts value from US$3.9 billion to US$4.3 billion. The modification reflected the continuing progress on Orions development and NASAs evolving budgetary landscape.(NASA, NASA Modifies Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Contract, contract release C07-21, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0721_Orion_Contract_Mod.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASAs Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSCs ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSCs Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASAs Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parsons experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASAs human spaceflight community, made him the right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.(NASA, Parsons Assumes Role as NASAs Kennedy Space Center Director, news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director, 8 January 2007.)
Associate Administrator for NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missionsSTS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASAs efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitzs resignation, praising the former astronauts tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASAs decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttles reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA, news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, Scott J. Doc Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former), http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, NASAs Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family, Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing on NASAs fiscal year (FY) 2008 budget request, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. On 5 February, President George W. Bush had presented to Congress NASAs proposed US$17.3 billion budget for FY 2008, as a component of the federal budget, including US$4 billion for five Space Shuttle flights and US$2.24 billion for ISS activities. Administrator Griffin urged Congress to fund NASAs FY 2008 Exploration Systems request fully, enabling NASA to develop the Orion and the Ares-1 crew vehicles. He cautioned that NASA was unlikely to succeed in bringing new exploration capabilities online by 2014 because of several factors, including the cost of retiring the Space Shuttle and making the transition to the new vehicle, the cost of supporting the ISS, and the impact of the overall reduction in funding for NASA mandated by the FY 2007 Continuing Resolution. However, Griffin stated that NASA would continue to transition the workforce, infrastructure, and equipment from the Space Shuttle to new Exploration systems. Committee Chair Bart Gordon (D-TN) criticized the Bush administrations failure to recommend the funding levels necessary to support the exploration initiative, the ISS, the termination of the Space Shuttle program, and the upgrade of the aging Deep Space Network.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, NASAs Fiscal Year 2008 Budget Request, 110th Cong., 1st Sess., 15 March, 2007, 28, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg33803/ pdf/CHRG-110hrg33803.pdf (accessed 20 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, NASAs Lean Budgetary Outlook Will Have Wide-Ranging Impact on Agency Programs, press release, 15 March 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1724 (accessed 28 September 2010).)
Four teams competed at NASAs Regolith Excavation Challenge to dig a minimum of 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of simulated lunar soilregolithwithin 0.5 hours, using no more than 30 watts of power. However, none of the teams succeeded in winning the US$125,000 first prize. The top performer was the entry from Technology Ranch of Pixmo Beach, California, the only machine to run for a full 30 minutes in its first attempt and to scoop up 75 kilograms (165 pounds) of regolith. The Regolith Excavation Challenge was the seventh centennial challenge NASA had held since 2005. However, the only person who had won any of the competitions was Peter K. Homer, who had won US$200,000 for his entry in the Astronaut Glove Challenge on 3 May. Kenneth Davidian, Program Manager of NASAs Centennial Challenges Program, stated that NASA would add the unawarded prize money to the winnings for the 2008 Regolith Excavation Challenge, increasing the value of the prize for that competition to US$375,000. Davidian said that he expected the number of teams competing in the challenge would double and that many more NASA engineers would observe the competition in the future.(Dana Mackenzie, No One Scoops the Prize at Moon Digger Contest, New Scientist, 14 May 2007.)
On the 50th anniversary of the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik, publisher Harry N. Abrams released America in Space, a photographic record of the history of space exploration, documenting NASAs achievements in aeronautics, science and technology, and human spaceflight. Published in cooperation with NASA, the book contained 500 color and black-and- white photographs, including many previously unpublished photographs, selected from NASAs archives. Heralding the space age, the launch of Sputnik led to the creation of NASA one year later.(NASA, New Book Chronicles NASAs First 50 Years, news release 07-210, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07210_NASA_book.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Jeremy Hsu, NASA Book Commemorates 50 Years of Spaceflight, Space.com, 5 October 2007, http://www.space.com/entertainment/ 071004-nasabook-anniversary.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) released images of an odd, six-sided, honeycomb- shaped feature circling the entire north pole of Saturn. NASAs Cassini spacecraft had collected the images in thermal-infrared light during a 12-day period beginning on 30 October 2006. NASAs Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft had also collected images of the hexagon-shaped feature more than 20 years before, indicating the long-lived nature of the feature. The Cassini images also revealed that the hexagon, which is 25,000 kilometers (15,000 miles) across, extends approximately 100 kilometers (60 miles) into the atmosphere, much deeper than previously thought. Kevin H. Baines, an atmospheric expert and member of Cassinis visual and infrared mapping spectrometer team at NASAs JPL, remarked that scientists had never seen a feature like the hexagon on any other planet. Because of its thick atmosphere, where circularly shaped waves and convective cells dominate, Saturn was the last place scientists had expected to see such a feature.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Cassini Images Bizarre Hexagon on Saturn, news release 2007-034, 27 March 2007, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-034 (accessed 1 February 2010).)
NASA celebrated the 80 anniversary of Charles A. Lindberghs solo transatlantic flight with Lindberghs grandson Erik Lindbergh, himself an aviator, who had recreated his grandfathers historic flight in 2002. Erik Lindbergh joined NASA in its rededication of a unique astronomy craft, a 747 airliner, which Pan American Airways had christened Clipper Lindbergh in 1977. NASA had modified the aircraft, enabling it to carry a 45,000-pound (22.5-ton or 20.4 tonnes) infrared telescope system. Designed to fly at more than 40,000 feet (12,192 meters), the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) would operate at an altitude above nearly 99 percent of Earths atmospheric water vapor, greatly enhancing the observatorys ability to study the cosmos. The German Aerospace Center had provided the telescope, and NASA had modified the craft.(NASA, NASAs SOFIA To Be Rededicated on Historic Lindbergh Anniversary, media advisory M07-52, 11 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_M07052_SOFIA_event.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Aero-News Network, Erik Lindbergh Dedicates NASAs Sofia in Honor of Grandfather, 22 May 2007. 71 NASA, Mars Rover Spirit Unearths Surprise Evidence of Wetter Past, news release 07-118, 21 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07118_Spirit_discovers_wet_Mars.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Space.com, NASA Rover Finds Surprising Evidence for Mars Watery Past, 21 May 2007, http://www. space.com/scienceastronomy/070521_rover_wetterpast.html (accessed 6 April 2010).)
NASA announced its selection of four universities to conduct suborbital scientific research. NASA intended the projects to reinvigorate its Sounding Rocket Program. The four projects had a combined value of US$4.2 million. NASAs Science Mission Directorates Heliophysics Division had selected two of the programs, and the Directorates Astrophysics Division had selected the other two. The University of Wisconsin proposed to design a payload to make astronomical polarization measurements in the far-ultraviolet spectrum and to explore new diagnostics of the geometry and magnetic fields in stellar envelopes and interstellar medium. Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, planned to launch a payload to investigate substorm auroras and their variations. The team from the University of Colorado, Boulder, proposed to investigate the ratio of molecular hydrogen to carbon monoxide in gas clouds of other galaxies, to help determine accurately the masses of those galaxies. The team from the University of Southern California at Los Angeles proposed to test a new photoelectron focusing system, which scientists could use in future solar observations to calibrate space research. A panel comprising external reviewers and representatives from NASAs scientific staff had selected the proposals, based on each projects scientific and technical merits, costs, and relevance to NASA programs.(NASA, NASA Funds Universities New Experiments for Suborbital Flights, news release 07-121, 23 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07121_Suborbital_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to discuss the status and future of the ISS in the context of NASAs FY 2008 budget request. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern about the significant cutbacks in NASAs ISS research program, warning that these cuts had potentially serious implications for the productivity of the station as a research facility once it is assembled. Christina T. Chaplain of GAO testified that NASA had planned 15 more Space Shuttle launchesan average of one every 2.7 monthsthrough 2010, when NASA intended to end the Space Shuttle program. Compared to the existing launch schedule of once every 10.8 months, the new Shuttle schedule would provide little allowance for delays related to mechanical failure or weather. Thomas W. Holloway, Chair of the IISTF, expressed doubt that commercial space vehicles under development would be ready to ferry supplies to the ISS when the Space Shuttle retired. Associate Administrator of NASAs Space Operations Mission Directorate William H. Gerstenmaier testified that, after the first test flights of the commercial cargo vehicles, scheduled for 2008, NASA would be better able to judge their readiness. Subcommittee Ranking Minority Member Thomas Charles Tom Feeney III (R-FL) expressed concern about the loss of skilled KSC workers when NASA ended its Shuttle Program and shifted its focus to the Moon and Mars programs, warning, We cant repeat past mistakeslike the Apollo-to-Shuttle transition where America frittered away hard-earned space-faring skills, which are almost impossible to replace.
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawns mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and JupiterVesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawns instrument suite to measure the asteroids elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, NASAs Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt, news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched, news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, NASAs Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids Frozen in Time, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, NASAs Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids, Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
NASA announced that, after a full and open competition, it had selected the Boeing Company as the prime contractor for the production, delivery, and installation of avionics systems for the Ares-1 rocket, a key component of the Constellation Program. NASA planned for Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV into orbit. Under the terms of the US$799.5 million contract, Boeing was responsible for developing and acquiring the avionics hardware, and for assembling, inspecting, and integrating the systems components on the upper stage of the rocket. During the performance period, which would last through 16 December 2016, NASA required Boeing to provide one instrument-unit avionics-ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support integrated flight tests and missions. The selection was the final major contract award for the Constellation Program, wrapping up a five-month period in which NASA had awarded nearly US$5 billion in contracts. The award was the second to go to Boeing, which had also won the US$1.1 billion contract to build the upper stage of the Ares rocket.(NASA, NASA Selects Prime Contractor for Ares 1 Rocket Avionics, news release C07-060, 12 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07060_Ares_1_Avionics.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Associated Press, Boeing Wins Final NASA Rocket Deal, 13 December 2007; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Boeing Wins Final Ares 1 Contract, 13 December 2007.)
NASA announced that one of its STEREO satellites had recorded images of an April 2007 collision between a comet and a solar hurricane, marking the first time that scientists had observed such an event. Enckes comet, traveling in the orbit of Mercury, had encountered a CME. NASA had designed STEREO to observe this type of solar event. As the CME swept by, the comets tail had brightened and then had disconnected, as the front of the ejection carried it away. Scientists had known that a comets plasma tail could disconnect from the comet, but the conditions necessary for this to occur had remained a mystery. Preliminary analysis of the images, which NASA researchers had combined into a movie, indicated that a phenomenon called magnetic reconnection had caused the tail to detach. In a magnetic reconnection event, the magnetic fields in a CME crunch together the oppositely directed magnetic fields around a comet, causing the comet fields to link together suddenly. This sudden reconnection releases a burst of energy that detaches the comets tail. Angelos Vourlidas of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, was lead author of an article about the event, published in the 10 October 2007 issue of Astrophysical Journal Letters. Remarking on the researchers sense of awe when they viewed the images, Vourlidas described their surprise at seeing the disconnection of the tail, calling the event the icing on the cake.(NASA, NASA Satellite Sees Solar Hurricane Detach Comet Tail, news release 07-214, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07214_Comet_Collision.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Andrea Thompson, Solar Storm Rips Tail Off Comet, Space.com, 1 October 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/071001_hurr_comet.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to the Boeing Company to provide engineering and technical support for four specialized research aircrafttwo F-15s and two F/A-18sat NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). NASA had modified the aircraft to conduct a variety of flight-research missions to support NASA and other government agencies, as well as private industry. The contracts value was as much as US$28 million during the five-year performance period lasting through April 2012.(NASA, NASA Awards California Aircraft Support Contract to Boeing, contract release C07-20, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0720_Boeing_Aircraft_Support.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASAs SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSCs A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, NASAs Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration, news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
NASA released images of solar activity captured by the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO), a pair of spacecraft launched on 25 October 2006 to study the Sun. The images revealed a close view of the Suns activity, as well as a progressive view of the Suns radiation as it reaches Earths atmosphere. Scientists intended to use STEREO images to study the flow of energy from the Sun to Earth, in particular, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), which can cause dangerous solar storms. STEREO Principal Investigator Russell A. Howard stated that the new view from the spacecraft would improve scientists ability to forecast the arrival time of severe space weather, enabling them to predict the arrival of solar storms to within a couple of hours, instead of within a day.(Aalok Mehta, Photo in the News: Stunning New Images of Sun Captured, National Geographic News, 1 March 2007.)
NASA released images of the Sun, captured by the X-ray Telescope aboard the international spacecraft Hinode, formerly known as Solar B. The images showed that the Suns magnetic field is much more turbulent and dynamic than previously known. Richard R. Fisher of the Heliophysics Division of NASAs Science Mission Directorate remarked that, for the first time, scientists could detect tiny granules of hot gas rising and falling in the Suns magnetized atmosphere. Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin, also a professor of physics at Stanford University, added that Hinode images revealed irrefutable evidence of the presence of turbulence-driven processes that bring magnetic fields to the Suns surface, resulting in an extremely dynamic gaseous envelope around the Sun. A collaborative mission, led by JAXA and including ESA and Britains Particle Physics Astronomy Research Council, Hinode had launched on 23 September 2006. Hinode carried three primary instrumentsthe Solar Optical Telescope, the X-ray Telescope, and the Extreme Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrometerto study the Suns magnetic field and how its explosive energy propagates through the various layers of the solar atmosphere.(NASA, International Spacecraft Reveals Detailed Processes on the Sun, news release 07-72, 21 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07072_Hinode_Images_of_Sun.html (accessed 14 October 2009);)
underwater telephone. The Atlantis had an on-board telephone connected to a satellite telephone, which could contact anyone on shore. Atlantis had telephoned NASAs JSC in Houston, Texas, where a high-powered dish transmitter had contacted the ISS directly. Oceanographers and astrobiologists were equally enthusiastic about the telephone call because much of the information oceanographers learn researching the sea floor applies to space exploration. Astrobiologist Richard Shand of Northern Arizona University described the feat of communicating with people who are not currently on Earths surface, using three different mediawater, air, and vacuumas an astonishing accomplishment. Apollo astronauts, who had called Houston from a distance of 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles), retained the record for a long-distance call. The call from the Alvin submersible to the ISS was a 253-kilometer (157-mile) long-distance call.(Christina Reed, Houston, We Have a Phone Call, Science Now, 26 January 2007.)
The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) announced that a landmark test flight of a balloon-borne solar telescope had succeeded, clearing the way for long-duration polar balloon flights to capture unprecedented details of the Suns surface. The project, called Sunrise, was an international collaboration among NCAR, NASA, Germanys Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research and Kiepenheuer Institute for Solar Physics, Spains Astrophysics Institute of the Canary Islands, and the Swedish Space Corporation. U.S. partners Lockheed Martin and the University of Chicago were also participating. The balloon, which was larger than a Boeing 747 jet, launched 3 October carrying a gondola containing 6,000 pounds (2,722 kilograms) of scientific instruments. The balloon flew for 10 hours, reaching an altitude of 120,000 feet (36,576 meters), and released the gondola to descend to Earth via parachute. During the flight, the telescope captured stable images of the solar surface, and the various instruments on board captured additional data. David Elmore of NCAR confirmed that the test flight had verified the operations of the entire system, allowing the team to continue planning the first full-scale mission. NASA and the NSF had funded the projects. Associate Administrator of NASAs Science Mission Directorate S. Alan Stern, in congratulating the NCAR team for their successful test flight, advocated the use of suborbital flight as a less expensive method of studying space than satellites and spacecraft.(National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), Solar Telescope Reaches 120,000 Feet on Jumbo-Jet-Sized Balloon, news release, 23 October 2007, http://www.ucar.edu/news/releases/2007/sunrise.shtml (accessed 29 September 2010); Katy Human, Balloon Test Flight Hailed, Denver Post (CO), 22 October 2007.)
Alvin Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. Dave Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffes backup during NASAs teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavours payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavours 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavours time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavours heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, NASAs Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station, news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, STS-118: Endeavour, NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter, NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off, New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
NASA announced a landmark achievement of its Spitzer Space Telescope (SST). For the first time the SST had captured enough light from exoplanetsplanets outside Earths solar system to identify molecular signatures in their atmospheres. NASA described the event as a significant step toward achieving the ability to detect life on rocky exoplanets. Using a spectrograph to reveal the fingerprints of the objects chemical composition, the space-based infrared SST had obtained the data from two different gaseous exoplanetsHD 189733b, located 63 light-years from Earth in the constellation Vulpecula, and HD 209458b, located 150 light-years away in the constellation Pegasus. The telescope had monitored the planets as they transited behind their stars and temporarily disappeared from view. Once the exoplanets were no longer visible, Spitzers spectrograph measured the dip in infrared light. The data collected through this method, known as the secondary-eclipse technique, indicated that the two planetsknown as hot Jupiters, because they are gaseous like Jupiter, but orbit much closer to their starsare drier and cloudier than scientists had previously predicted. Although scientists had predicted that water vapor would prove a common feature of the atmospheres of hot Jupiters, the SST found no evidence of water vapor on either HD189733b or HD 209458b.(NASA, NASAs Spitzer First To Crack Open Light of Far Away Worlds, news release 07-48, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0748_Spitzer.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Eric Berger, Another Step Closer To Finding a Planet Like Ours, Houston Chronicle, 22 February 2007.)
Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), a private company based in El Segundo, California, launched its Falcon-1 rocket from Omelek Island in the Kwajawlein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The 70-foot-long (21.3-meter-long), two-stage rocket, powered by liquid oxygen and kerosene, successfully reached space, accomplishing stage separation and second-stage ignition before reentering the atmosphere. Although the rocket failed to reach its desired orbit of 425 miles (684 kilometers), SpaceXs founder Elon Musk, also the cofounder of PayPal, considered the launch a success because the rocket had successfully achieved many of the riskiest milestones of launching and entering space. The companys first attempt at launching a Falcon-1 rocket in 2006 had failed when leaking fuel caught fire just after liftoff. SpaceX had designed the most recent missionDemo 2to gather flight data for the companys main customer, DARPA, which was seeking more economical means of reaching space. The typical commercial launch service cost US$30 million, but Musk had pledged to launch satellites for US$7 million.(John Antczak for Associated Press, SpaceX Launches New Rocket Into Space, 21 March 2007; John Schwartz, Private Rocket Lost Shortly After Launch, New York Times, 21 March 2007.)
NASA announced that it had begun testing SOFIA, the highly modified Boeing 747SP aircraft that NASA intended to use as an airborne observatory for first light infrared observations of the universe. Before arriving at NASAs DFRC, engineers had installed a 17-tonne (18.7-ton or 17,000-kilogram) telescope in the aircrafts aft fuselage and had cut a 16-foot-high (4.9-meter- high) telescope door in the fuselage. At DFRC, engineers had installed test instrumentation critical for the initial flight tests. In addition, they had equipped a telescope-cavity environmental-control system, designed to keep the telescope dry when the cavity door was closed, as well as when the craft had achieved the altitude required for operating the observatory. The first series of flight tests, conducted with the cavity door closed, would study the aerodynamics, structural integrity, stability and control, and handling qualities of the modified aircraft.(NASA, Sofia Observatory Enters Aircraft Testing Phase, news release 07-225, 12 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07225_sofia_first_flights.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) released a study conducted over two years, examining the United States Earth-observing satellite missions. The study, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond, was the first 10-year plan to recommend a path forward that would restore U.S. leadership in Earth science and prevent the collapse of the U.S. system of Earth- science satellites. The report recommended that, to accomplish this goal and to rebuild the aging network of environmental spacecraft, the U.S. government should fund 17 Earth-observing-satellite missions between 2010 and 2020. To fund these missions, NASA would need to resume spending US$2 billion per year on Earth science, and the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) would need to maintain funding levels at US$1 billion each year. According to the report, NASAs budget for Earth science had decreased 30 percent since 2000, while NOAA had experienced major cost overruns and schedule delays in its primary mission to study weather and climate. Without reinvestment, the number of NASAs satellites monitoring the Earths climate could decrease by 2017 from 25 to 7, leaving the United States without scientific information to analyze severe storms and to determine changes in the Earths climate.(Brian Berger, Report Urges Reinvestment in U.S. Earth Science Satellites, Space.com, 16 January 2007, http://www.space.com/aol/businessmonday_070122.html (accessed 4 March 2010); Marc Kaufman, Cutbacks Impede Climate Studies, Washington Post, 16 January 2007; National Research Council, Space Studies Board and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), http://www.nap.edu/catalog. php?record_id=11820#toc (accessed 5 November 2009).)
During a ceremony rededicating its Glenn Research Center (GRC) Plum Brook site in Ohio, NASA announced its intention to use the Plum Brook Stations Space Power Facility (SPF) to test the CEV Orion. NASA had designed Orion, which was in development, to enable research on the Moon, Mars, and other destinations in Earths solar system. NASA intended for the SPFthe only facility in the world large enough to undertake full-scale testingto conduct environmental tests of the Orion spacecraft, using simulations of conditions during launch, in- orbit operations, and reentry. The facility would also conduct thermal, acoustic, mechanical- vibration, and electromagnetic-interference tests.
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used data from NASAs Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to create the first three-dimensional map of the distribution of dark matter in the universe, an undertaking fundamental to understanding how galaxies have grown and clustered over billions of years. The research team had focused HSTs camera on an area of the sky 2 wide during 600 HST orbits, the largest investment of viewing time for a single project since the telescope had launched in 1990. Astronomers had measured the shapes of half a million faraway galaxies, constructing a map of dark matter that stretches halfway back to the beginning of the universe and shows how dark matter has grown increasingly clumpy as it collapses under gravity. The map provided the best evidence to date that normal matter, such as that composing galaxies, collects along the densest concentration of dark matter, thereby revealing a loose network of filaments that intersect in massive structures at the locations of clusters of galaxies. One of the researchers, Richard Massey of the California Institute of Technology, described the dark matter as scaffolding, stating that the stars and galaxies had assembled themselves inside of the scaffolding.(NASA, Hubble Maps the Cosmic Web of Clumpy Dark Matter in 3-D, news release 07-02, 7 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07002_Hubble_Dark_Matter.html (accessed 7 January 2007); Richard Massey et al., Dark Matter Maps Reveal Cosmic Scaffolding, Nature 445 (18 January 2007): 286290, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v445/n7125/full/nature05497.html (DOI 10.1038/nature05497; accessed 4 March 2010); John Johnson Jr., Dark Matter Is Mapped Unseen, Los Angeles Times, 8 January 2007.)
DARPA decommissioned its experimental Orbital Express satellites, officially ending the demonstration of on-orbit satellite servicing and robotics. The two craft comprising Orbital ExpressASTRO and NextSathad launched together in March 2007, to demonstrate ASTROs ability to approach NextSat with limited interaction from the ground, to grapple the craft with a robotic arm, and to transfer fuel and hardware to NextSat. The decommissioning of the satellites followed the completion of one last maneuver. ASTRO had found NextSat and homed in on the craft from long range, assisted by the U.S. Space Surveillance Network. Beginning on 16 July, ASTRO had traveled approximately 250 miles (402 kilometers) away from NextSat, so that its sensor suite lost track of NextSat. ASTRO then required input from the ground-based network to help it locate the target satellite. DARPA had originally scheduled the decommissioning to occur on 5 July but had extended the mission two weeks to allow the research team to attempt the long-range rendezvous maneuver. Orbital Express had met all of DARPAs criteria for mission success, including demonstrating its capability to track and to rendezvous with long-range targets.
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Kenneth J. Krieg had signed the National Partnership for Aeronautical Testing (NPAT) Agreement. NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) would use the integrated national strategy NPAT to manage their respective aeronautical test facilities, including wind tunnels, propulsion-test facilities, simulation facilities, and open-air ranges. The agreement fulfilled one element of the two agencies response to the National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed in December 2006. In addition to expanding the dialogue beyond the test-and-evaluation communities, to include industry, academia, and the science and technology programs of NASA and DOD, the agreement established a council responsible for developing projects to streamline and economize management of aeronautical test facilities. Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator of NASAs Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, and John B. Foulkes of DODs Test Resource Management Center would cochair the council.(NASA, NASA and Department of Defense Partner for Aeronautical Testing, news release 07-52, 26 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07052_DoD_MoU_aero.html (accessed 14 October 2009); United Press International, NASA Signs Defense Department Agreement, 28 February 2007.)
NASA announced the selection of the Boeing Company of Huntsville, Alabama, as the production contractor for the Ares-1 upper stage. Under the contract, valued at US$514.7 million, plus US$610 million in options, a NASA-led design team would receive support from Boeing during the design phase. Boeing would take responsibility for production of the upper stage, manufacturing a ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support NASAs flight manifest through 2016. The cost-plus-award-fee contract covered a126 performance period that would begin in September 2007 and last through December 2016.
The House Committee on Science and Technology held its first hearing to review NASAs proposed fiscal year (FY) 2009 budget request and FY 2008 Operating Plan. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony in support of NASAs US$17.6 billion request, which would allocate US$5.78 billion for Space Shuttle and ISS programs, US$4.44 billion for science, US$3.5 billion for development of new crewed spacecraft, and US$447 million for aeronautics research. Griffin devoted much of his oral testimony to NASAs request for an extension of a statutory waiver, which permits funding for payments to Russia for crew transport to the ISS. The current waiver had been a provision of the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Non Proliferation Act (Pub. L. No. 106-178, as amended). Griffin stated that NASA needed legislative authorization for the funding in 2008, because Russia required 36 months to fabricate new transport vehicles; therefore, NASA needed to finalize contractual agreements by late 2008, so that Russia could complete the vehicles by 2012.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Committee Examines FY09 NASA Budget, press release, 13 February 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID= 2088 (accessed 4 January 2010); United Press International, NASA Proposes $17.6 Billion Budget, 4 February 2008; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, NASAs Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 February 2008, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG- 110hhrg40598/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg40598.pdf (accessed 4 January 2011).)
Engineers at NASAs MSFC completed a series of tests on a main component of the J-2X engine, which powered the upper stage of the Ares-I rocket. This series of 20 tests was the second set of four planned series to test the J-2Xs workhorse gas generator, which drives the turbopumps that start the engine. The testing programs determined the gas generators combustion environment, durability, and performance, as well as reducing risk in the design, fabrication, and operation of flight hardware. The achieved objectives of this test series were to address stability issues in the gas chamber and to regulate ignition timing. Pratt and Whitney Rocketdyne had fabricated the gas generator.(NASA, NASA Engineers Complete Engine Test Series for Ares I Rocket, news release 08-208, 18 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08-208_Ares_engine_test.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
A team of astronomers led by Alicia M. Soderberg announced in the journal Nature that they had made the first observations of a supernova in the process of exploding. Before this discovery, astronomers had only observed supernovas by means of their visible light, which had traveled at least a month before reaching Earth. However, by serendipity, Soderberg had viewed the supernova SN 2008D from the beginning of its explosion. She had been observing the stars galaxy using NASAs Swift X-ray Telescope, when she caught the initial explosion of SN 2008D, only visible in the x-ray wavelength. Soderberg had alerted the astronomy community of the event. Scientists had trained several telescopes, including NASAs HST and NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory, on SN 2008D. They had watched the star as it exploded over the following days. Scientists hoped that studying the initial x-ray burst of SN 2008D would teach them how to recognize and observe other supernovas in the future.(Dennis Overbye, Scientists See Supernova in Action, New York Times, 22 May 2008; Andrea Thompson, Supernova Birth Observed for First Time, Space.com, 22 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5371-supernova- birth-observed-time.html (accessed 16 March 2011); see also A. M. Soderberg et al., An Extremely Luminous X- Ray Outburst at the Birth of a Supernova, Nature 453, no. 7194 (22 May 2008): 469474.)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Wayne Hale Jr. as NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Strategic Partnerships. Hale had begun his three-decade career with NASA in 1978 in Flight Operations at NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC). Hale had headed the Propulsion Systems Section of Mission Control from 1985 to 1988 and had overseen flight- control teams in Mission Control during all aspects of 40 Space Shuttle missions. He had served as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program (SSP) since 2005. In his new position, Hale would work in the Space Operations Mission Directorate to build alliances across the public and private sectors. John P. Shannon, who had served as Hales deputy since 2005, would succeed him as SSP Manager. Shannon had begun his career with NASA in 1988. When NASA appointed him Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1993, Shannon had become the youngest person in NASAs history to hold that post. After Shannon served as Deputy Director of the Columbia Task Force in 2003, NASA had selected him to create the SSPs Flight Operations and Integration Office.
A Russian Proton-M rocket launched an American AMC-14 communications satellite at 02:18 (MST), from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, but failed to bring it into correct orbit. The Breeze-M booster on the rocket failed 10 minutes after launch, leaving the satellite 8,000 kilometers (4,971 miles) below geostationary orbit. SES Americom owned the satellite, and Lockheed Martin had built it. The failed satellite had featured a new telecommunications technology that allowed changes in coverage while the satellite was in orbit. The satellites design would have enabled it to achieve a higher altitude using its own engine, although this would use up the satellites fuel supply and significantly shorten its lifespan.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 653, 1 April 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx653.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Agence France-Presse, Russian Rocket Fails To Take US Satellite into Planned Orbit, 14 March 2008.)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics conducted a review of the status of NASAs space exploration initiative. The Subcommittee focused on the effect that the FY 2009 budget request would have on the ability of NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate (ESMD) to implement the George W. Bush administrations 2004 Vision for Space Exploration (VSE). Among other things, the VSE had mandated that NASA return to the Moon by 2020. The ESMDs Constellation Program was developing vehicles, such as the Orion CEV and the Ares-I crew launch vehicle (CLV), to implement the VSE. NASA had proposed that the FY 2009 budget request include US$3.5 billion in funding for the ESMD. During the hearing, Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that space exploration projects were underfunded and might become a drain on NASAs resources. Furthermore, Cristina T. Chaplain of the Government Accountability Office (GAO) testified that, because of the complexity of the Constellation Program, GAO was concerned about the reliability of cost estimates for the programs. However, Richard J. Gilbrech, Associate Administrator of the ESMD, asked Congress to support the FY 2009 budget request, asserting that it would provide NASA with a stable source of funding.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Subcommittee Examines Status of NASAs Human Exploration Initiative, press release, 3 April 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/PressRoom/Item.aspx?ID=94 (accessed 19 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Subcommittee Examines Progress and Plans of NASAs Exploration Initiative, press release, 3 April 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=2142 (accessed 15 March 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA s Exploration Initiative: Status and Issues, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 3 April 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/ pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41471/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41471.pdf (accessed 4 March 2011).)
Alliant Techsystems of Edina, Minnesota, announced that Lockheed Martin Space Systems had awarded Alliant a contract to build electricity-generating solar arrays for NASAs Orion spacecraft. Because solar arrays are expendable, the contract, valued at over US$50 million, could extend at least through 2020. NASA had designed Orion for use in human space exploration and for transporting crews and cargo to the International Space Station (ISS). NASA had chosen Lockheed as the lead contractor for the Orion program in summer 2007.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), Alliant To Build Solar Panels for NASA, 11 January 2008; Erik Borg, Alliance Gets $50 M NASA Solar-Array Contract, Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal (MN), 11 January 2008.)
ESAs first Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), known as Jules Verne or ATV 1, launched aboard an Ariane-5 rocket from Guiana Space Center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 04:03 (UT). The ATV was carrying 4.6 tonnes (4,600 kilograms or 10,141 pounds) of supplies to the ISS, including 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of dry cargo, 856 kilograms (1,887 pounds) of propellant, 270 kilograms (595 pounds) of drinking water and 21 kilograms (46 pounds) of oxygen. The ATV Jules Verne, which measured 10.3 meters (34 feet) high and 4.5 meters (15 feet) wide, was the first spacecraft in the world to have an optical laserbased automated docking system. On 29 March and 31 March 2008, ESA intended to put the ATV through two orbital testing demonstrations. If the tests proved successful, ISS managers planned to allow it to dock with the ISS on 3 April 2008.(ESA, Europe Launches Its First Re-Supply ShipJules Verne ATVto the ISS, press release no. 15-2008, 9 March 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_15_2008_p_EN.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 653, 1 April 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx653.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Tariq Malik, European Cargo Ship Begins Maiden Voyage, Space.com, 9 March 2008, http://www.space.com/5079-european- cargo-ship-begins-maiden-space-voyage.html (accessed 13 January 2011).)
NASA announced that it had generated the highest-resolution topographical data of the lunar south pole to date, using the Goldstone Solar System Radar (GSSR) in the Mojave Desert in California. Scientists at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had generated the data over six months during 2006, when the Moons axis was tilted at a relatively rare alignment, allowing for a good view of the pole. The GSSR had gathered the data using its 70-meter (230-foot) radar dish, which bounced 500-kilowatt radar signals, at 90-minute intervals, off an area of the lunar surface measuring 400 miles by 250 miles (644 kilometers by 402 kilometers). The resulting images showed a resolution of up to 20 meters (66 feet) per pixel, close enough to identify a feature the size of a house. They revealed that the topography of the area, located near Shackleton Crater, was extremely rugged, with craters 2.5-miles deep (4-kilometers deep) and mountains as high as Mt. McKinley. NASA scientists claimed that the newest data had more than 3 times the resolution and 10 times the vertical accuracy of the best mapping data acquired previouslydata that the GSSR had captured during a 1997 study.(NASA, NASA Views Landing Site Through Eyes of Future Moon Crew, news release 08-071, 27 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08071_goldstone_radar.html (accessed 28 December 2010); Kenneth Chang, The Moons Craggiest Stretch Comes into Focus, New York Times, 28 February 2008.)
NASA observed the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act, the 1958 law that combined the staff and facilities of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics with those of other governmental space research facilities, thereby establishing NASA. In honor of the occasion, the House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing to discuss NASAs accomplishments to date and to consider future challenges facing NASA. On 9 July, the U.S. House of Representatives had commemorated the creation of NASA with the passage of H. Res. 1315, honoring the men and women of NASA on its fiftieth anniversary, acknowledging NASAs discoveries and accomplishments, and pledging that the United States would maintain a position of leadership in aeronautics, space exploration, and technology.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, House Passes S&T Bills Commemorating NASAs 50th Anniversary, First Woman in Space, press release, 9 July 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/PressRoom/ Item.aspx?ID=118# (accessed 18 May 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, Committee Holds Hearing Honoring NASAs 50th Anniversary, press release, 30 July 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/PressRoom/ Item.aspx?ID=121# (accessed 18 May 2011); Clinton Parks, 50 Years Ago: NASA Born in Sputniks Wake, Space.com, 29 July 2008, http://www.space.com/5671-50-years-nasa-born- sputnik-wake.html (accessed 25 May 2011).)
Officials at NASAs LaRC announced that they had completed a series of 11 tests on the Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne SJX61-2 scramjet engine in the 8-Foot High Temperature wind tunnel. The tests had been NASAs contribution to the mission to build the X-51 WaveRider aircraft. The design of the X-51 WaveRider would enable the craft to travel at speeds near Mach 7 for approximately 5 minutes. The U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory and U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had been the main contributors to the US$246 million X-51 project. LaRC had tested a combined cycle, jet-fueled, air-breathing, flight-clearance engine, similar to the engine that the X-51would use. NASA engineers expected that they would complete testing by the end of September 2008.(Brian Berger, NASA Helping U.S. Air Force Gear Up for 2009 X-51 Flights, Space.com, 8 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5804-nasa-helping-air-force-gear-2009-51-flights.html (accessed 27 July 2011); John Croft, X-51A Scramjet Readied for Flight Tests, Flight International, 10 September 2008.)
Robert Jastrow, one of NASAs founding administrators and a popular commentator on NASAs missions to the Moon, died from complications of pneumonia at the age of 82. Jastrow had spent his early career at Yale and at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. When NASA formed in 1958, Jastrow had become Chief of the Theoretical Division. In 1961 he had become Director of NASAs Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), where he had worked on the Pioneer, Voyager, and Galileo probes. He had held positions at Columbia University and Dartmouth College before becoming chair of the Mount Wilson Institute in 1992. Jastrow had cofounded the George C. Marshall Institute in 1984 and still held the position of Chair Emeritus of the Institute at the time of his death. The public knew Jastrow well for his ability to explain science and space exploration in easily understood terms. Besides being a frequent guest on network television, he was the author of the 1967 best seller Red Giants and White Dwarfs and of the controversial How To Make Nuclear Weapons Obsoletethe 1985 defense of President Ronald W. Reagans Strategic Defense Initiative. Over the course of his career, Jastrow had received the NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, the Arthur S. Fleming Award for Outstanding Service to the U.S. Government, and the Columbia University Medal of Excellence.(John Schwartz, Robert Jastrow, Who Made Space Understandable, Dies at 82, New York Times, 12 February 2008; Thomas H. Maugh II, Robert Jastrow, 82; Astrophysicist Helped Shape NASAs Space Exploration, Los Angeles Times, 17 February 2008.)
NASAs Human Research Program announced that it would fund nine ground-based studies on the effects of space radiation on human health. The selected study proposals, chosen from a pool of 60 submissions, would investigate issues such as damage to the central nervous system and risk predictions for cancer. Researchers from California, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, New York, and Utah would split the total value of the US$13 million funding. The Human Research Programs mission was to provide knowledge and technologies to improve human health during space exploration and to identify possible countermeasures for known problems.(NASA, NASA Awards Space Radiobiology Research Grants, news release 08-200, 5 August 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08200_NRA_Space_Radiobiology.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
NASA announced the resignation of Robert P. Hopkins as NASAs Chief of Strategic Communications. Hopkins had held positions at NASA as Senior Advisor to Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale and as Assistant Administrator of the Office of Communications Planning. Over the course of his career, he had managed the development of a strategic communications plan that had served as the basis for NASA activities, such as planning NASAs fiftieth anniversary in 2008. Additionally, Hopkins had enacted initiatives, such as a communications portal and a toolkit for implementing the Communications Coordinating Committee, helping to facilitate communication across NASA. He had advanced NASAs outreach through development programs, such as the NASA Future Forums and the NASA Lecture Series. Upon leaving NASA, Hopkins planned to take a position in the private sector. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin named Christopher M. Shank as Acting Chief of Strategic Communications. Shank had joined NASA in 2005, after holding positions in the U.S. Air Force, in the NRO, and, as a staff member on the U.S. House Science and Technology
NASA announced the resignation of S. Alan Stern as Associate Administrator for NASAs SMD. During his career with NASA, Stern had served as Principal Investigator for the New Horizons Mission to Pluto and as a member of the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin announced that Edward J. Weiler would replace Stern as interim Associate Administrator for NASAs SMD. Before accepting this position, Weiler had served as Director of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC).(NASA, NASA Administrator Announces Science Mission Directorate Leadership Changes, news release 08- 088, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08088_ SMD_AA_change.html (accessed 13 January 2001).)
NASAs Lunar Science Institute, along with nine other international space agencies, signed a statement of intent to consider participating in the International Lunar Network (ILN), a cooperative effort to install mobile science stations on the Moon. The stations would replace the technology that NASA astronauts had placed on the lunar surface during the Apollo program. The signing of the statement took place in the course of a four-day NASA Lunar Science Conference at NASAs ARC. The conference had gathered approximately 500 scientists, from Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, to discuss the future of lunar exploration. Although scientists from the participating agencies planned to refine the ILN concept, the agencies expected to make initial decisions regarding communications standards and potential landing sites, and to select a set of scientifically equivalent core instruments to perform specific measurements.(NASA, NASA Hosts International Meeting for Lunar Science Discussions, new release 08-190, 29 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08190_NASA_hosts_ILN.html (accessed 18 May 2011); David Perlman, Scientists Swap Moon, Mars Exploration Plans, San Francisco Chronicle, 22 July 2008.)
NASA scientists released data that the Cassini spacecraft had collected on 12 March 2008, when it swooped through a geyser of water vapor erupting from the surface of Saturns moon Enceladus. The data revealed that the water vapor contained acetylene, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, methane, and propane. The organic material composing Enceladus closely resembled that of a comet, a discovery that surprised scientists and raised questions regarding the formation and origin of Saturns moons. Cassini had also generated new heat maps, which showed significantly warmer temperatures on Enceladus than anticipated, particularly along the moons tiger stripesthe deep fissures at its south pole. Temperatures along the fissures had registered at -135F (-93C), which was 63F (17C) warmer than previously recorded temperatures in that area and 200F (93C) warmer than the temperatures of other areas of the moon. Temperatures this warm raised the possibility that Enceladus could have subterranean liquid water.(NASA, Cassini Tastes Organic Material at Saturns Geyser Moon, news release 08-089, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08089_Cassini_Enceladus_Flyby.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Dave Mosher, Seeds of Life Found Near Saturn, Space.com, 26 March 2008, http://www.space.com/5179- seeds-life-saturn.html (accessed 1 February 2011).)
Atlantis landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at 14:08 (UT) after a 13-day journey to the ISS, successfully completing the Shuttle mission STS-122, to deliver and install ESAs microgravity science laboratory Columbus. The seven-member crew included American astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Alan G. Poindexter, Leland D. Melvin, Rex J. Walheim, and Stanley G. Love, and ESA astronauts Hans W. Schlegel and Leopold Eyharts. The mission had begun with a 19:45 (UT) launch on 7 February 2008 from KSC and had included three spacewalks. Crew members had docked the Columbus laboratory to the Harmony module of the ISS; installed power, data, and cooling cables to the laboratory; replaced a spent nitrogen tank; placed two science experiments on the laboratorys exterior; retrieved a broken gyroscope; installed a solar monitor; and positioned the European Technology Exposure Facility. STS-122 had also exchanged Eyharts for American astronaut Daniel M. Tani, who had been aboard the ISS for almost four months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 652; NASA, Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission, news release 08-061, 20 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08061_Atlantis_Lands.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
NASAs Aeronautic Research Mission Directorate announced that it had awarded six research contracts, with a combined value of US$12.4 million, for the study of advanced concepts in subsonic and supersonic commercial transport. The 18-month studies would focus on the development of key technologies and advancements that would allow NASA to prepare innovative new commercial vehicles for public use sometime during 20302035. The studies were the first phase of a two-phase acquisition process; NASA would ask participants who successfully completed Phase 1 to submit proposals for Phase 2. The leaders of the six study teams were Boeing Company, GE Aviation, Lockheed Martin, MIT, and Northrop Grumman. Each teams contract was valued at approximately US$2 million.(NASA, NASA Awards Future Vehicle Aircraft Research Contracts, news release C08-060, 6 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-060_ARMD_contracts.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics received testimony from S. Alan Stern, Associate Administrator for NASAs Science Mission Directorate (SMD), and from a panel of research scientists, regarding the FY 2009 budget request for science programs. The presidents budget request had provided US$4.4 billion in direct funding for science programs, an amount representing 25 percent of NASAs total budget request. Subcommittee Ranking Member Thomas C. Feeney (R-FL) called the budget essentially flat, but Stern testified that the budget accomplished all of the SMDs objectives, including starting seven new missions, increasing research analysis, accelerating the suborbital program, beginning a lunar program, and initiating the Earth Science Decadal Survey.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Witnesses: FY09 NASA Science Budget Makes Best of Limited Resources, press release, 13 March 2008, http://science.house.gov/PressRoom/Item.aspx?ID=89# (accessed 19 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASAs Science Programs: Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request and Issues, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 March 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41067/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41067.pdf (accessed 19 January 2011).)
NASA announced that William W. Parsons would be resigning as Director of NASAs KSC to pursue opportunities in the private sector. Parsons had begun his career with NASA in 1990. He had served in numerous positions, including Director of NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC), Launch Site Support Manager, Manager of the Space Station Hardware Integration Office, Chief of Operations of the Propulsion Test Directorate, SSP Manager, and Deputy Director of NASAs JSC. NASA had selected former astronaut Robert D. Cabana as the new Director of NASAS KSC. Cabana, who had completed his astronaut training in 1986, had flown on four Space Shuttle missions: STS-41 in October 1990, STS-53 in December 1992, STS-65 in July 1994, and STS-88 in December 1988. Additionally, he had served as Director of NASAs SSC, Deputy Director of NASAs JSC, Chief of NASAs Astronaut Office, Manager of International Operations of the ISS Program, Director of NASAs Human Spaceflight Program in Russia, Deputy Director of the ISS Program, and Director of Flight Crew Operations.(NASA, Cabana To Succeed Parsons as Kennedy Space Center Director, news release 08-249, 30 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-249_Parsons_leaves.html (accessed 25 July 2011). 123 Brian Berger, Bush Signs NASA Budget, Soyuz Waiver into Law, Space.com, 5 October 2008, http://www. space.com/5929-bush-signs-nasa-budget-soyuz-waiver-law.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
The Islamic Republic of Iran announced that it had launched a research rocket to celebrate the opening of its new space center in Semnan Province. The quasi-official Fars News Agency reported that Iran had launched the research rocket Kavoshgar 1 in advance of the anticipated launch of Irans first domestically manufactured satellite. Although Iran did not announce the altitude that the rocket had reached, media reports stated that Iran had fired Kavoshgar 1 into space. Scientists generally consider that space begins at an altitude of approximately 60 miles (97 kilometers).(Nazila Fathi, Iran Launches Rocket To Commemorate New Space Center, New York Times, 5 February 2008. 16 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 652, 1 March 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx652.html (accessed 28 December 2008); Tariq Malik, New Cargo Ship Launches Toward Space Station, Space.com, 5 February 2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/080205-expedition16-progress28-launch.html (accessed 30 December 2010).)
A team of astronomers led by Peter F. Michelson of Stanford University announced in the online version of the journal Science that NASAs Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope had discovered a pulsar after detecting its gamma-ray beams. Pulsars, which are rapidly spinning collapsed neutron stars, emit radiation from their poles in jets that sweep past Earth. Usually, scientists detect the energy as radio waves and, occasionally, as x rays or visible light. Fermis sighting was the first time that scientists had seen a pulsar that only emits gamma rays. The team speculated that, although the pulsar might emit energy in other wavelengths, only the gamma-ray beam is wide enough for astronomers to detect from Earth. Part of the supernova CTA 1, the pulsar is approximately 4,600 light-years away from Earth, in the constellation Cepheus. Its gamma rays blink past Earth every 316.86 seconds. The team of astronomers believed that Fermi would find more gamma-ray pulsars, allowing scientists to learn more about their magnetic fields and about the rate at which stars explode.(NASA, NASAs Fermis Telescope Discovers First Gamma-Ray-Only Pulsar, news release 08-259, 16 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-259_Fermi_GRP.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Rachel Courtland, First Pulsar Identified by Its Gamma Rays Alone, New Scientist, 17 October 2008, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn14968 (accessed 10 August 2011); see also A. A. Abdo, The Fermi Gamma- Ray Space Telescope Discovers the Pulsar in the Young Galactic Supernova Remnant CTA 1, Science 322, no. 5905 (21 November 2008): 12181221.)
NASA announced the appointment of Arthur E. Goldman as Director of NASAs SSC. Goldman replaced Robert D. Cabana, who had accepted a position as Director of NASAs KSC in October 2008. Goldman had begun his service with NASA in 1990 as a Project Engineer for the Space Shuttle Systems Integration Office at NASAs MSFC, becoming Supervisor of that program in 1992. In 1994 he had transferred to the Space Shuttle Main Engine Project, working first as Manufacturing Engineer, then as Technical Assistant, and finally as Business Manager. Goldman had served as Deputy Director of NASAs SSC since 2006. He had received many professional awards, including NASAs Exceptional Achievement Medal and the Commendation of the Director of MSFC.(NASA, Goldman Names Director at Stennis Space Center, news release 08-303, 20 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-303_Goldman_SSC.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
A team of researchers, led by Roger J. Phillips of the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, announced in the online version of the journal Science that NASAs Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) had gathered evidence indicating that Marss lithosphere is colder and thicker than scientists had previously thought. Using the Shallow Radar (SHARAD) on the MRO, the researchers had produced the most precise pictures to date of the Martian crust and upper mantle below the polar ice cap. The ice cap on Mars is 1.2 miles (1.93 kilometers) deep and 310,000 square miles (802,896.31 square kilometers) wide. On Earth, the force of a similar weight would cause the lithosphere to sag, but the Martian lithosphere remains level and even. The crusts rigidity implies that the planets interior is colder than scientists had previously thought, indicating that any aquifers of liquid water that may exist on Mars would lie deeper below the surface, closer to the planets warm core. The radar pictures also showed that the crust is composed of layers of icy dust, interspersed with layers of almost pure ice. The researchers believed that vacillations in Marss orbit had caused the planets climate to change, resulting in these layers. ASI, the Italian space agency, had produced the SHARAD. NASAs JPL managed MRO for NASAs SMD.(NASA, NASA Satellite Finds Interior of Mars Is Colder, news release 08-128, 15 May 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08128_MRO_Mars_Temp.html (accessed 16 March 2011); Charles Q. Choi, Brrr! Mars Colder Than Expected, Space.com, 16 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5347-brrr-mars-colder- expected.html (accessed 16 March 2011); see also Roger J. Phillips, Mars North Polar Deposits: Stratigraphy, Age, and Geodynamical, Science 320, no. 5880 (30 May 2008): 11821185.)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee on Research and Science Education held a hearing to address international science and technology cooperation. NASA Assistant Administrator for External Relations Michael F. OBrien testified on the scope of international collaboration in NASAs programming, as well as the benefits to the United States of ongoing international scientific cooperation. OBrien stated that, since its inception in 1958, NASA had entered more than 3,000 cooperative agreements with over 100 nations or international organizations. He said that NASA was currently a party to approximately 300 active international agreements, and that over half of NASAs missions currently in orbit involved international participation. OBrien also discussed the benefits of scientific cooperation with other nations, including the availability to the global scientific community of research data, the advancement of specific NASA mission objectives, and the promotion of U.S. foreign policy interests.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, Witnesses: International Science Collaboration Mutually Beneficial, press release, 2 April 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/Pressroom/Item.aspx?ID=91 (accessed 17 February 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, International Science and Technology Cooperation, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 2 April 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41470/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41470.pdf (accessed 4 March 2011).)
NASA announced that it had signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for the implementation of the Joint Dark Energy Mission (JDEM). JDEM would measure the universes expansion with high precision, making it the first space- based observatory to study the nature of dark energy, specifically. Scientists hoped that understanding the properties of dark energy, which makes up approximately 70 percent of the total mass energy of the universe, would help them learn more about how galaxies form and gain their mass. NASA and DOE signed the MOU in accordance with recommendations of a 2007 study issued by the jointly funded Beyond Einstein Program Assessment Committee. The Committee had recommended that NASA should develop and launch JDEM first, out of the five proposed missions in NASAs Beyond Einstein Program.
NASA announced that it had renamed its GLAST telescope the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope, in honor of the early twentieth century scientist Enrico Fermi. Fermi had developed a theory to explain how cosmic particles could be accelerated to high speeds. His work formed the basis of the scientific study of gamma rays. NASA also announced that the telescope, which had launched on 11 June 2008, had successfully completed two months of instrument testing and calibration. Scientists hoped to use the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope to study gamma rays and to make new discoveries about black holes, pulsars, and the laws of physics.(NASA, NASA Renames Observatory for Fermi, Reveals Entire Gamma-Ray Sky, news release 08-214, 26 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08214_NASA_renames_GLAST.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
Boeing Company announced that it had filed a protest with GAO over a contract that NASA and NOAA had awarded to Lockheed Martin Space Systems on 2 December 2008. The contract for NOAAs Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES-R) Program had covered the design, development, and delivery of two satellites, as well as pre-launch, launch, and post- launch support for the satellites. The base contract carried a total value of US$1.09 billion, with two options, each providing for one additional satellite. NASA and NOAA would use the data from the satellites Earth-viewing, solar-viewing, and space-viewing instruments for weather forecasting and for environmental, solar, and space science. Boeing had been the contractor for the previous series of GOES-R satellites.(NASA, NASA Selects NOAA Goes-R Series Spacecraft Contractor, news release C08-067, 2 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_C08067_GOES.html (accessed 22 August 2011); James Gunsalus, Boeing Protests $1.09 Billion Satellite Award Won by Lockheed, Bloomberg News, 16 December 2008.)
The Ocean Surface Topography Mission/Jason-2 satellite launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Delta-2 rocket at 07:46 (UT). The 510-kilogram (1,124.36-pound) craft was a joint mission of the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT); the French space agency (Centre National dEtudes SpatialesCNES); the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); and NASA. EUMETSATs aim was to continue the data-collection mission that NASA and CNES had begun in 1992 with their ocean topography experiment, the TOPEX/Poseidon mission, and had continued with the 2001 launch of Jason 1. Jason 2 had five instrumentsimproved versions of those aboard Jason 1 that could chart the topography of the oceans surface, the speed and direction of the oceans current, and the amount of solar energy the ocean stores. Scientists hoped to use these measurements to track global climate change, to hone their predictions of hurricane intensity, and to improve their understanding of currents, eddies, and tides. The project partners had scheduled Jason 2 to fly in tandem with Jason 1 for approximately six months, while engineers calibrated Jason 2s instruments. Afterwards, the two spacecraft would travel in separate orbits, doubling the global satellite coverage.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 656, 1 July 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx656.html (accessed 24 April 2011); NASA, NASA Launches Ocean Satellite To Keep a Weather, Climate Eye Open, news release 08-154, 20 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08154_OSTM-Jason-2_Launch.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
NASA announced that it had selected Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) for a contract with the Launch Services Program at NASAs KSC. The indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contract stipulated that NASA would be able to place orders for the launch services of the Falcon-1 and Falcon-9 launch vehicles through 30 June 2010, and that ordered launches could take place through December 2012. SpaceX would have to be able to launch payloads of 551 pounds (249.93 kilograms) or more into a circular orbit of 124 miles (199.56 kilometers) at an orbital inclination of 28.5. Since 1999, NASA had awarded launch services contracts two times per year to multiple launch services providers. NASA allowed the companies awarded contracts to compete for missions in support of NASAs Science Directorate, Space Operations Directorate, and Exploration Directorate. The contracts potential value was between US$20,000 and US$1 billion, depending upon the number of launches NASA actually ordered.
NASA announced that it had extended the U.S. On-Orbit Segment Acceptance and Vehicle Sustaining Engineering contract awarded to the Boeing Company through 30 September 2010. Originally granted in January 1995, the contract provided engineering support for the ISS. The contractor would complete delivery and on-orbit acceptance of the American section of the ISS, provide end-to-end subsystem management for the majority of the ISSs systems, support American hardware and software provided to international participants in the ISS program, and sustain engineering of the ISSs hardware and software. The contractor would work at NASAs JSC, KSC, and MSFC. The contract was valued at US$350 million.(NASA, NASA Extend International Space Station Contract, news release C08-059, 1 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-059_ISS_Contract.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
Robert C. Seamans Jr., who had served as NASA Deputy Administrator during the Apollo era, died of heart failure at age 89. Seamans had begun his career as a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the 1940s. In 1960 he had accepted a position with NASA as Associate Administrator, and, from 1965 to 1968, he had served as Deputy Administrator. During his tenure, NASA had worked to achieve President John F. Kennedys goal of landing a man on the Moon, and Seamans had been instrumental to the success of that mission. In 1968 Seamans had left his position at NASA to return to MIT, although he remained a consultant to NASAs Administrator. Later that year, he had assisted in making the controversial decision to send Apollo 8 to orbit the Moon, a move that had laid the groundwork for the lunar landing. Seamans had served as Secretary of the U.S. Air Force from 1969 to 1973. In 1974 he had been appointed Administrator of the Energy, Research and Development Administration, a predecessor agency to the Department of Energy. In 1977 Seamans had accepted a position as Dean of the School of Engineering at MIT, where he had continued to teach aeronautics classes even after his formal retirement in 1984.(Peter Schworm, Robert Seamans; Helped Lead NASA During Apollo Missions, Boston Globe, 30 June 2008. 79 NASA, Astronaut James Reilly Leaves NASA, news release 08-162, 30 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08163_Seamans_statement.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientists announced that the Ulysses spacecraft had made its fourth pass over one of the Suns poles. Ulysses, engaged in an 18-year, ongoing joint mission operated by NASA and ESA, had completed an orbit of the Sun every 6.2 years. As it passed over the Suns poles, Ulysses occupied a unique position enabling the craft to sample solar winds, a vantage point unavailable to any other spacecraft or Earth-based observatory. This most recent flyby of the Suns north pole had occurred a week after scientists had observed the beginning of a new solar cycle. This is a wonderful opportunity to examine the Suns north pole within a transition of cycles, said Arik Posner, a NASA scientist for the Ulysses program.(European Space Agency (ESA), Ulysses at the North Pole, news release, 15 February 2008, http://www.esa.int/ esaSC/SEMLLN3MDAF_index_0.html (accessed 17 December 2010); Houston Chronicle, Ulysses Flies over Suns North Pole, 15 January 2008.)
NASAs ARC signed a memorandum for the record, expressing its intention to cooperate with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), the top research and education facility in South Korea. KAIST had launched South Koreas first satellite, Uribyeol 1, in 1992. The memorandum initiated a dialogue between the two institutions regarding potential collaboration on topics such lunar science, planetary exploration, and the research and development (R&D) of navigation systems, rovers, satellite communications, and small satellites.(NASA, NASA Ames Explores Possible Collaboration with South Korea, news release 08_07AR, 28 January 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/news/releases/2008/08_07AR.html (accessed 17 December 2010).)
NASA announced that it had awarded an Integrated Mission Operations Contract to United Space Alliance of Houston, Texas, for mission and flight support of the ISS and for human space exploration activities after the retirement of the Space Shuttle. The contractor would provide development and execution of capabilities for ground-based human-spaceflight operations, including training crew and flight controllers, preparing and supporting mission planning, and executing real-time missions. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, valued at US$206.5 million, covered the period of 1 November 2008 through 30 September 2011. An optional one-year extension, if exercised, would continue through 30 September 2012 and would bring the total value of the contract to US$371 million.
NASA range-safety officials destroyed an ATK suborbital rocket that had swerved off course shortly after lifting off from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility (WFF). Officials were not sure what had caused the ALV X-1 launch vehicle to fail 27 seconds after its 5:10 (EDT) launch. The rocket carried US$11 million worth of NASA experiments, including a hypersonic flight experiment called HYBOLT (Hypersonic Boundary Layer Transition) and the Sub-Orbital Aerodynamic Re-entry Experiments (SOAREX), which would have tested new reentry design elements for spaceflight vehicles. In addition to NASAs experiments, the rockets payload included a U.S. Naval Research Laboratory experiment to test GPS systems. NASA officials stated that they believed that the majority of the debris had fallen into the Atlantic Ocean.(NASA, NASA and ATK Investigate Failed Launch of Hypersonic Experiments, news release 08-213, 22 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08_213_Hybolt_failure.html (accessed 7 July 2011); Carol Vaughn, Wallops Rocket Launch Fails, Salisbury Daily Times (MD), 25 August 2008.)
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam launched its first communications satellite aboard an Ariane-5 ECA rocket at 22:17 (UT) from Kourou spaceport in French Guiana. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the 2,600-kilogram (5,732-pound) VINASAT-1 satellite for Vietnams Post and Telecommunications Group. The Vietnamese intended for VINASAT 1 to come to rest at 132E longitude, above the border between Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. From that position, the satellite would deliver communications to remote Vietnamese communities. Previously, Vietnam had leased satellite capacity from other countries, but with the launch of VINASAT 1, some Vietnamese officials hoped that they would be able to sell their own satellites extra capacity to their neighbors. The Ariane-5 ECA rocket also carried into orbit the Brazilian satellite Star One C2.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654; BBC News, Dedicated Satellite for Vietnam, 19 April 2008.)
NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced that she would resign her position, effective 17 January 2009. Dales career had included service for the University of Texas; the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology; the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation; the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy; and for various law firms. Since November 2005, she had served as NASAs Deputy Administrator. Dale stated that she planned to use her time off to evaluate the options for her next career phase and to spend time with her family.(NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Dale To Resign on January 17, news release 08-317, 3 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-317_Dale_resigns.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
At the Royal Astronomical Societys National Astronomy Meeting, a team of researchers led by Peter T. Gallagher of Trinity College, Dublin, announced that they had produced new, corrected estimates of the speed at which solar tsunamis move. Solar tsunamis, first photographed by NASAs Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft in the 1990s, are huge pressure waves that roll through the Suns gaseous atmosphere. Although the scientific community had previously estimated the speed of solar tsunamis based upon the SOHO photographs, these estimates had not correlated with the waves estimated intensityan intensity equivalent to the release, in a fraction of a second, of 2 billion times the worlds annual energy consumption. To correct the estimates, Gallaghers team had analyzed photographs that NASAs Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO) spacecraft had captured on 19 May 2007. Because STEREO had captured more images per day than SOHO had, the researchers had been able to calculate the speed of solar tsunamis at over 1 million kilometers per hour (over 621,371.19 miles per hour), much faster than scientists had previously thought. Additionally, the researchers had used STEREOs Extreme Ultraviolet Imager instruments to show that the solar tsunamis had moved through dense layers of the atmosphere just as quickly as through less dense layers. Solar tsunamis are associated with the appearance of coronal mass ejections (CMEs), which are massive explosions of gas and magnetic fields near the Suns atmosphere. Astronomers believed that monitoring solar tsunamis could help to predict CMEs.(Andrea Thompson, Solar Tsunamis Move at Astronomical Speeds, Space.com, 1 April 2008, http://www.space. com/5198-solar-tsunamis-move-astronomical-speeds.html (accessed 3 March 2011).)
A team of scientists led by Judith L. Racusin of Penn State University reported in the journal Nature their discovery that GRB 080319B had appeared extraordinarily bright because its jet had pointed almost directly at Earth. First sighted by NASAs Swift satellite on 19 March 2008, GRB 080319B had been 7.5 billion light-years away from Earth, in the constellation Bootes. After Swift had sighted it, scientists around the globe had begun observing the GRB as it brightened to a magnitude of 5.3 on the astronomical brightness scale. For approximately 40 seconds, GRB 080319B had been visible to the naked human eye. Racusins team showed that the GRBs jet had been composed of a narrow core, 0.4 wide, moving at almost the speed of light. A slightly slower jet, approximately 20 times wider than the core, had surrounded it. The team theorized that, if other GRB jets also have bright cores, astronomers might not often see them, because GRB jets rarely point in Earths direction, and their cores are very narrow.(NASA, Naked-Eye Gamma-Ray Burst Was Aimed Squarely at Earth, news release 08-223, 10 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-223_Swift_Gamma_Ray_burst.html (accessed 26 July)
NASA announced that Robert D. Strain had accepted the position of Center Director of NASAs GSFC, the Greenbelt, Maryland, facility that develops uncrewed scientific spacecraft and administers NASAs Earth observation, astronomy, and space physics missions. Strain had been serving as the Head of the Space Department at the Johns Hopkins Universitys APL in Laurel, Maryland. He had previously served as the Associate Department Head and Assistant Department Head at APL, and as an executive at Axiom Corporation, Orbital Sciences Corporation, and Fairchild Space and Defense Company. NASA expected that Strain would begin work as Center Director at NASAs GSFC on 4 August 2008.(NASA, NASA Names Strain New Goddard Space Flight Center Director, news release 08-179, 17 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08179_Strain_GSFC_Director.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)
NASA announced the cowinners of its 2007 Software of the Year Award: the Data-Parallel Line Relaxation (DPRL) software and the Adaptive Modified Gerberg-Saxton Phase Retrieval program. The DPRL, developed at NASAs ARC, simulated the heat, pressures, and shear stresses that a spacecraft experiences while entering a planets atmosphere. Because it was more accurate than a test facility, the software allowed engineers to design optimally suited protective materials for spacecraft. NASAs JPL had developed the Adaptive Modified Gerberg-Saxton Phase Retrieval program, which used algorithms to characterize possible errors in the imaging of a telescopes scientific camera and then corrected the errors, improving the cameras resolution and sensitivity. NASA had used the software in designing its James Webb Space Telescope, scheduled to launch in 2013. NASAs Software of the Year Award recognized software inventions that had significantly improved NASAs ability to explore space and had benefited science.
NASAs Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that it had selected four companies to compete to supply its orders for developmental test hardware and aerospace model systems for use in ground tests, flight tests, space exploration, and spaceflight. NASA had designated the contracts, which would have a cumulative maximum value of US$30 million over five years, as awards for reliance-consolidated models and for centralization of design and fabrication practices at NASAs Ames Research Center (ARC), Glenn Research Center (GRC), LaRC, and MSFC. The contract recipients were Advanced Technologies of Newport News, Virginia; ATK Micro Craft of Tullahoma, Tennessee; Tri Models of Huntington Beach, California; and Triumph Aerospace SystemsNewport News of Newport News, Virginia.(NASA, NASA Selects Companies for Design and Fabrication, news release C08-006, 23 January 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_C0806_Contract_model_systems_and_test_hardware.html (accessed 17 December 2010).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 1:25 p.m. (PST), returning seven astronauts from a 16-day mission to the ISS. While aboard the ISS, crew members had unloaded over 7 tons (6.35 tonnes or 6,350.29 kilograms) of cargo from Endeavour; set up a refrigerator, exercise machine, two sleep stations, and a rack for science experiments; and activated a recycling system to turn astronauts urine and perspiration into potable water. The crew of Endeavour brought back samples so that NASA scientists could test the water before NASA approved the system for use. Astronauts Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn- Piper, Stephen G. Bowen, and Robert S. Kimbrough had conducted four spacewalks to repair the
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to Northrop Grumman Corporations Integrated Systems Division of San Diego, California, for services in support of its Northrop Grummanmanufactured Global Hawk aircraft. NASAs DFRC planned to operate the two uncrewed aircraft. The indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity, sole-source contract, which would span from 6 August 2008 through 5 August 2013, carried a maximum value of US$25 million. The contract would include the operation of the aircraft, their ground control station, and related systems. Additionally, the contractor would supply technical assistance, including analysis, design support, operational and manufacturing support, simulation, and software development and engineering. NASAs DFRC planned to use the high-altitude, long-endurance, long-distance aircraft in missions in support of Earth science research and the research of NASAs SMD.(NASA, NASA Awards Global Hawk Support Contract to Northrop Grumman, news release C08-050, 7 August, 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_C08-050_GLOBAL_HAWK.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
NASA announced that Edward J. Weiler would continue in the position of Associate Administrator for the SMD. He had held the position of Interim Associate Administrator for the SMD since 26 March 2008. Joining NASA in 1978, Weiler had served as Chief of the Ultraviolet/Visible and Gravitational Astrophysics Division, Chief Scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins Program, Associate Administrator for the Space Science Enterprise, and Director of NASAs GSFC. As Associate Administrator for NASAs SMD, Weiler would be responsible for managing research and exploration programs on a number of topics, including Earth studies, space weather, the solar system, and the universe. Additionally, he would oversee the SMDs grant-based research programs and spacecraft projects.(NASA, Weiler Assumes Official Role as NASA Science Chief, news release 08-114, 7 May 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08114_Weiler_Science_AA.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
NASA announced that its Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) had passed the first round of flight-testing, after the craft successfully flew five times with its external door closed. The external door is a modification of the crafts 747SP fuselage. The crafts 10-foot (3-meter), 19-ton (38,000-pound or 17,237-kilogram) telescope would make observations through the door, collecting data that scientists would be able to use to study the birth and evolution of planets, stars, and galaxies. In addition to confirming SOFIAs aerodynamics, control, handling, stability, and structural integrity, the tests also assessed the telescopes tracking abilities. SOFIA, a joint partnership between NASA and the German Aerospace Center, was based at the Aircraft Operations Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, part of NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC).(NASA, SOFIA Completes Closed-Door Test Flights, news release 08-010, 16 January 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_08010_SOFIA_Flight_Series_End.html (accessed 7 December 2010).)
The Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies received testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin regarding the FY 2009 budget request. Griffin supplied the Subcommittee with a detailed explanation of the request, which would provide NASA with US$17.6 billion in funding. Griffin stated that he believed that this budget would maintain an adequate fiscal balance between NASAs aeronautics research missions, Earth and space science missions, and space exploration missions. However, Senator Barbara A. Mikulski (D-MD) expressed disappointment over the funding request. Calling the budget stagnant, she expressed her concerns regarding requested cuts in funding for aeronautics research; the lack of funding to reimburse NASA for the cost of returning the Space Shuttle to operation after the Columbia disaster; and the inadequate funding for the period between the 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle and the expected 2015 launch of the Orion and Ares vehicles.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies, Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations for Fiscal Year 2009, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 3 April 2008, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_senate_hearings&docid= f:41242.pdf (accessed 15 March 2011).)
President George W. Bush signed Pub. L. No 110-422, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2008, which authorized an appropriation of US$20.2 billion to NASA for FY 2009 for science, aeronautics, exploration, education, and space operations. The law required that NASA fly nine Space Shuttle missions to the ISS, two more flights than the previous manifest had required. Additionally, the law required that NASA make reasonable efforts to launch the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, an observatory that the crew would attach to the outside of the ISS. The law also required that NASA take all necessary steps to ensure that the ISS remained viable through at least 2020. The law authorized US$1 billion for the Constellation Program, to advance progress on the Orion and Ares vehicles. To allow flexibility in scheduling future Space Shuttle missions, the law prohibited NASA from taking any actions that would prevent the Space Shuttles use past its expected 2010 retirement.(Eun Kyung Kim, NASA Bill Boosts Budget $2.6B, Adds Flight, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 2008; Mark Matthews, Bush Signs NASA Authorization Act, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 October 2008; Mark Carreau, Bush Signs Act Allowing NASA More Shuttle Time, Money, Houston Chronicle, 17 October 2008.)
NASA announced that Assistant Administrator for External Relations Michael F. OBrien had signed a joint statement of intent with Munki Lee, the Republic of Koreas (South Koreas) Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (MEST) Director-General for Big Science. The statement of intent, signed in Seoul, was an agreement between NASA and MEST to conduct dialogues that would identify new cooperative endeavors related to aeronautics research, Earth science, human spaceflight, planetary science, and space exploration. The agencies expected that they might discuss topics for possible collaborative endeavors, such as planning exploration architecture, exchanging research analysis and data, and contributing hardware and scientific instruments to future missions. They might also consider involvement in the Global Exploration Strategy, a discussion between 14 space agencies to increase cooperation in space exploration; the International Lunar Network, an initiative to establish a robotic network on the Moon; and the International Space Exploration Coordination Group, an international effort to coordinate space exploration activities. NASA and MEST expected to prepare a report after 8 months of dialogue. (NASA, NASA and Korea Sign Statement of Intent for Future Cooperation, news release 08-277, 30 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08277_Korea_Agreement.html (accessed 8 August 2011). 139 NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Mission, Crew Operations Support, news release C08-064, 31 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-064_Mission_Ops.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Brauns German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Brauns program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew Americas first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing on NASAs aeronautics R&D programs. Jaiwon Shin, NASAs Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission, was among the witnesses. The Subcommittee examined whether NASAs aeronautics R&D programs were satisfactorily meeting the United States needs, especially regarding the impact of aviation on the environment, the development of aeronautics safety, and the development of the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen). NextGen, a joint program of NASA, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), and the Departments of Commerce, Defense, Homeland Security, and Transportation, proposed to overhaul the nations air transportation system. NextGen required an increase in applied R&D. However, to comply with the NASA Authorization Act of 2005, NASA had shifted its focus from applied R&D to fundamental research. Additionally, Congress had reduced NASAs FY 2009 budget for the Aeronautics Research Program from FY 2008 levels by US$62.5 million. At the hearing, Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that NASA would not be able to maintain the relevancy of its aeronautics R&D in the face of decreased funding.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Subcommittee Examines NASAs Aeronautics R&D Program, press release, 1 May 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=2175 (accessed 16 June 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Aeronautics Program Faces Challenges To Meet Air Travel Demands, press release, 1 May 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/Pressroom/Item.aspx?ID=100# (accessed 16 March 2001); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASAs Aeronautics R&D Program: Status and Issues, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 1 May 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41902/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41902.pdf (accessed 16 March 2011).)
NASAs Phoenix spacecraft made a successful landing in the Martian northern polar region, beginning a three-month mission to burrow into the soil of Mars in search of water ice and carbon-based compounds. Phoenix had launched on 4 August 2007 and had completed a 422- million-mile (679.14- kilometer) journey to reach Mars. Phoenix was the sixth spacecraft to land safely on Mars and the first craft since the 1976 Viking 2 to land without airbags. The spacecraft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems, was 7 feet (2.13 meters) tall and weighed 904 pounds (410.05 kilograms). It contained seven scientific instruments, including cameras, small chemistry labs, an 8-foot-long (2.44-meter-long) robotic arm, and a weather station. The Phoenix mission, which cost US$457 million, would be the first to collect water samples on another planet. The University of Arizona was leading the mission, in partnership with NASAs JPL and Lockheed Martin in Denver. International contributors to the mission included CSA; the University of Copenhagen and the University of Aarhus, both in Denmark; the Max Planck Institute in 65 Germany; the University of Neuchatel in Switzerland; and the Finnish Meteorological Institute.
The Spacecraft Crew Survival Integrated Investigation Team, a multidisciplinary team based at NASAs JSC, issued an in-depth study of the safety equipment and safety procedures that the crew of Columbia had used during the Columbia disaster. The study, the first comprehensive report on crew survival in a spaceflight accident, detailed five lethal events that had occurred during the breakup of Columbia. The team determined that, even with better cabin equipment, hypersonic-entry conditions would have prevented crew survival. The report issued 30 recommendations to improve crew safety and vehicle design, covering topics such as crew training, individual safety equipment, procedures, restraints, spacecraft design, and future accident investigations. NASA had already implemented some of the recommendations, and NASA officials were assessing others.(NASA, NASA Report Reviews Crew Safety Measures During Columbia Accident, Recommends Improvements, news release M08-269, 30 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_ M08269_Crew_Safety.html (accessed 22 August 2011); John Schwartz, Report on Columbia Details How Astronauts Died, New York Times, 31 December 2008; see also NASA, Columbia Crew Survival Investigation Report (report no. NASA/SP-2008-565, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, December 2008), http://history.nasa.gov/columbia/columbiacrewsurvival.pdf (accessed 1 September 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract for the completion of a 210-day independent study of the design concept of the Constellations Programs lunar-landing craft. NASA awarded the contract, totaling approximately US$1.5 million, to five different companies: Andrews Space of Seattle, Boeing Defense, Space and Security in Houston, Lockheed Martin Space Systems in Denver, Northrop Grumman in El Segundo, California, and Odyssey Space Research of Houston. Each company would receive a maximum payment of US$350,000 to assess the Altair lunar landers current design, recommend safety improvements, and propose partnerships between government and industry.(NASA, NASA Awards Contracts for Design Study of Lunar Landing Craft, news release C08-014, 17 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_C08014_Altair_BAA_Selection.html (accessed 13 January 2011).)
NASA announced that it had selected a proposal for a robotic mission to Mars, a mission that would study the planets atmosphere, climate history, and potential habitability. Out of 20 proposals submitted, NASA had accepted the proposal of the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at the University of Colorado at Boulder to build the US$485 million Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) spacecraft. According to the proposal, MAVEN would begin orbiting Mars in the fall of 2014. Over the course of one Earth year, the craft would use its eight instruments to gather data, including a study of the upper atmosphere 80 miles (128.75 kilometers) above the Martian surface. Scientists would also be able to use MAVEN to relay support for robotic missions on the ground on Mars. NASA would provide the University of Colorado with US$6 million for mission planning and technology development, and Lockheed Martin would build the spacecraft. NASAs GSFC would manage the MAVEN mission. MAVEN would be the second mission conducted by the Mars Scout ProgramNASAs series of small, low-cost, principal investigatorled missions to Mars.(NASA NASA Selects Mission To Study Mars Atmosphere, news release 08-233, 15 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-233_MAVEN_Mars_mission.html (accessed 26 July 2011).)
NASA announced that the Constellation Program had awarded to 11 companies and a university contracts to conduct 180-day studies of the systems necessary for lunar outposts. NASA would use the studies recommendations to choose packaging options, to identify basic functions for lunar habitats, and to develop innovative avionics, computer software, and energy storage ideas, as well as equipment and techniques to assist in preparing for the outpost site. NASA had awarded contracts on six study topics. Oceaneering Space Systems of Houston would study alternative packaging options, and Honeywell International of Glendale, Arizona, would study avionics. ATK Space Systems Group of Brigham City, Utah, Battelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, Ohio, and Hamilton Sundstrand of Canoga Park, California, would study energy storage. The Boeing Company of Huntington Beach, California, ILC Dover of Frederica, Delaware, and University of Maryland, College Park, would study minimum habitation functions. Astrobotic Technology of Pittsburgh and Honeybee Robotic of New York would study methods for moving regoliths. The Charles Stark Draper Laboratory of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and United Space Alliance of Houston would study software. The maximum value of each individual award was US$250,000, and the total value of all contracts was approximately US$2 million.(NASA, NASA Awards Contracts for Concepts of Lunar Surface Systems, news release C08-48, 28 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_C0848_Lunar_surface_contract.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)
NASA announced that it had signed a cooperative Space Act Agreement with the Challenger Center for Space Education of Alexandria, Virginia. The partnership would use hands-on interactive educational activities to interest students, as well as their families, teachers, and the public, in the study of engineering, mathematics, science, and technology. The Challenger Center, founded in 1986, consisted of a network of 50 Challenger Learning Centers that train teachers to use project-based learning and space exploration themes to engage skills in critical thinking, communication, decision making, and teamwork.(NASA, NASA and Challenger Center Combining Efforts for Students, news release 08-217, 28 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08217_NASA_Challenger_Center.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
NASA announced the appointment of Michael R. Luther as NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in the Science Mission. Luther had begun his career with NASA in 1981 at NASAs LaRC. In 1987 he had moved to NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, where he had served as Program Manager of the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and as Earth Science Flight Program Director. Luther had received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal in 2005. As Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs, Luther would supervise the administration, including formulation and development, of the 36 missions of NASAs SMD. Additionally, he would manage the implementation of 54 operation missions. NASAs SMD was responsible for conducting research and for operating scientific programs to explore the solar system and universe, to observe the Earth, and to study space weather.(NASA, NASA Earth Scientist To Head Programs Office in Science Directorate, news release 08-096, 10 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08096_Luther_Named_SMD_DAA.html (accessed 17 February 2001).)
NASAs GRC announced that it had awarded a contract for the definition, design, fabrication, assembly, integration, test, and operation of spaceflight projects to ZIN Technologies of Middleburg Heights, Ohio. The cost-plus-incentive-fee, indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contract covered a base period of three years, with two optional one-year extensions. The contracts total value was US$94.5 million. The contractor would perform ISS flight investigations, particularly in the Exploration Technology Development Program and Human Research Program. The projects would include advanced technology development and demonstrations in power, energy storage and distribution, in-space propulsion, lunar surface and in-situ resource applications, space communications, and spacecraft fire safety.(NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Space Flight Projects Systems Development and Operations, news release C08-065, 10 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_C08065_GRC_ ZIN.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
Ernst Stuhlinger, one of the original members of Werner von Brauns rocket team, died at his home in Huntsville, Alabama, at the age of 94. The U.S. government had brought the team to the United States after World War II. Stuhlinger, Associate Director of Science on von Brauns team, was an expert in spacecraft guidance and navigation instruments. Stuhlinger had also made important contributions in the field of propulsion. He had developed an innovative second-stage firing device for Explorer 1 in his garage, becoming renowned for having pressed the button that triggered that device at exactly the right moment during the satellites 1958 launch. Before his retirement in 1975, Stuhlinger had served as Director of Science at NASAs MSFC. He was author of the 1964 book, Ion Propulsion for Space Flight and co-author of the 1993 biography Werner von Braun: Crusader for Space.(John Noble Wilford, Ernst Stuhlinger, Rocket Scientist Crucial in Space Race, Is Dead at 94, New York Times, 28 May 2008; Martin Weil, Ernst Stuhlinger, 94; Space Program Pioneer, Washington Post, 27 May 2008.)
2011); John Johnson Jr. NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped, Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASAs ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committees opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Marss moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen insteadfirst, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Marsplans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earths orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The reports main recommendations involved options for the United States path forward in space exploration. Three of the committees eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moons gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere, 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction, New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, See What the Committee is Doing, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASAs Human Space Flight Program: Report of Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA marked the 10-year anniversary of the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory with the release of the first of three new versions of classic Chandra images. NASA planned to release the other two versions over the following three months. The newly released image showed the remnants of the supernova E0102, located 190,000 light-years away from Earth, in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Chandra had made its first observation of E0102 shortly after its 1999 launch. The observatory had created the new image from recent x-ray data showing the supernovas outer blast wave and its inner ring of cooler material. This x-ray data had provided astronomers with new information about the geometry of the remnant and the nature of the explosion. Chandra had launched in 1999 from aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, deploying on a five-year mission that had ushered in an unprecedented decade of discovery. Among its achievements, Chandra had provided the strongest evidence to date for the existence of dark matter. Chandra had independently confirmed the existence of dark energy, producing spectacular images of the titanic explosions created when matter swirled toward supermassive black holes.(NASA, NASA Celebrates Chandra X-Ray Observatorys 10th Anniversary, news release 09-171, 23 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-171_Chandra_anniversary.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Space.com, On 10th Birthday, Chandra Spies Stellar Explosion, 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7039-10th- birthday-chandra-spies-stellar-explosion.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairingthe nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmospherefailed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japans GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, NASAs Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful, news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
NASA announced the one-year extension of the Space Station Cargo Integration Contract that Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems had held since January 2004. The extensions start date was 1 October 2009. As the second of two such options provided for in the original contract, the extension brought the total value of the contract to US$381 million. Under the terms of the contract, Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems provided sustained engineering for NASA carriers and cargo packing for delivery to and from the ISS. The company also determined the most efficient way to pack cargo; verified the adequacy of the integrated carriers; packed the pressurized cargo into subcarriers; and returned the cargo to providers, once it had returned to Earth.(NASA, NASA Extends Space Station Cargo Integration Contract, news release C09-038, 26 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/C09-038_ISS_cargo.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASAs GSFC announced that NASAs STEREO mission had confirmed the existence of the so-called solar tsunami, a controversial phenomenon that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission had first observed in 1997. In May of that year, the SOHO craft had recorded a tsunami-type wave rippling away from a CME blast site on an active region of the solar surface. At that time, scientists wondered whether the phenomenon had been an actual wave or a shadow of the CME. SOHOs single point of view was insufficient to provide an answer to that question. However, in February 2009, the twin craft of the STEREO mission had recorded a wave from two positions, separated by 90 degrees, when sunspot 11012 suddenly erupted, giving researchers an unprecedented view of the event. The technical name for a solar-tsunami wave is fast-mode magnetohydrodynamical (MHD) wave. STEREO had captured a solar-tsunami wave climbing 100,000 kilometers high (62,137 miles high), racing outward at 250 kilometers per second (155.34 miles per second)560,000 miles per hour (901,233 kilometers per hour)  and generating energy equivalent to 2.4 million megatons of TNT. Joseph B. Gurman of the Solar Physics Laboratory at NASAs GSFC explained that, although solar tsunamis pose no direct threat to Earth, they help scientists diagnose conditions on the Sun and forecast of space weather more accurately.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Mystery of the Solar TsunamiSolved, GSFC news release, 19 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/stereo/news/solar_tsunami.html (accessed 21 December 2011); Space.com, Solar Tsunamis Are Real, NASA Says, 25 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7602-solar- tsunamis-real-nasa.html (accessed 21 December 2011).)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASAs safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASAs diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAPs annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bushs 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares Is and Orions initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report, media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, The Budgetary Implications of NASAs Current Plans for Space Exploration (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. Danny Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiments purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASAs LaRC.(Diane Tennant, NASA Opens Suitcase from Space, Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening, LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA announced its selection of the seven research teams that would become the first members of NASAs Lunar Science Institute, headquartered at Ames Research Center (ARC). NASA had established the Institute to support scientific research related to NASAs existing lunar science programs, in coordination with U.S. space exploration policy. NASA had selected the members using a competitive evaluation process that had begun in June 2008. The seven teams were from Brown University in Rhode Island; Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland; the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston, Texas; NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland; Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado; the Lunar University Node for Astrophysics Research at the University of Colorado in Boulder; and NASAs Lunar Science Institute of the Colorado Center for Lunar Dust and Atmospheric Studies at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Proposals for lunar research included the study of the history of lunar impacts and how such impacts have affected the Moons evolution; the study of the Moons formative years; the study of the dynamic response of the lunar environment; and the use of the Moon as a base from which to study the cosmos. NASA had modeled the Lunar Science Institute after its Astrobiology Institute, also housed at ARC.(NASA, NASA Selects Research Teams for Lunar Science Institute, news release 09-004, 9 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-004_Lunar_Institute_members.html (accessed 1 February 2011).)
NASA announced that NASA and the National Snow and Ice Data Center had captured new data indicating that the decade-long trend of diminishing sea-ice cover had continued. In addition, new evidence from satellite observations showed that the ice cap was thinning, as well. Scientists using satellite data to track Arctic sea-ice cover stated that, during the winter of 20082009, they had noted the fifth lowest maximum ice extent recorded since the beginning of satellite monitoring in 1979. All six of the lowest maximum ice events had occurred since 2004. Studying ICESat data, NASA researchers had discovered that, in addition to the diminishing ice extent, ice thickness had been declining. The new, thinner ice is more vulnerable to summer melt than the older, thicker ice it replaces. Researchers explained that more than 90 percent of the sea ice in the Arctic was only one or two years old at the beginning of the spring of 2009an indication that the Arctic sea ice was thinner and more vulnerable than at any time in the past three decades.(NASA, Satellites Show Arctic Literally on Thin Ice, news release 09-079, 6 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-079_Sea_ice_thins.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, Arctic Sea Ice Thinnest Ever Going Into Spring, 7 April 2009.)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and JAXA President Keiji Tachikawa had signed an agreement defining the terms of the two space agencies cooperation on the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) mission. NASA intended the GPM mission to build on the success of the NASA-JAXA TRMM. GPM would begin to measure global precipitation, a key factor in climate. NASA described GPM as a cornerstone of the multinational Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Precipitation Constellation. The GPM missions spaceborne core observatory would provide the reference standard, unifying the measurements of a constellation of multinational research and operational satellites carrying microwave sensors. Using a Dual-Frequency Precipitation Radar (DPR), operating at Ku- and Ka-band frequencies, and a multichannel Global Precipitation Measurement Microwave Imager (GMI), operating at from 10 to 183 GHz, the GPM mission would provide uniformly calibrated precipitation measurements globally, every 2 to 4 hours, contributing to scientific research and societal applications. Additionally, for the first time, the observatorys sensor measurements would make detailed observations of precipitation-particle-size distribution. The agreement made NASA responsible for the GPM core-observatory spacecraft bus, the GMI that it would carry, and a second GMI. A Low-Inclination Observatory provided by a partner agency would carry the second GMI. JAXA would supply the DPR for the core observatory, an H-2A rocket for the core observatorys launch, and data from a conical-scanning microwave imager that would deploy on the upcoming Global Change Observation Mission satellite.(NASA, NASA and Jaxa Sign Agreement for Future Earth Science Cooperation, news release 09-177, 30 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_177_NASA_JAXA_Agreement.html (accessed 10 August 2011).)
Eilene Marie Galloway, a pioneer in space law and policy, died of cancer at the age of 102. As a national defense analyst at the Library of Congress, Galloway had helped organize hearings on U.S. space preparedness following the Soviet Unions launch of Sputnik in 1957, which had led to the creation of the Senate Special Committee on Space and Aeronautics. Galloway had also served as an advisor during the formation of the House Select Committee on Astronautics and Space Exploration. When the House Select Committee recommended the creation of a national space agency, Galloway had suggested that Congress constitute the new entity as an administration responsible for coordinating space-related activities across the federal government. In addition to advising Congress on space policy, Galloway had helped establish the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNCOPUOS). She had frequently served on UNCOPUOS as a representative of the United States. Galloway had also been a founding member of the International Institute of Space Law (IISL) and had frequently voiced her support for Article II of the Outer Space Treaty, which states, celestial bodies are not subject to national appropriations by claims of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means. In 2006 Galloway had become the first woman elected Honorary Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. She had also been a fellow of the AAS, an Honorary Director of the IISL, a Trustee Emeritus of the International Academy of Astronautics, the first recipient of a Lifetime Achievement Award from Women in Aerospace, and the recipient of the NASA Public Service Award and Gold Medal.(Frank Morring Jr., Space-Law Pioneer Eilene Galloway Dead at 102, Aviation Week, 5 May 2009.)
University of California at Irvine announced the publication of a NASA-funded study about bone strength among astronauts. Although previous studies had examined bone-mineral density, this study was the first to evaluate bone strength. Joyce Keyak, a professor of orthopedic surgery and biomedical engineering at University of California at Irvine, led the study. She and her research team used a novel computer program that Keyak had developed to identify hipbone fracture risk in people with osteoporosis. They analyzed hipbone CT (computed tomography) scans of one female and 12 male astronauts who had spent four to six months aboard the International Space Station (ISS). The researchers found that, on average, the astronauts hipbone strength decreased 14 percent. However, three astronauts experienced losses of 20 to 30 percentcomparable to those seen in older women with osteoporosis. The research team published its findings in the online version of Bone, the journal of the International Bone and Mineral Society.(University of California at Irvine, Astronauts on International Space Station Lose Alarming Amounts of Hipbone Strength, news release, 26 January 2009, http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/article/ 19371 (accessed 2 February 2011); Kristen Schott, UCI Study Finds Astronauts at Risk for Bone Loss, OC Metro (Newport Beach, CA), 27 January 2009.)
NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) announced the successful flight test of a newly designed super-pressure balloon prototype intended to carry large scientific experiments to the edge of space on missions lasting a minimum of 100 days. The projects goal was to design a 22-million-cubic-foot (67-million-cubic-meter) balloon that would carry an instrument weighing up to 1 ton (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonne) to an altitude of more than 110,000 feet (33,528 meters). The test flight launched a 7-million-cubic-foot (2.13-million-cubic-meter) balloon, the largest single-cell, super-pressure, fully sealed balloon flown to date. The launch took place on 28 December 2008 from McMurdo Station, NSFs logistics hub in Antarctica. Successfully demonstrating the durability and functionality of its unique pumpkin shape and novel materiala lightweight polyethylene film approximately the thickness of plastic food wrap. The balloon reached a float altitude of more than 111,000 feet (33,833 meters), which it was still maintaining on 8 January, its eleventh day of flight.(NASA, New NASA Balloon Successfully Flight-Tested Over Antarctica, news release 09-003, 8 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-003_Antarctic_Balloons.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
Richard E. Halpern, a senior NASA official who had served as Science Manager on Spacelab, the ISS, and other human spaceflight and robotic NASA projects, died of heart ailments at the age of 78. Halpern had served in the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s and had held a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University in 1968 and 1969. Before joining NASA in 1963, he had worked at the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. After joining NASA, Halpern had become Director of its High Energy Astrophysics Program during the early planning stages for the ISS. In the late 1970s, he had served as Program Manager for three launches of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory. He had served as Director of the ISS utilities and operations division from 1986 until his retirement in 1989. NASA had awarded Halpern its Exceptional Service Medal in 1978 and its highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, in 1980.(Matt Schudel, Obituaries: Richard E. Halpern NASA Official, Washington Post, 7 December 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that NASA had continued to experience cost overruns and delays in implementing large-scale projects or those budgeted at US$250 million or more. GAO had audited 18 NASA projects, with a combined life-cycle cost of more than US$50 billion. Of those 18 projects, 13 had entered the implementation phase. Ten of the 13 had experienced significant cost growth or schedule growth or both. Development costs had increased by an average of 13 percent from baseline cost estimates, and projects had an average launch delay of 11 months. GAO reported that many projects had faced challenges in developing new technologies or retrofitting older technologies, as well as difficulty managing contractors. However, GAO found that, despite these problems, NASA had improved its ability to manage and to estimate the cost of major projects. Nevertheless, GAO suggested that NASA needed to make additional improvements. The report noted that, although NASAs budget represented less than 2 percent of the federal governments discretionary budget, NASA was increasingly receiving requests to expand its portfolio to support important scientific missions, such as the study of climate change. GAO found that, to meet these increased demands, NASA would need to work even harder to manage its resources as effectively and efficiently as possible.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Assessments of Selected Large-Scale Projects (report no. GAO-09-306SP, Washington, DC, 2 March 2009), http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-306SP (accessed 11 May 2011); Mark Matthews, GAO: NASAs Big Projects Take Too Long, Cost Too Much, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 March 2009.)
Human Space Flight Review Committee Chair Norman R. Augustine held a press conference to present the committees findings and final report. The committee had formed in June 2009 at the request of John P. Holdren, Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. Its purpose was to examine independently
NASA announced that its Kepler space telescope had detected the atmosphere of HAT-P-7, a known gas-giant planet, within a 10-day period of test-data collection, thereby demonstrating Keplers extraordinary scientific capabilities. NASA analysis showed that Keplers onboard telescope and light-detecting instruments were at least 100 times more precise than the ground- based instruments that had originally discovered HAT-P-7. The unprecedented precision of Keplers measurements of the planet yielded new information about HAT-P-7s atmosphere, demonstrating Keplers accuracy in locating Earth-sized planets. Kepler had launched on 6 March 2009, on a mission to locate Earth-sized, potentially habitable exoplanets.(NASA, NASAs Kepler Mission Spies Changing Phases in a Distant World, news release 09-180, 6 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_180_Kepler_First_light.html (accessed 31 August 2011); John Johnson Jr., NASA Says Kepler Spacecraft Proves It Can Find Earth-Sized Planets, Los Angeles Times, 7 August 2009.)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttles successor craft. The Shuttles successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Programs Ares I-X mission management office at NASAs JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASAs KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicles first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rockets booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, NASAs Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test, news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASAs New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight, 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break, New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, Ares I-X FliesBut Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
NASAs GSFC announced the findings of a study that had investigated diminishing groundwater levels in India. Using data provided by the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), the research team, led by NASA hydrologist Matthew Rodell of GSFC, had found that, despite no shortage of rainfall, Indians were consuming groundwater in northern India faster than it could be replenishedprimarily using rain to irrigate agricultural crops. The twin GRACE satellites, which NASA and the German Aerospace Center had launched in 2002, orbited
After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its warm mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescopes three instruments at -456F (-271C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SSTs liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projectedmore than five-and-a-half yearsbut Spitzers supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404F (-242C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzers infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be reborn, with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzers two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet- forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzers new projects would include refining estimates of Hubbles constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASAs Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, NASAs Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career, news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status, JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
NASA named Arthur F. Rick Obenschain, Deputy Director of NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) for the 24 February OCO launch failure. As Chair of the MIB, Obenschain would lead four yet-to-be-named members, tasked with gathering information, analyzing the facts, identifying the launch failures causes and contributing factors, and making recommendations for actions to prevent a similar incident. As Deputy Director of GSFC, Obenschain shared responsibility for executive leadership and overall direction and management of the Center, in addition to providing executive oversight and technical evaluation for development and delivery for Goddard space systems launches and operations. Previously, Obenschain had headed the Flight Projects Directorate, where he had 25 been responsible for the daily management of more than 40 space and Earth science missions.
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract modification to L-3 Communications Integrated Systems LP of Waco, Texas, to extend through 31 December 2009 the period of performance for further developmental engineering in support of the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) mission. The joint program of NASA and the German Aerospace Center, SOFIA included a high-altitude, airborne, German-built 2.5-meter (100-inch) infrared telescope. Mounted in a cavity in the rear fuselage of a highly modified Boeing-747SP jetliner, the telescope had scientific instruments capable of celestial observations ranging from visible light through the submillimeter, far-infrared spectrum. L-3 Communications was responsible for completing development and testing of the SOFIA Airborne System, including modification, fabrication, installation, integration, and verification of various systems to meet mission requirements. The contract modification covered completion of the SOFIA subsystems, such as the mission-control and communications system; engineering and flight-test support for the telescope-cavity-door-open flight tests and the science programs; and support for reviews leading to NASAs public aircraft certification. The option modification brought the total value of the contract to approximately US$37.7 million. NASA had not yet exercised the two additional one- year-option periods allowed under the initial cost-plus-award-fee contract with L-3 134 Communications Integrated Systems. The initial contract had taken effect in February 2007.
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia, Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earths atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Koreas launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic Peoples Republic of Koreas (North Koreas) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Koreas launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Koreas complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space, 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch, Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of two scientific proposals to study the Sun and other exotic objects in the universe, such as neutron stars and black holes. NASA would develop the proposals into full missions, as part of its Small Explorer (SMEX) program. The winning proposals were the Interface Region Imaging Spectrography (IRIS) and the Gravity and Extreme Magnetism (GEMS). With Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center in Palo Alto, California, as Principal Investigator, the IRIS mission would use a solar telescope and spectrograph to explore the solar chromosphere, a region crucial in the quest to understand energy transport into the solar wind. NASA expected the mission greatly to extend the scientific output of existing heliophysics spacecraft. Jean H. Swank of NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, would serve as Principal Investigator of the GEMS mission, designed to study the bending of space and curving of light in regions of extreme gravitynear objects such as ultra- dense neutron stars and stellar-mass black holesand to detect and measure the polarization of the x rays that such objects emit. NASA planned for to launch both projects by 2015, with mission costs capped at US$105 million each, excluding the launch vehicles.(NASA, NASA Awards Two Small Explorer Development Contracts, news release 09-141, 19 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-141_SMEX_Selections.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA announced the first successful full-scale, full-duration stationary test fire of the first-stage motor for the Ares-I rocket, the CLV in development for NASAs Constellation Program. NASA and its industry partner ATK Space Systems had successfully conducted the test, which consisted of shooting a giant flame through the 154-foot (46.94-meter) rocket as it stood on a horizontal test stand, to ignite the 1.5 million pounds (0.68 million kilograms) of solid propellant coating the boosters interior. The ignition shot flame at three times the speed of sound. The plumes temperature reached 4,500F, and the flame generated 3.6 million pounds (1.6 million kilograms) of thrust. During the firing of the five-segment solid development motor (DM 1), engineers gathered measurements from 650 sensors to evaluate acoustics, thrust, roll control, and motor vibrations. The event marked the second attempt to conduct the 2-minute test at ATK Space Systems test stand in Promontory, Utah. NASA had canceled the first test on 27 August, when it was already in progress, with 20 seconds remaining in the countdown. NASAs engineering team had made this decision when the ground controller unit had a problem with a 30-year-old component that helped to move nozzle controls. Nozzle controls steer a rocket in flight. The engineering team had conducted a detailed investigation and had replaced a faulty part.(NASA, NASA and ATK Successfully Test Ares First Stage Motor, news release 09-198, 10 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-198_Ares_DM-1_test.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Mark Stark for Associated Press, Rocket Test in Northern Utah Goes Off Problem-Free, 11 September 2009; Todd Halvorson, Ares I Scores a Victory: A Debut in Flame and Smoke, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 September 2009.)
Orbital Sciences Corporation announced that NASAs GSFC had selected Orbital Sciences to design, manufacture, integrate, and test a new low-Earth-orbit space-science satellite for GSFCs GEMS mission. The purpose of the GEMS mission was to help answer fundamental questions about the universe. The mission aimed to find energy released near black holes, locate the origin of x-ray emissions from pulsars, and identify the magnetic field structure in high-energy nebulae. Under the US$40 million contract, which GSFC had awarded through NASAs SMEX Program, Orbital Sciences would provide the spacecraft bus and conduct mission operations. Orbitals proven spacecraft bus, LEOStar 2TM, would provide the design for the GEMS bus. GEMS would be the eighth satellite modeled after LEOStar 2 and the fifth SMEX satellite to use that platform. Previous space-based x-ray observatories had been insensitive to polarization but, for the GEMS mission, Orbital planned to design the first observatory able to measure x-ray polarization systematically. This capability would enable scientists to use the GEMS observatory to study scattering, magnetic fields, and strong gravitational fields. The GEMS team planned to make the mission data accessible to the astrophysics community and to the public via NASAs High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center Web site.(Orbital Sciences Corporation, Orbital Selected by NASA To Build New Space Science Satellite To Study X-ray Polarization, news release, 8 July 2009, http://www.orbital.com/NewsInfo/release.asp?prid=700 (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASAs MFSC and the Chandra X-ray Observatory announced that a long observation from Chandra, the SST, and ground-based observatories had identified for the first time the source of energy producing so-called cosmic blobs. The Chandra observations had helped reveal that the so-called blobs are not infant galaxies, as astronomers had previously thought, but more likely adolescent galaxies about to stabilize. The telescopes had observed a collection of 29 blobs in one large field in the sky called SSA22. The blobs had become visible from Earth when the universe was approximately 2 billion years old, or 15 percent of its current age. Chandra data had revealed a signature in five blobs indicating the growth of supermassive black holesa point- like source with luminous x-ray emission. An additional three blobs provided possible evidence for such black holes. Further observations, including Spitzer data, had determined that remarkable levels of star formation dominated several of these galaxies. Calculations had revealed that the radiation and outflows from the black holes, and from the bursts of star formation, were powerful enough to light up the hydrogen gas in the blobs. Scientists stated that, although the gas in the blobs would not likely cool down to form stars, it would add to the hot gas found between galaxies, indicating that SSA22 could evolve into a massive galaxy cluster. James E. Geach of Durham University in the United Kingdom, lead author of the study, which the Astrophysical Journal would publish in its 10 July 2009 issue, remarked that scientists would need to look further back in time to capture data indicating that the blobs were forming galaxies and black holes.(Chandra X-Ray Center, Galaxies Coming of Age in Cosmic Blobs, news release, 24 June 2009, http://chandra. si.edu/press/09_releases/press_062409.html (accessed 5 August 2011); Clara Moskowitz, Secrets of Space Blobs Revisited, Space.com, 24 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6885-secrets-space-blobs-revealed.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Seth Borenstein, Telescope Finds Space Blobs Are Pubescent Galaxies, Associated Press, 25 June 2009.)
NASA and Cisco announced a partnership, under the terms of a Space Act Agreement, to develop an online, collaborative global-monitoring platform called Planetary Skin. Planetary Skin would capture and analyze data from satellite-, airborne-, sea-, and land-based sensors. Governments, businesses, and the general public would have access to the data, enabling them to measure, report, and verify environmental data in near real time and thereby assisting them in detecting and adapting to global climate change. Cisco and NASA planned to start Planetary Skin with a series of pilot projects, such as Rainforest Skin. Cisco and NASA planned to develop the prototype of Rainforest Skin during the following year. Focusing on deforestation, Rainforest Skin would explore methods of integrating a comprehensive sensor network and determining how to capture, analyze, and present information about changes in rainforests carbon levels in a transparent and usable way. S. Peter Worden, Director of NASAs ARC, explained that NASA had collected a lot of data, which was awaiting conversion. He remarked further that the partnership sought to combine NASAs data and Ciscos expertise in data handling to explain what was currently happening in the rainforests of the world.(NASA, NASA, Cisco Partnering for Climate Change Monitoring Platform, news release 09-20AR, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/news/releases/2009/09-20AR.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Michael Burnham for Greenwire, NASA-Cisco Climate Project To Flash Planetary Skin, New York Times, 4 March 2009. 32 NASA, NASA Announces Mishap Board Members for OCO Investigation, news release 09-047, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-047_OCO_MIB.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
In coordination with NASAs Office of the Chief Engineer and Office of Human Capital Management, NASAs Innovative Partnerships Program announced the selection of its inaugural group of Innovation Ambassadors. NASA had established the program to target opportunities for creating NASA partnerships and for identifying new sources of innovation outside the traditional aerospace field. NASA anticipated selecting a group of Innovation Ambassadors annually, assigning the selected ambassadors to positions at several leading innovative external research and development organizations in the United States. During these assignments, which would last as long as a year, the selected individuals would share their expertise with their assigned research and development organization while learning about the organizations innovative products, processes, and business models. Upon returning to NASA, the ambassadors would share new ideas with their NASA colleagues and would implement innovations within their respective NASA divisions. NASA had selected ARCs Robert S. McCann, who would work with the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in Palo Alto, California, studying the application of artificial intelligence to health systems management and human-machine teams; JSCs Eric C. Darcy, who would work with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado, to develop mathematical models for lithium-ion battery performance; GSFCs Lawrence M. Hilliard, who would work with Primary Simulation, of Silver Spring, Maryland, to apply laser ball technology to interactive educational tools; and Kelly J. Snook, also from GSFC, who would work at Massachusetts Institute of Technologys (MITs) Media Laboratory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to study the use of sound as a means of visualizing and analyzing scientific data.(NASA, NASA Selects First Innovation Ambassadors, news release 09-182, 4 August 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_182_Innovation_Ambassadors.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA announced that, together with industry engineers, it had successfully tested the three main parachutes of the Ares-I rocket, which NASA was designing to serve as the booster rocket for the Orion CEV. Engineers had designed the parachutes as the primary element of the rockets deceleration system, which included a pilot parachute and a drogue parachute. The main parachutes would deploy in a cluster, open simultaneously, and provide the necessary drag to slow the descent of the solid-rocket first-stage motor to a soft landing in the ocean, allowing their recovery for use on future flights. NASAs MSFC engineers had conducted the first cluster test at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The flight test was the eighth in an ongoing series supporting the development of the Ares-I recovery system. The research team had dropped the 41,500-pound (18,824-kilogram, or 18.8-tonne) load from a U.S. Air Force C- 17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,058-meters). All parachutes and test hardware had functioned properly and landed safely. The parachutes measured 150 feet (45.72 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonnes), making them the largest rocket parachutes manufactured to date.(NASA, NASA Tests Largest Rocket Parachutes Ever for Ares I, news release 09-113, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-113_AresI_Parachutes_Test.html (accessed 20 June 2011);)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting, members of NASAs MESSENGER mission team and cartographic experts from the U.S. Geological Survey released the first global map of Mercury. The team had built the map from 917 images that NASAs MESSENGER spacecraft had collected as recently as 29 September 2009 and from earlier images that Mariner 10 had captured in the 1970s. Scientists planned to use the map as a critical tool to help identify Mercurys craters, faults, and other features. MESSENGER would use this information in its observations, when the craft entered Mercurys orbit in 2011. MESSENGER Principal Investigator Sean C. Solomon remarked that, beyond its use as a planning tool, the global map signified that MESSENGER was no longer a flyby mission. Instead, MESSENGER would soon become an in-depth, nonstop global observatory of the solar systems innermost planet.(Alexis Madrigal, First Global Map of Mercury, Wired, 16 December 2009; Nancy Atkinson, MESSENGER Team Releases First Global Map of Mercury, Universe Today, 16 December 2009.)
Astronauts aboard the ISS operated the Japanese robotic arm for the first time, moving two experiments. One of the two experiments would study the effect of the stations space environment on electronics and devices; the other was an x-ray observatory that would scan the night sky, using an inter-orbit communications system to send images, data, and voice communications to Japans Kibo mission control center at Tsukuba Space Center. The ISSs robotic arm moved the three payloads from JEL to JEF, the porch attached to Japans Kibo laboratory. After some initial problems with its grappling device, the 33-foot (10-meter) robotic arm continued its day-long operation as planned. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata helped to drive the robotic arm. Wakata, Japans first long-duration ISS resident, had lived aboard the station since March 2009.(Tariq Malik, Japanese Experiments Moved to Space Station, Space.com, 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7043-japanese-experiments-moved-space-station.html (accessed 29 August 2011).)
NASA announced its partnership with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabias King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), to collaborate in lunar and asteroid science research. The Saudi Lunar and Near-Earth Object Science Center would become an affiliate partner with the NASA Lunar Science Institute at NASAs ARC. The partnership fell within the scope of a MOU on Science and Technology, which the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States had signed in 2008. U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia James B. Smith recognized the partnership as an important advance in the growing U.S.-Saudi program of bilateral science and technology cooperation.(NASA, NASA Partners with Saudi Arabia on Moon and Asteroid Research, news release 09-284, 15 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-284_NASA-Saudi_statement.html (accessed 16 December 2011).)
NASA announced that, using NASAs Aqua satellite, researchers had conducted the first global analysis of the health and productivity of ocean plants. Ocean scientists had used Aquas Moderate Resolution Imagine Spectroradiometer (MODIS) to measure remotely the amount of fluorescent redlight emitted by phytoplankton. This research marked the first time that scientists had observed redlight fluorescence over the open ocean on a global scale. The measurements enabled the researchers to assess how efficiently the microscopic plants had been conducting photosynthesis. The data could also enable researchers to study the effect of global environmental changes on phytoplankton. Scientists consider phytoplankton to be the center of the ocean food web, accounting for half of all photosynthetic activity on Earth and playing a critical role in the balance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Michael J. Behrenfeld, a biologist at Oregon State University, explained that the amount of fluorescent light emitted is not constant but, rather, changes with the health of the plant life in the ocean. Scott C. Doney, a marine chemist from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, added that fluorescence provides insight into how well phytoplankton are functioning within the ecosystem. The new measurement revealed that large areas of the Indian Ocean contain phytoplankton that are experiencing stress from iron deficiency. Scientists observed that phytoplankton fluorescence increases as the amount of iron decreases. Therefore, large portions of the ocean light up seasonally, as phytoplankton respond to the lack of iron in their diet.(NASA, NASA Satellite Detects Red Glow To Map Global Ocean Plant Health, news release 09-124, 28 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-124_Ocean_health.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
NASA released the first comprehensive map of Earths solar system, including a map of its location in the Milky Way galaxy. NASA had produced the map using data collected over six months by two detectors on NASAs Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) spacecraft. The map revealed the local interstellar medium, the region that separates the nearest reaches of the galaxy from the heliosphere. This region acts as a protective bubble, shielding Earths solar system from the most dangerous cosmic radiation traveling through space. According to IBEX Principal Investigator David J. McComas, of the Space Science and Engineering Division at Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, the IBEX sky map marked the first time that scientists could leave the Suns atmosphere and begin to understand Earths place in the galaxy. The map also enabled astronomers to place in context the observations from NASAs Voyager spacecraft. Since their launch in 1977, the twin Voyager spacecraft had each traveled into the interstellar boundary. However, the IBEX data showed a ribbon of bright emissions that neither Voyager craft had detected. Launched in October 2008, NASAs IBEX had a mission to map the heliosphere. The journal Science had published a series of papers outlining the results of the mission.(NASA, NASA Spacecraft Provides First View of Our Place in the Galaxy, news release 09-241, 15 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-241_IBEX.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, NASA Probe Helps To Map Solar System, 16 October 2009.)
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martinbuilt NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary afternoon spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecrafts orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. Frances national space agency, Centre National dEtudes Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASAs NOAA- N Prime, 6 February 2009.)
NASAs GSFC selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation to build a second GMI for the GPM mission. Ball had designed the identical instrumentsGMI 1 and GMI 2as multichannel, conical-scanning, microwave radiometers, which would serve an essential role in the near-global coverage of GPM. Ball planned to conduct full instrument testing on GMI 1 in mid-2010, with launch aboard the spaceborne GPM core observatory scheduled for 2013. The GMI-2 launch would follow in 2014. Ball had designed the 8-foot-high (2.4-meter-high) GMI instruments to rotate at 32 revolutions per minute, to perform temporal sampling of rainfall accumulations and more frequent and higher quality data collection, using two stable calibration points.(Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation, Ball Aerospace Selected for Second NASA GMI Microwave Imager, news release, 30 November 2009, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=363 (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA announced a partnership with the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory to develop a technology roadmap study for the commercial reusable launch vehicle (RLV) industry. Led by NASAs Innovative Partnerships Program, the study would identify technologies and assess their potential use, in an effort to accelerate the development of commercial RLVs. The study would also recommend to the U.S. government technology tasks and milestones for various vehicle categories. NASA had defined the categories as 1) reusable, suborbital vehicles; 2) expendable and partially reusable, orbital vehicles; 3) reusable, two-stage orbital vehicles; and 4) advanced vehicle concepts, such as single-stage-to-orbit, air-breathing systems, in-flight refueling, and tethered upper-stage vehicles. NASA and the U.S. Air Force planned to evaluate all types of flight systemsfrom space entry, descent, and recovery systems, to avionics, communications, and flight control. The study would commence in 2009, at the Commercial and Government Responsive Access to Space Technology Exchange in Dayton, Ohio (2629 October 2009). Representatives from NASA, the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, and the FAAs Office of Commercial Space Transportation would meet with representatives from the commercial RLV industry, soliciting feedback about long-range growth plans and the necessary technology to implement those plans successfully.(NASA, NASA Announces Commercial RLV Technology Roadmap Project, news release 09-238, 13 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-238_RLV_Study.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Michael Cooney, NASA Partners with US Air Force To Develop Commercial Space Roadmap, Network World, 14 October 2009.)
NASA announced that it had selected six universities to receive research grants totaling nearly US$30 million. The selected universities served large numbers of underrepresented and minority students. The grants would help the universities establish multidisciplinary scientific, engineering, and commercial research centers, capable of making significant contributions to NASAs programs. Through the NASA Group 5 University Research Center awards program, each university would receive up to US$1 million per year for up to five years, based on their performance and on availability of funds. The awards continued NASAs commitment to supporting new aerospace science and technology concepts and expanding the nations base for aerospace research development. Through these efforts, NASA hoped to achieve a broad-based, competitive capability for aerospace research and technology development. NASA also hoped the awards would help underrepresented minorities obtain advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Selected from among 35 institutions that had submitted proposals, the six universities to receive awards were California State University in Long Beach, for the Center for Human Factors in Advanced Aeronautics Technologies; Delaware State University in Dover, for the establishment of a NASA Optical Sciences Center for Applied Research; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University in Greensboro, for the Center for Aviation Safety; North Carolina Central University in Durham, for the NASA Center for Aerospace Device Research and Education; University of Texas in Brownsville, for the Center for Gravitational Wave Astronomy; and University of Texas in El Paso, for the Center for Space Exploration Technology Research.(NASA, NASA Awards Grants for Research Centers at 6 Minority Universities, news release 09-213, 16 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-213_Minority_University_Grants.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced the selection of the members of the mishap board tasked with investigating the unsuccessful launch of the OCO, which had failed to reach orbit after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on 24 February 2009. NASA charged the board to identify the causes and contributing factors of the launch failure and to recommend measures that NASA should take to prevent a similar incident in future missions. NASA had named Arthur F. Rick Obenschain, Deputy Director at NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the investigation, and now named four other voting members: Jose A. Caraballo, Safety Manager at NASAs Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia; Patricia M. Jones, Acting Chief of the Human Systems Integration Division in the Exploration Technology Directorate at NASAs ARC in Moffett Field, California; Richard J. Lynch of Aerospace Systems Engineering at NASAs GSFC; and David R. Sollberger, Deputy Chief Engineer of the NASA Launch Services Program at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. NASA named Ruth D. Jones, the Safety and Mission Assurance Manager at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), as the boards ex officio member, charged with assuring that board activity conformed to NASA procedural requirements.
NASA announced that it had designated 2009 as the International Year of Astronomy, to commemorate the anniversary of the beginning of modern astronomy in 1609, when Galileo first used a telescope to view the heavens. As part of the yearlong celebration, NASA planned to release images from its Great ObservatoriesHubble Space Telescope (HST), Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), and Chandra X-ray Observatoryto museums, nature centers, planetariums, and schools across the country. NASA would make the images public between 14 and 28 February 2009, in conjunction with Galileos 15 February birthday. Selected sites would also unveil a large 9-square-foot (2.7-square-meter) print of the spiral galaxy Messier 101. NASA had created the print by combining images of Messier 101HSTs optical view, SSTs infrared view, and Chandras x-ray view. Describing the image created from the three views, Hashima Hasan, Lead Scientist for the International Year of Astronomy at NASA Headquarters, said that one might see such an image if one could use ones eyes, night-vision goggles, and x-ray vision simultaneously. The selected sites would also display individual images from each observatory. HSTs visible-light view of Messier 101, known as the Pinwheel Galaxy, revealed the swirls of bright stars and glowing gas that had earned the galaxy its nickname. Spitzers infrared-light image peered into those spiral arms, showing where dense clouds collapse to form stars. Chandras x-ray image uncovered high-energy features of Messier 101, such as remnants of exploded stars or matter moving around black holes.(NASA, NASAs Great Observatories Celebrate International Year of Astronomy, news release 09-026, 10 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-026_IYOA.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to Computer Sciences Corporation of Fort Worth, Texas, to support NASAs aircraft used for astronaut training and flight research. The follow-on, potentially valued at approximately US$163 million, continued services provided under a previous contract, which had been in effect from 1 March 2004 through 31 August 2009. The new contract would be in effect 1 September 2009 through 28 February 2010. Under the Aircraft Maintenance and Modification Program, Computer Sciences Corporation would continue to provide flight-line, intermediate, and depot-level maintenance, repairs, modifications, and engineering support for NASA aircraft.(NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Aircraft Maintenance, news release C09-040, 25 August 2009.)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers using data collected by NASAs Swift satellite had found the most distant GRB to date13.1 billion light-years from Earth. Designated GRB090423, the explosion originated from a star that had died when the universe was 630 million years old, or less than 5 percent of its present age. Swift had detected a 10- second-long GRB on 23 April and had quickly pivoted, to observe the burst location with its ultraviolet/optical and x-ray telescopes. Swift had observed a fading x-ray afterglow, but nothing in visible light. Derek B. Fox of Pennsylvania State University explained that the burst had most likely arisen from the explosion of a massive star, and that the scientists were not only seeing the demise of a star, but alsoperhapsthe birth of a black hole in one of the universes earliest stellar generations. NASA had designed Swift to capture very distant bursts like GRB090423. Neil Gehrels of NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Lead Scientist on NASAs Swift team, remarked that the bursts incredible distance from Earth had exceeded the teams greatest expectations. According to Joshua S. Bloom of the University of California at Berkeley, who had observed the afterglow using the Gemini South telescope in Chili, the event marked a watershed moment in the field of astronomy. The immense distance of the burst from Earth signified that the dead star was the earliest object yet discovered from an era called reionization, which had occurred in the first billion years after the Big Bang. Bloom added that the observation of GRB090423 marked the beginning of the study of the universe as it was before most of the structure that scientists know about today came into being.(NASA, New Gamma-Ray Burst Smashes Cosmic Distance Record, news release 09-088, 28 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-088_Swift_Gamma-ray_Burst.html (added 17 May 2011); Rachel Courtland, Most Distant Object in the Universe Spotted, New Scientist, 28 April 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASAs commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceXs remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners vehiclesthree Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASAs Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads, 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the systems artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Divisions Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASAs Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
NASAs ARC announced that LCROSSs observation of its 9 October 2009 impact on the lunar surface had succeeded. During LACROSSs descent into the Centaur crater, nine instruments on board had captured each phase of the impact sequence. The ultraviolet/visible and near-infrared spectrometer and camera data had revealed a faint but distinct debris plume. LCROSS Principal Investigator and Project Scientist Anthony Colaprete remarked that the ejecta brightness of the plume was at the low end of NASAs predictions. However, that description could provide a clue to help determine the properties of the material that Centaur had impacted. LCROSS had also captured Centaurs impact flash in both of its mid-infrared thermal cameras over a couple of seconds. The temperature of that flash would provide valuable information about the composition of the material at the impact site. Although creating a plume had been the key to the missions success, LCROSS had not detected a debris plume, initially. The new images, captured by a different camera on board the spacecraft, confirmed that Centaurs impact had, indeed, created a plume.(NASA Ames Research Center, NASAs LCROSS Captures All Phases of Centaur Impact, ARC news release 16 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/LCROSS/main/LCROSS_impact.html (accessed 30 September)
ATK announced that, together with NASA and industry partners Lockheed Martin Corporation and Orbital Sciences Corporation, it had successfully performed a ground-test firing of the attitude-control motor-thruster system of the launch-abort system (LAS) for NASAs Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV). The test, conducted at ATKs facility in Elkton, Maryland, marked a milestone in the development of the Orion spacecraft. The fifth in a series of ground tests of the crafts attitude-control motor system, the High Thrust-8 (HT-8) demonstration provided validation that several flight-weight subsystems were performing as designed. According to a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation, ATK was responsible for the design of the attitude- control motor, which would provide steering for the LAS in the event of a catastrophic failure on the launchpad or during Orions initial ascent. Orbital Sciences Corporation was responsible for delivering the LAS motors for Lockheed Martin, the prime contractor for NASAs Orion Project.(ATK, NASA and Orion Industry Team Successfully Test Orion Launch Abort System Attitude Control Motor Thruster System, news release, 1 April 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=911 (accessed 3 June 2011); Guy Norris, ATK Pad Abort Thruster Test, Aviation Week, 2 April 2009.)
A team of astronomers published research in the journal Nature, revealing that temperatures on the gas giant exoplanet known as HD 80606b can rise from 980F to 2,240F (527C to 1,227C) within 6 hours. The researchers had studied infrared measurements collected by NASAs Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), to determine the amount of heat emanating from HD 80606b as its orbit neared its star. The planet travels around its star along an oblong orbit every 111.4 daysan orbit that scientists described as the most eccentric of any known planet. At its closest point to its star, HD 80606b receives 825 times more irradiation than at its farthest point. The eclipse that occurs in the moment before the planets closest approach to its star had enabled the astronomers to measure separately the amount of heat emanating from the planet, distinguishing it from the stars heat. They had succeeded in measuring precisely how hot the planet becomes as it approaches its star. A computer model using Spitzer data had revealed global storms and shock waves in the planets atmosphere every 111 days, as it swings close to its star. The simulation showed that the increasing heat and expansion of the atmosphere produces very high winds5 kilometers per second (3 miles per second), or more than 11,000 miles per hour (17,703 kilometers per hour)moving from the day side of the planet to its night side.(Clara Moskowitz, Extreme Exoplanets Wild Ride, Wired, 29 January 2009; Jeanna Bryner, Exoplanet Sees Extreme Heat Waves, Space.com, 28 January 2009, http://www.space.com/6364-exoplanet-sees-extreme-heat- waves.html (accessed 27 April 2011); see also, Gregory Laughlin et al., Rapid Heating of the Atmosphere of an Extrasolar Planet, Nature 457, no. 7229 (29 January 2009): 562564, http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2346/nature/ journal/v457/n7229/pdf/nature07649.pdf (DOI 10.1038/nature07649; accessed 27 April 2011).)
NASA honored four veteran aerospace journalists and a public affairs officer at a ceremony at KSC for their work chronicling the nations space program. NASA unveiled five new gold plates with the names of the late Milt Salamon, who had worked as a local columnist at Florida Today and its predecessor paper for three decades; Sue Butler of the Daytona Beach News Journal and the Associated Press; the late Jerry B. Hannifin of Time magazine; the late Rudy P. Abramson of the Los Angeles Times; and the late Frank J. Colella, the first Manager of Public Affairs at NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California. The new plates joined 57 others that comprised the Roll of Honor, called the Chroniclers Wall, at the NASA News Center at the Launch Complex 39 Press Site. The Chroniclers Wall recognized career achievements of writers, journalists, broadcasters, and communicators who had covered NASA at KSC for at least 10 years. In an additional ceremony, NASA recognized Milt Salamon for his role in writing about the ordinary people who worked at KSC and lived on the Space Coast. Salamon, who had died in January 2002 at the age of 75, had worked as an engineer for Lockheed Martin in California and at Cape Canaveral before starting his writing career. He had worked at the National Enquirer before starting at Florida Today in 1974.(Todd Halvorson, KSC Honors Columnist, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 2009. 23)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with American Tank and Vessel of Mobile, Alabama, for the installation of a test-cell diffuser and associated systems in the A-3 test stand at NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. NASA planned to test the J-2X engine for its Constellation Program at the A-3 test stand. Construction had begun in 2007, and NASA had scheduled the first test to take place in 2012. The contract with American Tank and Vessel had a maximum value of US$45 million.(NASA, NASA Awards Construction Contract for Rocket Engine Testing, news release C09-006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-006_SSC_A-3_Test_Stand.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA astronauts Randolph J. Bresnik and Robert L. Satcher Jr. undertook the third and final spacewalk of STS-129. The pair began their spacewalk an hour late because of difficulty with a valve on the drink bag of Satchers spacesuit. However, the team quickly worked to get ahead of schedule, finishing at 2:06 p.m. (EST), just after the originally scheduled ending time. With the assistance of a robotic arm, the pair installed a 1,200-pound (544-kilogram) oxygen tank at a NASA air lock on the ISS, the main objective of the spacewalk. They filled it with high-pressure oxygen for future spacewalks, connected the gas line, and conducted a check for leaks. The pair also installed science experiments on the outside of the station, including the MISSE, which would help NASA scientists understand how substances and coatings react to direct sunlight, radiation, atomic oxygen, and extreme temperatures. NASA intended to use the results of these experiments in the design of future spacecraft. Additionally, Bresnik and Satcher removed two orbital-debris shields from the air lock, making room for the oxygen tank; loosened a bolt on an ammonia tank; and worked on fluid jumper lines.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronauts Take Spacewalk No. 3 After Suit Snag, 24 November 2009; Ryan Flinn, Spacewalkers Final Sortie Tests Materials for Future Craft, Bloomberg News, 24 November 2009.)
NASA announced its selection of Einstein, Hubble, and Sagan Fellowships in three areas of astronomy and astrophysics. Each postdoctoral fellowship would provide support to the awardees for three years at any host university or research center in the United States. Jon Morse, Director of the Astrophysics Division in NASAs Science Mission Directorate (SMD), described the recipients as among the best and brightest young astronomers in the world, who had already contributed significantly to studies of how the universe works, the origin of the cosmos, and whether life exists beyond Earth. Morse described the fellowships as a springboard for scientific leadership, as well as an inspiration for the next generation of students and researchers. NASA awarded 10 fellowships in the Einstein program, to conduct research related to NASAs Physics of the Cosmos Program; 17 fellowships in the Hubble program, to pursue research associated with NASAs Cosmic Origins Program; and five fellowships in the Sagan program, which 26 NASA had created in September 2008, in alignment with its Exoplanet Exploration Program.
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASAs MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttles main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicles Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSCs propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASAs MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFCs Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, Lightfoot Named Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center, news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HSTs successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, NASAs Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission, news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program, 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, The Last Fix, Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis, Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASA announced that its Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had captured the first gamma-ray burst (GRB) ever seen in high resolution. The burst, designated GRB 080916C, was the most extreme yet recorded, in terms of its tremendous power and speed. The Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had detected the blast on 15 September 2008, and the Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor aboard the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had recorded the event. Thirty-two hours after the blasts detection, a team at the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had searched for the explosions afterglow. The team at the Max Planck Institute had then captured the field in seven wavelengths, using the Gamma-Ray Burst Optical/Near-Infrared Detector (GROND) on the 2.2-meter (7.22-foot) telescope at the European Southern Observatory in La Silla, Chile. The capture had enabled the Max Planck Institute team to determine that the blast had occurred 12.2 billion light-years away, in the constellation Carina. Fermi team members had used this information to show that the blast had exceeded the power of 9,000 ordinary supernovas and to calculate that, within the jet, gas bullets had likely moved at 99.9999 percent of the speed of light.(NASA, NASAs Fermi Telescope Sees Most Extreme Gamma-Ray Blast Yet, news release 09-033, 19 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-033_Fermi_Gamma-ray_Blast.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Press Association (United Kingdom), Record Radiation Blast Detected, 20 February 2009.)
Rodger E. Doxsey, head of the Space Telescope Science Institutes (STScIs) HST Mission Office in Baltimore, died of cancer at the age of 62. Recruited as an HST Mission Operations Scientist, Doxsey had worked at STScI since 1981, nine years before the launch of HST. Since HSTs launch, Doxsey had been involved in the daily operations of the telescope. He had been responsible for all work necessary to support HSTs scientific operations, planning and scheduling, and calibration of data, and for building scientific mission specifications and issuing all commands necessary to HSTs instruments. Doxsey had worked with GSFC to develop HSTs new scientific instruments. Despite his illness, he had remained involved in the preparations for the final servicing mission to the telescope in May 2009. In 1991 NASA had recognized Doxsey with the highest honor it could give to a nonfederal employee, awarding him its Distinguished Public Service Medal. With this award, NASA noted Doxseys outstanding leadership in developing the concepts of the scientific operations of HST and in implementing the systems needed to accomplish those ends. In 2004 AAS had awarded Doxsey the Van Biesbroeck Prize for his outstanding, unselfish dedication to making HST one of the most scientifically productive telescopes of all time. Director of STScI Charles Mattias Matt Mountain described Doxsey as the heart and soul of Hubble at the Institute, saying that Doxsey knew everything about the space telescope, from the smallest anomaly to the breadth of the extraordinary science delivered by the telescope. Doxsey had worked with HST for more than 28 years.(Frank D. Roylance, Rodger Doxsey, One of Space Telescope Teams First Leaders, Dies at 62, Baltimore Sun, 15 October 2009.)
ESA launched its far-infrared space telescope Herschel and its cosmic background mapper Planck on an Ariane-5 rocket from Europes Spaceport in French Guiana at 13:12 (UT). With a payload weighing 5.3 tons (4.8 tonnes, or 4,808 kilograms), the Ariane-5 rocket carried the largest telescope ever launched into space. The two spacecraft would carry out their scientific observations from separate orbits at approximately Lagrange point 2 (L2), a virtual point in space approximately 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) from Earth, in the opposite direction from the Sun, where the combined pull of Earth and Sun creates a gravitational stability point. Herschel would make infrared observations of stars, galaxies, and star-forming regions, using a 3.5-meter-diameter mirror, the largest yet carried into space. Herschel, weighing 3,400 kilograms (3.75 tons), carried three instrumentsthe Photodetector Array Camera and Spectrometer (PACS), the Spectral and Photometric Imaging Receiver (SPIRE), and the Heterofyne Instrument for the Far Infrared (HIFI). In addition, it carried 2,300 liters (607.6 gallons) of liquid helium, to cool the instruments to a few 10ths of a degree above 0 K. ESA had scheduled Herschels mission to continue three years, but the mission could continue until Herschel had depleted its helium. The 1,900-kilogram (2.09-ton) Planck carried an aperture mirror with a diameter of 1.5 meters (4.92 feet) and two cryogenically cooled instrumentsthe High Frequency Instrument (HFI), which would detect emissions in six frequency bands between 100 and 857 GHz (3 millimeters to 350 microns), and the Low Frequency Instrument (LFI), which would operate between 30 and 70 GHz (10 millimeters to 4.3 millimeters). Scientists expected that Planck would use these instruments to measure minute variations in the cosmic microwave background radiation, gathering detailed information about the age, size, mass, and geometry of the early universe. Planck would also produce two all-sky maps before the end of the planned 15-month mission.(European Space Agency, ESA En Route to the Origins of the Universe, ESA news release 10-2009, 14 May 2009, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_10_2009_p_EN.html (accessed 5 July 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667, 1 June 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx667.html (accessed 5 July 2011).)
NASA announced the selection of the Avcoat ablator system for the Orion crew modules thermal protection system at the base of the craft. During reentry into Earths atmosphere, the base of the spacecraft would endure more heat than any other area of Orion, but the Avcoat system would enable the base to erode, or ablate, in a controlled way, transporting heat away from the crew module during its descent. Over a period of three years, NASAs Orion Thermal Protection System Advanced Development Project had considered eight different candidate materials before choosing the two final candidatesPhenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) and Avcoat, both of which had proven successful in space missions. NASA had used Avcoat for the Apollo capsule heat shield and on select regions of the Space Shuttles orbiter in its earliest flights and had resumed production of Avcoat for the study. Avcoat was made of silica fibers with an epoxy-novalic resin filled in a fiberglass-phenolic honeycomb. NASA engineers had manufactured it directly onto the heat-shield substructure. Unlike Avcoat, PICA was manufactured in blocks and attached to the vehicle after fabrication. NASA had used PICA on its first robotic space mission dedicated to exploring the comet Stardust, the first mission to return samples since Apollo. Project engineers had performed rigorous thermal, structural, and environmental testing on Avcoat and PICA, comparing the two materials mass, thermal and structural performance, life-cycle costs, ease of manufacturing, reliability, and certification challenges. NASA and Orions prime contractor Lockheed Martin ultimately chose Avcoat as the more robust, reliable, and mature system.(NASA, NASA Selects Material for Orion Spacecraft Heat Shield, news release 09-080, 7 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-080_Orion_Heat_Shield.html (accessed 17 May 2011). 53 NASA, Space Station Crew Lands in Soyuz After Successful Mission, news release 09-081, 8 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-081_Exp18_Landing.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Associated Press, U.S. Space Tourists Return Put Off by a Day, 3 April 2009.)
ESAs Ariane-5 rocket launched from Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:09 (UT), carrying a telecommunications satellite for JapanJCSAT 12and a broadcasting satellite for Australia Optus D3. Lockheed Martin had built the 8,900-pound (4,037-kilogram) JCSAT 12, equipping it with 30 active Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders, to provide communications services to Hawaii, Japan, and the Asia-Pacific region for 15 years. Orbital Sciences had built the Optus D3, a 5,400-pound (2,449-kilogram) craft that would use 24 Ku-band transponders to relay communications and direct-to-home television services across Australia and New Zealand. Orbital Sciences had designed the Optus D3 with a 15-year life span, like Lockheed Martins JCSAT 12.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 670, 1 September 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx670.html (accessed 8 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, Ariane 5 Places Japan, Australia Satellites in Orbit, 22 August 2009; Xinhua News Agency, Ariane Rocket Launches Satellites for Japan, Australia, 23 August 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASAs KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space stations final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the stations truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, NASAs Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission, news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
JAXA successfully launched its 16.5-ton (14.97-tonne, or 14,969-kilogram) H-2 Transfer Vehicle (HTV 1), loaded with 4.5 tonnes (4.96 tons) of cargo and supplies for delivery to the ISS. Liftoff occurred at 1:01 a.m. (EDT) from the Tanegashima Space Center, and JAXA confirmed separation from the rockets upper stage approximately 15 minutes later. HTV 1, which carried both pressurized and unpressurized cargo to the ISS, was the first craft capable of transporting both types of cargo. The pressurized cargo included food, computer equipment, and other supplies. Also aboard was cargo that NASA and JAXA intended to use on JAXAs Kibo module: NASAs Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) and Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) Experiment Payload (HREP), for studies of the ocean and atmosphere, and JAXAs Superconducting Submillimeter-Wave Limb-Emission Sounder (SMILES) instrument, designed to study the ozone layer. Masazumi Miyake, Deputy Director of JAXAs Houston office, said that the launch signaled a new era for JAXA, opening new horizons for Japan in its efforts to achieve human spaceflight. Miyake added that the HTV-1 mission was a demonstration flight to verify functionality and performance. However, after completing the mission, JAXA intended to launch an average of one operational HTV per year. HTV 1 represented Japans first attempt at a major orbital rendezvous and its first launch to a staffed space station. The HTV program, which Japan had been developing since 1997, had cost the United States US$700 million. The cost of the HTV spacecraft unit was US$200 million, not including the launch vehicle.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671, 1 October 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx671.html (accessed 16 September 2011); Robert Block, Japan Enters New Era of Space Exploration, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion projects preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicles capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martinled industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, NASAs Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones, news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, NASAs New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty, Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced the successful completion of the second drop test of a drogue parachute for the Ares-I rocket. The drop test had taken place on 28 February 2009 at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The test was the seventh in a series of flight tests supporting the development of the Ares-I parachute-recovery system, which comprised a pilot chute, drogue, and three main parachutes. To test the 68-foot-diameter (20.7-meter-diameter) drogue parachute, researchers had dropped the parachute from a U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 25,000 feet (7.62 kilometers). The drogue had carried a 50,000-pound (22,680-kilogram, or 22.68-tonne) load, to simulate the rockets spent first-stage motor. The parachute and the test hardware had functioned as planned, landing the load safely. NASA engineers had designed the drogue to permit recovery of the rockets reusable first-stage motor. They planned to use the design in future Ares-I flights, including launches associated with NASAs Constellation Program.(NASA, NASA Successfully Tests Parachute for Ares Rocket, news release 09-045, 2 March 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-045_Ares_Drogue_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellitethe Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASAs HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85, New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
NASA announced that its twin STEREO (Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory) spacecraft had provided scientists with their first view of the speed, trajectory, and three-dimensional shape of solar coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The spacecrafts capabilities had dramatically improved scientists ability to predict the impact of CMEs on Earth, enabling them to determine when CMEs would occur. In addition, scientists could now predict whether a CME would merely cause an auroral display or would produce a type of cosmic ray that is potentially hazardous to astronauts, spacecraft, and Earth technologies such as GPS signals and power grids. NASA had launched the two spacecraft in 2006 on a mission to make simultaneous observations of CMEs from different vantage points. The successful production of three-dimensional observations had enabled solar physicists to determine when a CME would reach Earth and to predict how much energy the CME would deliver to Earths magnetosphere. Because of the two vantage points of the twin STEREO spacecraft, the craft were able to provide data that Earth-based observatories were unable to capture, regarding the direction and speed of solar storms. STEREO could also sample the contents of solar storms and gauge the magnetic properties of the eruptions. Before the STEREO mission, scientists could not make measurements or collect subsequent data about CMEs until the ejections had arrived at Earthtypically three to seven days after their occurrence.(NASA, NASA Spacecraft Show Three Dimensional Anatomy of a Solar Storm, news release 09-083, 14 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-083_STEREO.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Anne Minard, First 3-D Pictures of Solar Explosions Created, National Geographic News, 15 April 2009.)
