PHRASE: space flight _nytCount: 89 _historyStories.size(): 2473 _mentions: 2808
PHRASE: flight center _nytCount: 22 _historyStories.size(): 1290 _mentions: 1341
..
January 8, 1998
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)

May 14, 1973
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)

December 28, 1972
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)

December 31, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)

December 31, 1974
President Ford signed S. 1283 into P.L. 93—577, the Federal Nonnuclear Energy Research and Development Act of 1974, to establish and conduct a national program of basic and applied research and development, including but not limited to demonstrations of practical applications, of all potentially beneficial energy sources and utilization technologies, within the Energy Research and Development Administration. (Text; PD, 6 Jan 75,14) During December: A total of 349 NASA Civil Service employees, including Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley, retired under an “early out” retirement plan authorized by the Civil Service Commission-Under the plan employees could retire if they were at least 50 yrs of age and had 20 yrs of service or if they had 25 yrs of service, regardless of age. NASA had requested the retirement authority, which would extend through 28 Feb. 1975, to minimize effects of a reduction in force scheduled for February at Marshall Space Flight Center and of end of FY 1975 ceilings at Headquarters and elsewhere. NASA also announced a plan to reassign some Headquarters employees to Centers. Retirees included 50 at Headquarters, 50 at Goddard Space Flight Center, 78 at Langley Research Center, 68 at msfc, 28 at Lewis Research Center, 26 at Ames Research Center, 16 at Kennedy Space Flight Center, 14 at Johnson Space Flight Center, 10 at Flight Research Center, and 8 at Wallops Flight Center. By 31 Dec. nasa’s permanent Civil Service strength totaled 24 619—303 over its end of FY 1975 ceiling, (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 20 Jan 75, 11-12; nasa Ann, 12 Dec 74; nasa Deputy Admin memo to Hq employees, 23 Dec 74)

December 29, 1961
Dr. Arthur Rudolph was appointed Assistant Director of Systems Engineering in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight. Operating out of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. Rudolph would serve as liaison between vehicle development at Marshall and the manned space flight program at the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.

June 17, 1987
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)

March 17, 1975
A significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in the face of possibly unstable funding will be the extent to which commercial and foreign government users participate in the development and financial support of future payloads,” Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Av Wk interviewed the Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, Philip E. Culbertson, who said that it would be better, in the long term, to move into a position where more organizations outside NASA were sponsoring and paying for missions and payloads. The agency was encouraged by the interest of industries in flying and funding Space Shuttle missions involving a wide range of basic scientific and technical operations. Foreign reimbursable payloads, already an important part of NASA launch operations, were seen as an even iarger factor in Shuttle payloads development. Japan, already holding discussions with NASA to lay the groundwork for a viable national space program, was considered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both scientific and earth applications programs in the communications, navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in positioning domestic communications satellites over its territory would continue into the Shuttle era. Even individual Soviet scientists had made inquiries into the possibilities of flying payloads on the U.S. Shuttle. Culbertson pointed out that, unlike earlier NASA manned space programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, NASA in-house Shuttle payload development was the sole responsibility of the specific NASA disciplines themselves. NASA’s FY 1976 budget request contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts that could evolve into Shuttle payloads, and the budget for FY 1977 would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the budget crunch, funding for Shuttle payloads would compete directly with other programs and the payload proposals “will have to stand on their own merit.” Culbertson also said that major decisions would have to be made on how long to keep which expendable launch vehicles in the program. In another interview, NASA Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. Lord said that upcoming major decisions concerning Spacelab included a follow-on procurement plan for Spacelab hardware and priorities on how often ESRO (European Space Research Organization) and other crews and experimental hardware would fly on Shuttle— Spacelab missions. Lord said that operations of overall Spacelab functions would probably be maintained separately from payload operations: Johnson Space Center was the logical place to handle overall operations, and Marshall Space Flight Center was the leading candidate for the Spacelab payload operations center. Goddard Space Flight Center had expressed interest in handling operational needs of the high-energy experiments on Spacelab pallets. (Covault, Av Wk, 17 March 75, 59- 60) 18March: “The expertise and facilities of LeRC [Lewis Research Center], as well as other NASA centers, are being considered by ERDA [Energy Research and Development Administration] as part of its overall definition of a total institutional structure required to carry out the nation’s energy R&D program,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., ERDA Administrator said in a letter to Representative Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio). The letter was a reply to correspondence from members of the Ohio congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen and industrialists to President Ford calling for increased use of LeRC talent to meet the nation’s energy crisis. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Seamans noted that the newly established ERDA was the lead Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. ERDA intended to use the expertise and facilities of other Federal agencies where it was feasible and in the national interest with respect to cost, timeliness, and program management. LeRC, NASA’s lead center for aerospace propulsion and power, was already involved in ERDA-sponsored projects in solar heating and cooling, wind energy, and topping cycles to increase the efficiency of coal-fueled steam plants. But LeRC would continue its main task to work on propulsion technology, conducting energy research in support of ERDA “when it was consistent with the requirements of its principal mission within NASA.” (Text, letter to Mosher from Fletcher and Seamans, 18 March 75)

February 1, 1963
nasa announced launch responsibility for Agena and Centaur space vehicle programs had been transferred from nasa Launch Operations Center to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Field Project Branch at Cape Canaveral. Launches would be conducted under technical direction of Ageiia and Centaur project managers, nasa Lewis Research Center. Transfer would permit log to concentrate on manned space flight and associated launch vehicles, including Saturn series developed under management of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Overall project responsibility for Agena and Centaur programs had been assigned to nasa Lewis Research Center in December and October, respectively. (nasa Release 63-19)

January 31, 1963
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)

March 22, 1973
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)

September 16, 1964
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Laboratory, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the Hermann Oberth Medal by the West German Association for Rocket Research Technique and Space Flight at annual meeting of West Berlin’s Scientific Association for Air and Space Flight. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/17/64)

October 25, 1962
At annual nasa awards ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Group Achievement Awards: to four groups at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Assistant Directorate for Engineering and Development, Preflight Operations Division, Mercury Project Office, and Flight Operations Office; and to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Directorate for Tracking and Data Systems, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to Robert E. Bourdeau and John C. Lindsay, both of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Outstanding Leadership Awards to Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director for Engineering and Development, msc; George B. Graves, Jr., Assistant Director for Information and Control Systems, msc; George M. Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight; and John W. Townsend, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Science at GSFC.

December 31, 1961
NASA established a Management Council to ensure the orderly and timely progress in the manned space flight programs. The Council, composed of senior officials from NASA headquarters, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Manned Spacecraft Center, and chaired by D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, would meet at least once a month to identify and resolve problems as early as possible and to coordinate the interface problems.

December 14, 1994
The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)

July 1, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)

August 21, 1972
Revision of NASA’s FY 1973 operating plan to adhere to $3.2-billion budget limitation would necessitate work reductions in manned space flight, NASA announced. Work reductions at Manned Spacecraft Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Kennedy Space Center would not affect Apollo 17 or Sfeylab launch schedules or safety and quality assurance requirements. Support contractor manpower at msfc would be reduced by 600 to 700 positions. Cost ceilings also would necessitate additional reductions in prime contractor personnel. (NASA Release 72-176; msfc Releases 72-111, 72-113)

April 8, 1972
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 16: While space program had been “worth the money,” it was “just a well that this is the next to last manned mission; the most promise henceforth will be in earth-orbital projects. The Soviets appear to be investing much more heavily in those than the United States.” (W Star, 4/15/72, A4) April 15—16:	Wallops Station held open house as part of joint program of Federal activities. Displays included moon rock and Apollo spacesuit. Television set was available for visitors to watch Apollo 16 launch on April 16. (Wallops Release 72-5) Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 175.9km (109.3-mi) apogee and 166.7-km (103.6-mi) perigee. Insertion into trajectory toward moon was achieved at 2:34 get in spite of minor anomalies—leak in instrument unit (iu) temperature control system’s gaseous nitrogen bottle pressure and malfunction of S—IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) helium regulators, which caused continuous venting. CSM separation from Lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:05 GET and docking with LM was shown on color TV for 18 min. First S-1VB APS burn was near nominal, but because of helium depletion and potential trajectory disturbances, second bum was not made and S-IVB lunar impact operations were terminated. Tracking of stage ended at 27:09 get when IU signal was lost. S-IVB impacted lunar surface at 75:08 get (4:02 pm EST April 19) at point estimated to be 1.8° north latitude and 23.3° west longitude. Impact was detected by seismometers at Apollo 12, 14, and 15 sites. Unexplained light-colored particles streaming from LM close-out panel during docking were reported by crew at 7:18 GET. Young and Duke entered lm, powered up, and found all systems normal. Grasslike particles, shown on cm TV, were later identified as shredded thermal paint, but degraded thermal protection was not expected to affect LM operations. First midcourse correction (MCC—1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Electrophoresis demonstration began on schedule at 25:05 get and appeared to be successful, from crew’s description of reaction of charged particles in liquid. Ultraviolet (uv) photographs of earth from 107 300 km (66 700 mi) and 216 600 km (134 600 mi) were taken as planned. Duke reported “spectacular” view of half earth from 201 000-km (125 000-mi) altitude when he could see sun shining on only half of planet. During MCC-2, made at 30:39 get, services propulsion system (sps) tank pressure anomaly that had occurred earlier in mission was tracked and minor leak in transducer reference cavity was located. Procedures were sent to crew to account for transducer reading. Visual light flash experiment was started about two hours late, at 49:10 get, because of problem in aligning spacecraft. Duke counted 70 white, instantaneous light flashes that left no after-glow, uv photography of earth at 327 800 km (203 700 mi) was completed as planned. Young and Duke entered lm at 53:50 get for two-hour checkout of LM systems. All system checks were nominal. Scientific instrument module (sim) door jettisoned at 69:59 get. csm—lm undocking and separation maneuver was conducted on schedule at 96:14 get. When Young and Duke came from behind moon in lm, Duke told Mission Control his helmet was full of orange juice. Duke’s microphone apparently had become entangled with tube through which he drank juice stored in his spacesuit. “Every time I turn my head I get orange juice. It’s delicious . . . hut it’s better in your mouth than floating around the cockpit. I’ve already had an orange shampoo.” When Mattingly came from behind moon in csm he reported he had not conducted circularization burn because of malfunction in SPS yaw gimbal servo loop. While flight controllers evaluated problem, LM-powered descent-initiate maneuver was delayed, and LM and CSM maneuvered into station-keeping mode prepared to dock or continue landing procedures. Analysis of problem identified malfunction in secondary circuit that would not preclude lunar landing. Second separation maneuver by CSM with RCS burn was performed and LM began descent to moon on 16th revolution. LM Orion touched down in moon’s Descartes region 230 m (755 ft) northwest of planned target point at 104:30 GET (9:23 pm EST April 20). “Wow, down. Old Orion is finally here, Houston. Fantastic,” Duke exclaimed. “All we’ve got to do is jump out the hatch and we’ve got plenty of rocks.” Duke and Young said site was rolling country surrounded by mountains and covered with big boulders. Sunlight was so bright it washed out moon’s colors and made lunar surface appear white. Since LM had stayed in lunar orbit six hours longer than planned it was powered down to conserve electrical power and first extravehicular activity (EVA-1) was rescheduled to follow sleep period. EVA-1 began at 119:05 get (11:59 am est April 21). Young climbed down ladder and stepped onto lunar surface. “Okay, Cayley Plains,” he said, “Apollo 16 is gonna change your image.” Duke followed and astronauts began deploying experiments. Because of problems with LM antenna astronauts’ first steps on moon—for first time—were not beamed back to earth. Once Young and Duke set up portable antenna, TV signal and communication with ground controllers were received clearly on earth. TV pictures showed bleak, pale surface resembling Apollo 15 site, with flat-topped Smoky Mountain to north and Stone Mountain to south. Astronauts said site was rockier, more hilly, and more cratered than previous landing sites. Soil was firm, with rocks scattered over 30% of the surface and small craters covering 70%. During deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) Young tripped over heat flow experiment (hfe) cable, pulling it from connector after Duke had drilled first bore hole. Mission Control later developed way to repair $1.2-million experiment, but procedure was not used because it would have been too complex and too time consuming and included some risk to other ALSEP components. U.S. flag and remaining ALSEP components were deployed successfully and functioned nominally. Crew deployed lrv and found ampere readings for battery No. 2 off-scale low and rear steering inoperable. About 40 min later, after loading, all meters and rear steering operated properly and LRV performed nominally throughout remainder of EVA. Young and Duke explored Flag, Spook, Plum, and Buster Craters and collected 20 kg (44 lbs) of samples, including number of white rocks. One crystalline rock coated with bluish glass appeared to have same texture as anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on Apollo 15 mission; another was pure white. Some were flecked with green and black glass, some were black and gray, and one weighed about 6% kg (14 lbs). EVA-1 terminated at 126:16 get after 7 hrs 11 min 11 sec. After resting inside LM and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:51 get (11:33 am est April 22). They explored Survey Ridge and Stone Mountain and said ridge was pockmarked with small, subdued craters, most about one meter {three feet) wide and some containing smaller craters within main crater. Area around South Ray Crater was strewn with sharp boulders and resembled crater in Nevada where astronauts had trained. Young and Duke turned on lrv TV so viewers could watch them walking and collecting samples high up on slope of Stone Mountain. They reported seeing more of previously discovered white soil under gray surface layers and said soil was very loosely consolidated. While ascending ridge and traversing very rocky terrain, LRV rear wheels failed to respond at full throttle, lrv continued to move, hut front wheels were digging in. Troubleshooting procedures identified mismatch of power mode switching. After change in switch configuration lrv worked properly. Astronauts took core samples and collected rocks that appeared to be volcanic, a greenish rock shaped like a snake’s head, and pure crystalline rocks. EVA was televised in color with lrv camera and was extended 20 min. During crew’s return to LM, 5-cm (2-in) portion of Young’s portable life support system (plss) antenna broke off, causing 15- to 18-db drop in signal strength. EVA—2 ended at 150:14 get after 7 hrs 23 min 26 sec. Third eva began 30 min early at 165:45 get (10:27 am est April 23)	to allow additional time near North Ray Crater and two other stations. Astronauts chipped off samples from enormous basalt rock the size of a house. All planned activities were accomplished, but astronauts had trouble configuring cosmic ray detector for stowage and return to earth, lrv covered 9% km (6 mi) and reached 17 km per hr (11 mph) going down 15° slope. TV coverage was excellent throughout eva. Total EVA-3 time was 5 hrs 40 min 14 sec—bringing total eva time to 20 hrs 14 min 54 sec and total distance traversed to 27.1 km (16.8 mi). While LM was on moon, Mattingly, orbiting moon in Casper, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. He radioed information to geologists at Mission Control to help them plan EVA—3 exploration of Stone Mountain and determine best way to approach North Ray Crater. He located radioactive hot spot on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms south of Apollo 14 landing site and gamma spectrometer identified thorium, potassium, and uranium. Mattingly also discovered, on far side of moon, volcanic lava flows that resembled maria flows and spilled out over northeast rim of crater high in mountains near lunar equator. Two areas resembled volcanic flows around Flagstaff, Ariz., where crew had trained. Many large basins on moon’s far side appeared to be covered with same kind of material that covered area around Apollo 16 site. Young and Duke depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 96.6 kg (213 lbs) of lunar samples at 175:44 get (8:26 pm est April 24). Liftoff was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully and LM crew transferred samples, film, and equipment to CSM. For first time docking was not seen on TV, because LM steerable antenna was inoperable. LM jettison was delayed one day so that astronauts could rest. After LM jettison at 195:12 GET, LM lost altitude and began tumbling, apparently because circuit breaker in attitude-and-translation-controller assembly’s primary guidance and navigation system had accidentally been left open. LM ascent stage remained in lunar orbit and was expected to impact lunar surface in about one year. Boom that carried instrument to measure atmosphere of moon was jettisoned because it would not retract and might have broken off. Orbit-shaping maneuvers were canceled to avoid firing of SPS because of degraded backup SPS thrust vector control. Scientific Subsatellite was launched at 196:14 get (4:56 est April 24)	into lunar orbit with 123.3-km (76.6-mi) apolune and 97.9-km (60.8-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 40-kg (90-lb) satellite 77 cm long and 36 cm in diameter (30 x 14 in) carried three experiments. Subsatellite extended three 1%-m (5-ft) booms, two with magnetometer sensors to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and third for stabilization. Spacecraft also carried particle shadows and boundary layer experiment to collect data on plasmas and solar flares and S-band transponder to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Expected lifetime was 6 to 9 mos—shorter than 12 mos planned because shaping burn to optimize orbit had not been performed—but Subsatellite crashed into moon May 29. Transearth injection maneuver at 200:33 get put CSM on trajectory for earth after 114 hrs 5 min (65 revolutions) in lunar orbit. April 25-27:	Good-quality TV pictures of receding moon from inside CM and of lunar surface from LRV on moon were transmitted between 227 and 229 get. At 243:35 get (3:43 pm est April 25) Mattingly left CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film cassettes from SIM on SM. Mattingly made two trips, during which he observed condition of instruments, reported that insulation paint near rocket nozzle was blistered, and deployed and exposed microbial ecological evaluation device (meed) experiment for 10 min. He reentered CSM after 1 hr 24 min. Scheduled TV press conference began at 268:13 GET and ended at 268:31 GET. Astronauts briefly described moon’s far side, including crater Guyot, which seemed to be so full of material that it overflowed and spilled down side of the crater. CM separated from SM at 290:08 GET, 15 min before entry interface at 121900-m (400 000-ft) altitude. Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and CM splashed down and flipped upside-down in mid-Pacific about 5 km (3 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 2:44 pm EST April 27, after 11-day 2-hr (265-hr 51-min) mission. After flipping spacecraft upright by inflating air bags, astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, left CM and were carried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for postflight examinations. After being declared in excellent condition, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. Young had lost 3% kg (7% lbs); Mattingly, 3 kg (6V2 lbs); and Duke, 2% kg (5% lbs), but all were “euphoric, hungry and thirsty, and walking well.” CM was retrieved and placed in dolly on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 16 objectives: to make selenologi-cal survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Descartes region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for lack of rate feedback in thrust vector control and yaw oscillations that delayed lunar landing, caused revision of lunar surface activities, and necessitated end of mission one day earlier than planned. All anomalies were quickly analyzed and resolved or compensated for by workaround procedures developed to permit mission to continue. Flight crew performance was excellent. Minor errors made by crew were attributed to fatigue and did not preclude mission success. Mission was officially judged a success. Accomplishments included largest payload (34 518 kg; 76100 lbs) placed in lunar orbit, first cosmic ray detector deployed on lunar surface, first use of far-UV camera on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (71 hrs 14 min), longest lunar surface EVA (20 hrs 15 min), and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth (96.6 kg; 213 lbs). In addition, astronauts returned 3793.5 m (12 446 ft) of exposed film used on lunar surface and in lunar orbit. Apollo 16 was 13th Apollo mission to date, 10th manned Apollo mission, and 5th successful manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 15 had been conducted July 26-Aug. 7, 1971. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-64K; NYT, 4/16-30/72; W Post, 4/16-28/72; W Star, 4/16-28/72; B Sun, 4/18/72, Al; AP, New Haven Register, 4/21/72) April 16:	Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko—first Soviet dignitary to accept invitation to watch Apollo launch—described his reaction to launch to press at Kennedy Space Center. “It was beautiful, it was poetry. It was a great impression.” Yevtushenko said he had been even more impressed on his midnight visit to the floodlit launch pad with astronaut David R. Scott, “It’s really a beautiful show, this white tender body of a rocket, supported by the clumsy but sometimes tender hands of the red gantry tower. I absolutely had the feeling of one big brother embracing his sister before a long way, a long road. It was wonderful. Silence, not people. No press. Nothing. The sky, the ground, the rocket. It was so beautiful.” (Witkin, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)

August 15, 1962
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Blacksburg, Va., that dual space flight of vostok iii and iv “was impressive from the standpoint of the whole operation, . . . [but] it does not look like the Russians used any new equipment. I don’t think there was a technical breakthrough. . . .” When asked to comment on U.S. prospects of being first to reach the moon, Dr. von Braun said that manned lunar flights would require rockets bigger than any used either by the U.S. or U.S.S.R. so far. “We have such rockets under development, and the Russians also have to develop a new rocket to do this job .... Therefore I don’t think we have any serious handicaps to overcome so far as the lunar program is involved.”

August 4, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center was seeking industry proposals for procurement of parallel definition studies of the atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space (AMPS) payload, a reusable research facility to be integrated with Spacelab. The proposed 12-mo studies were to define an overall AMPS program with special emphasis on ground- and flight-support systems and subsystems, systems engineering and integration, and ground/orbital operations with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. AMPS, a single laboratory system flown with the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments and observations in atmospheric science, magnetospheric physics, and plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75—172) 4—6 August: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at its 1975 aircraft systems and technology meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., presented the following aerospace awards. Award Recipient (affiliation) Purpose Aircraft Design Walter E. Fellers (Northrop Corp.) For 30 yr of outstanding achievement in design and development of fighter aircraft to meet rapidly changing requirements Octave Chanute Alan L. Bean Jack R. Lousma Dr. Owen K. Garriott (NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) For outstanding contributions to manned space flight and scientific research. Using the most sophisticated instruments ever flown in space, crew performed scores of scientific experiments and observations vastly expanding man’s knowledge and enhancing quality of life on earth 38th Annual Wright Brothers Lecture Henri Ziegler (Airbus, France) Topic: International Cooperation in Aerospace Projects: cooperation between European industries and between Europe and United States (AIAA Release, 22 July 75)

April 17, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)

January 29, 1973
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the statement given out at the nasa FY 1974 budget briefing held Jan. 27: “The budget the President has approved for NASA for FY 1974, like those of other agencies, has been reduced substantially below previous plans and expectations to hold total government spending to the targets set by the President. At the same time, the budget will permit NASA to carry forward a substantial and significant program in space and aeronautics.” The budget provided for continuing the major projects in the schedule announced Jan. 5 and for starting two new projects: Nimbus-G, “another in NASA’s series of experimental earth oriented satellites, which will be directed at environmental pollution and oceanographic measurements, and LAGEOS, a new geodetic satellite for extremely accurate measurements of movements of the earth’s surface.” In addition to reductions in programs announced Jan. 5, the budget required “that we stretch out schedules in a number of ongoing projects. The second Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-b) will be delayed two years, until 1976. This will allow it to carry an additional sensor. Tiros-N, the prototype of a new series of operational meteorological satellites for the National Weather Service, will be delayed by about one year to 1977. “We will also undergo another belt-tightening in NASA. By the end of FY 1974 our civil service complement will be reduced 1880 positions below the FY 1973 end strength approved in the FY 1973 budget. This reduction includes the previously announced reductions related to the termination of our nuclear programs.” Despite a “sharp decrease from the level budget anticipated last year,” Dr. Fletcher was “very pleased with the program content we were able to retain. Clearly from what has been said today and on January 5, we will have to curtail several activities that are of major importance to the nation.” But “we have been able to keep NASA’s main line program essentially intact and each of the programs curtailed will still be done, either at a later date than anticipated or in an alternate way to that planned last year. Although I, personally, would like to see a higher NASA budget, I believe we can capitalize on the belt-tightening required to produce even greater yield for the tax dollar in future years.” NASA was “making substantial efforts to reduce future costs . . . while still giving the nation a strong program in space and aeronautics.” Additionally, a prime object of the space shuttle program was to reduce costs of operating in space. NASA intended to “develop and introduce new design concepts and management approaches which, together with the relaxed weight and size constraints of the Space Shuttle, will result in substantially lower development and operating costs.” NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly discussed personnel cutbacks necessitated by the new budgetary limitations. The total NASA Civil Service reduction of 1880 positions would include a Marshall Space Flight Center cut of 650; Goddard Space Flight Center, 158; Kennedy Space Center, 100; Manned Spacecraft Center, 75; Wallops Station, 17; Lewis Research Center, 660; nasa Hq., 150; and Ames, Langley, and Flight Research Centers, a total of 70. From a peak Civil Service complement of more than 34 000 in 1967, nasa would be reduced to under 25 000 employees by June 1974—a drop of 30%. Total employees from all sources—contract and in-house—would drop from the 1966 peak of 420 000 to about 100 000. (Text; Transcript)

January 4, 1980
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)

June 17, 1977
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)

June 15, 1963
Henry F. Auter, Chief of Electrical Systems Engineering Branch of Test Div., nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, appointed Deputy Manager of msfc Mississippi Test Operations. (Huntsville Times, 6/15/63) Jwne 16-19: Flight of vostok vi with Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova, first woman in space, conducted by U.S.S.R. Launched from Baikonur, vostok vi completed 48 earth orbits in 70 hrs. 50 min.; initial orbital path was 141-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 88.3-min. period. Shortly after entering orbit, Tass reported, Lt. Tereshkova established radio communications with Lt. Col. Bykovsky in vostok v; the two cosmonauts then radioed joint message to Premier Khrushchev. Tass stated flight of vostok vi was being made “to continue the study of the effect of various space-flight factors on the human organism, including a comparative analysis of the impact of these factors on the organisms of a man and a woman; to carry out new medical-biological research and to further improve and perfect the systems of piloted spaceships in conditions of simultaneous flight.” During initial orbit vostok v and vi came within about five km. (three mi.) of each other, apparently closest distance achieved. Cosmonaut Tereshkova, whom Tass described as having never piloted an aircraft, landed bv parachute in Kazakhstan. After she and Cosmonaut Bykovsky landed, Tass issued statement on flight results: “New valuable data have been obtained about the influence of different factors of a space flight of long duration on the organisms of man and woman. Rich factual material necessary for further perfection of the systems of piloted space ships has been obtained.” (Tass, Izvestia, 6/18/63, 1, afss-t Trans.; NYT, 6/17/63-6/20/63, Iff) Jwne 16: Results of six-year experimental study of 25 generations of mice exposed to large radiation doses were reported in New York Times. Conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, study disclosed large doses of radiation over long period of time have an “amazingly small” effect on mice: no evidence of malformations was found, and there appeared “to be no threat to genetic extinction of the species.” (Plumb, NYT, 6/16/63)

February 28, 1962
H. Douglas Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., aerospace technologists at nasa Langley Research Center, awarded $1,000 for invention of Horizon Scanning Active Attitude Orientation of Stabilized Space Vehicles. James S. Albus, engineer at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, awarded $1,000 for his invention of a Digital Solar Aspect Sensor. Invention awards of less than $1,000 were made to following nasa employees: William H. Kinard and Sidney A. Batterson, Langley Research Center; Estin N. Baker, Jess S. W. Davidsen, Ralph L. Mossino, and Gilbert G. Robinson, Ames Research Center; Wilhelm Angele, Marshall Space Flight Center.

May 14, 1973
Employment assistance officers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Lewis Research Center, and Marshall Space Flight Center were providing detailed resumes of employees affected by NASA personnel reductions, NASA announced. Among affected employees were 200 engineers and scientists and 180 technicians at LeRC; 100 space scientists, engineers, and technicians at MSFC,- and 106 GSFC specialists, including electronic, civil, mechanical, and aerospace engineers; physicists; chemists; mathematicians; and electronic and computer technicians, (nasa Release 73-99)

September 8, 1976
NASA announced that the rollout of Orbiter 101 had been set for 17 Sept, at the Rockwell Int’l Space Div. assembly plant at Palmdale, Calif, [see 11 Aug.]. First of NASA’s Shuttle spacecraft olf the assembly line, OV-101 was not yet scheduled for orbital flight: its first job, beginning in Jan. 1977, would be as a test vehicle. It would be launched from a modified Boeing 747 jetliner on which it was riding piggyback, in a series of approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center. It would then be ferried early in 1978 to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground vibration tests. Mated in a test stand to the 46-m external tank as if for an actual launch, Orbiter 101 would undergo extended vibration and stress loading equal to that experienced during a launch phase, when all the main engines—OV-lOl’s three main engines and the two solid-fuel boosters—would produce up to 30 million newtons of thrust. After the testing at MSFC, Orbiter 101 would be-returned to Calif, to be prepared for space flight; Orbiter 102 would be used in initial orbital flights from Kennedy Space Center, scheduled for 1979. Under construction since June 1974, the Orbiter’s main parts came from various contractors: crew module and aft fuselage from Rockwell at Palmdale, mid fuselage (cargo bay) from General Dynamics in San Diego, wings from Grumman Aerospace in N.Y., and tail assembly from Fairchild Republic in N.Y. Orbiter’s three main engines (each providing 211 500 kg of thrust at launch) were constructed by Rockwell’s Rock-etdyne Div. under contract to MSFC. (NASA Release 76-143; Marshall Star, 8 Sept 76, 1)

February 28, 1962
nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly 4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality. During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight produced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr. Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight, compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More newspapers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not only the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared to let our own people and the rest of the world see the entire operation from beginning to end.”

April 12, 1973
A series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches at White Sands Missile Range during the manned Skylab 2 mission scheduled for May would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment used in two experiments on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), Marshall Space Flight Center announced, calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions. The rockets would acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with. Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that aboard the atm. Black Brant VCs would be used for all the launches. Taking part in the program, managed by MSFC, were Goddard Space Flight Center, Ames Research Center, the Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (msfc Release 73-42)

April 3, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced establishment of Sortie Can Task Team to plan project definition phase for sortie can—low-cost, space shuttle payload carrier for manned research and applications studies in earth orbit. Team would be managed by Fred E. Vreuls, with Hans R. Palaora as chief engineer, (msfc Release 72-41) Marshall Space Flight Center announced request for proposals for nine-month space tug operations and payload support study. Contractor selected would define flight operations to be conducted by tug after deployment from space shuttle and define interface between tug and automated payload or satellite that tug was delivering or returning. Proposals were due by April 10. (msfc Release 72-39)

February 4, 1974
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 2 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1975 NASA budget plan for new authorization of $3,247 billion and spending of $3,273 billion, although a “constrained budget,” would carry forward the programs planned in FY 1974. Goals and major programs were the same, with three new projects in space science and applications, but the space shuttle had been slipped four to six months. NASA’s FY 1974 budget had “reflected a sharp temporary reduction, because of Government-wide fiscal problems . . . , below the $3.4 billion level previously planned as the long-term level.” Increases in FY 1975 and later years were therefore “in order to approach again the level required to maintain . . . advances in space and aeronautics for the rest of the decade.” The FY 1975 increase of “about $100 million,” however, was less than required to return to NASA’s complete program as planned, and adjustments had been necessary. Principally, the first manned orbital flight of the shuttle was rescheduled to the second quarter of 1979, instead of the end of 1978, but NASA had a “firm commitment now” that there would be no more slips for budgetary reasons, and none was expected for technical reasons. NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly said at the briefing the stretchout was expected to increase shuttle costs about $50 million “in 1971 dollars.” The $800 million requested for the shuttle was $89 million less than NASA had submitted to the Office of Management and Budget. In the three new space flight projects, Pioneer Venus had top scientific priority as the next step in planetary exploration. Two missions launched in 1978 would study the Venus atmosphere for a better understanding of that planet and of the earth’s atmosphere, meteorology, and climatology. In the second new start, seasat, an experimental applications satellite, would measure ocean characteristics to aid scientific understanding of ocean dynamics and determine if a forecasting system could be developed, seasat-a was to be launched in 1978. The third start, the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm), would launch an Explorer satellite in 1977 to make thermal measurements of the earth’s surface to help find mineral resources and potential geothermal energy sources and to discriminate rock structures for planning civil works such as highways. NASA was asking $6 million to build the world’s first large infrared telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary research to complement planetary space flights, especially to provide data for the 1977 launch of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. Another new thrust, still in the planning stage, was the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , to return the large amounts of data expected from the shuttle in the 1980s and permit phase-out of some tracking stations. NASA would not develop the spacecraft for the TDRSS but would lease satellite services from a private organization, beginning in CY1979. Analysis of data from the Skylab missions that were ending with the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4 would continue for many years. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joint engineering and training activities with the U.S.S.R. were on schedule. All shuttle hardware prime contractors and most subcontractors had been selected, and the Dept, of Defense tentatively planned to modify an existing upper stage for use as an interim space tug with, the shuttle. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, was still working well, exceeding its design life by more than six months. ERTS-b, previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to 1975. A number of nasa and 11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be continued. In space astronomy, oso-i was scheduled for 1975 and the heAo series would be resumed, with launches planned for 1977, 1978, and 1979. Astronautics programs would continue to develop technology to improve fuel economy, reduce noise, and improve performance of U.S.-built civil transport aircraft. nasa’s Civil Service employment was to be stabilized at the end of FY 1974 levels except for a further reduction of 354 persons at Marshall Space Flight Center following completion of Skylab. NASA’s FY 1975 total would be 24 616, about 2200 less than in FY 1973 and 354 less than in FY 1974. Support service contractors at the Centers had reductions planned at about the same level, the 25 000 FY 1973 total dropping to 24 000 in FY 1974 and to 22 000 in FY 1975. (Text; NASA, FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material)

February 20, 1973
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket—second in a series of two—from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 52.5-km (32.6-mi) altitude. The objectives were to measure the ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption for the evaluation of the Nimbus 4 (meteorological satellite launched April 8, 1970) backscatter uv experiment, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The rocket was launched during a Nimbus 4 overpass. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The first rocket in this series was launched Feb. 13. (nasa Rpt srl) February 21:	The emergency team formed by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Navy’s Fleet Weather Facility to aid Jacques-Yves Cousteau’s crippled research vessel Calypso [see Feb. 15] had been disbanded, NASA announced. The Calypso had safely navigated the dangerous Drake Passage between Antarctica and the Ushuaia port, Argentina, using weather and ice information supplied by Ats 3 satellite. Satellite photos had been processed at Goddard Space Flight Center, turned over to fwf, and analyzed and information transmitted to Cousteau aboard the Calypso, (nasa Release 73-33)

May 20, 1976
NASA announced delivery of experiment hardware for the first of three High Energy Astronomy Observatories (HEAO) to the prime contractor, TRW Systems of Redondo Beach, Calif. The hardware consisted of 4 experiments to survey and map x-ray sources during the 6-mo mission of HEAO-A in 1977. A Naval Research Laboratory experiment (Dr. Herbert Friedman, principal investigator) would use a large-area survey instrument to locate x-ray sources and obtain data for studying the physics and evolution of energy sources. An experiment built by Goddard Space Flight Center with assistance from the Calif. Institute of Technology would measure emissions and absorptions of diffuse x-rays and correlate results with radio and visible light ray emission; principal investigators were GSFC’s Dr. Elihu Boldt and Caltech’s Dr. Gordon Garmire. A third experiment, for the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and MIT, was a scanning modulation collimator to determine precise celestial positions of selected x-ray sources and investigate their size and structure; principal investigators were SAO’s Dr. Herbert Gursky and MIT’s Dr. Hale Bradt. The fourth experiment, for the University of Calif, at San Diego and MIT, would determine the position, spectrum, time variations, intensity, and other properties of hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays; principal investigators were UCSD’s Dr. Laurence Peterson and MIT’s Dr. Walter Lewin. Data gathered by the HEAO missions could lead to new theories about energy production and high-density nuclear matter. Marshall Space Flight Center, which would manage HEAO for the Office of Space Science, directed TRW in designing and building the observatories and integrating and testing the overall system, including the experiments. (NASA Release 76-100; MSFC Release 76-86)

May 9, 1986
Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that John W. Thomas, Spacelab Program Officer Manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to assume management responsibility for the Solid Rocket Motor redesign team at the Marshall Space Flight Center on May 12, 1986. The Space Shuttle Challenger accident investigation uncovered several deficiencies in the design of the solid rocket motor joint. An independent group of senior experts would also be involved in all phases of the program; they would report to NASA Administrators and review and integrate the findings and recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8658)

April 23, 1963
Saturn project engineers James B. Bramlet and Robert E. Lindstrom, of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Saturn Systems Office, said at aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas that nasa heavy launch vehicle programs are on tight schedules but are “within the bounds of our capabilities .... [and can meet requirement for a] manned lunar landing in this decade.” (Huntsville Times, 4/23/63)

July 31, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a number of activities, centered on the Space Shuttle, including testing, procurement, and completion of facilities. —During July, MSFC awarded 14 contracts each of which totaled more than $50 000. (MSFC Release 76-155) —MSFC completed preparation of a 2.8% scale model of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) that would be tested in Ames Research Center wind tunnels (the 2 supersonic facilities and the 4.2m transonic facility). MSFC had used a 0.5% scale model in its smaller trisonic (over mach 3) wirid tunnel to develop preliminary environmental data; the smaller tunnel ft as cheaper to operate, and a smaller model was cheaper to alter. Data from the ARC tests would be use in SRB component vibration and acoustic design and in establishing qualification-test criteria, and finally for generation of data on the acoustic environment for reentry of an actual full-scale SRB. (MSFC Release 76-120) —Completing the first phase of acoustic testing that used scale models of the Space Shuttle with models of the Kennedy Space Center launch pad, MSFC announced that it had begun another test program using a scale model of the Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launch pad and a Shuttle model having working main engines and solid-fuel rocket boosters to the same scale. The Vandenberg launch pad differed from that at KSC, but MSFC said that much of the information obtained since Aug. 1974 in 150 test firings to evaluate different acoustic methods for the KSC launch pad would be useful in suppressing noise at the Vandenberg site. The tests were made to determine the best way to control noise and ignition overpressure when Shuttle engines and boosters were ignited at launch; uncontrolled pressures and acoustics could damage the Shuttle or its payload. Tests were scheduled for completion in Dec. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-117) —MSFC announced award of a $247 363 contract to Rockwell’s Space Div. for a 12-mo study of Shuttle booster and external tank options that could reduce cost per flight and increase payload weight capability. (MSFC Release 76-118) —MSFC announced that the first flight-configuration nozzle for the Shuttle main engine under development by Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Div. had been completed and successfully proof-tested. Completion of the nozzle represented a significant design and manufacturing achievement; the nozzle consisted of 1080 precisely formed tapering tubes brazed to a shell and stiffened by bands. It was about 3m tall and 2.7m in diameter, weighing about 454 kg. Attached to the main combustion chamber of the main engine, the nozzle would allow exhaust gases to expand to obtain maximum thrust, contributing to highly efficient burn. (MSFC Release 76-128) —MSFC announced completion of tests conducted with KSC to determine the effects of salty and brackish water on materials used in elements of the Space Shuttle. Recovery of 2 Shuttle boosters after each launch would require towing the boosters in the salty Atlantic Ocean and into the brackish waters of a Fla. river. The studies used an integrated test bed constructed from the same materials and covered with the same sealants and paints planned for use on flight rockets, carrying samples of electrical and electronic equipment and hydraulic systems being considered for Shuttle use. The test bed, shipped to KSC, was put into the ocean for 7 days and in the Banana River for 3 days, at a depth that closely simulated actual booster-recovery conditions. Returned to MSFC, the test bed had been subjected to study by engineers and technicians to discover the effects of the ocean and river environments, and to look for corrosion or marine biological growth. After this study, the refurbished test bed would be used again for tests in the ocean by KSC personnel. (MSFC Release 76-131) —MSFC announced it had requested bids from industry on development of range-safety receivers for the Space Shuttle. Each Shuttle’s 2 booster solid rockets would carry 2 receivers and the external tank 1, a total of 5 for each launch. The receivers would be part of a safety system that would let the range safety officer destroy the vehicle in case of a malfunction at launch. NASA planned to reuse the receivers up to 20 times, recovering and returning the equipment to the manufacturer for testing before it was shipped to the assembly contractor for reuse. (MSFC Release 76-132) —MSFC announced that assembly of the first Space Shuttle external tank had begun at the Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. Assembly should be completed and the tank delivered to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Miss., in mid-1977 for use in the test program for the main propulsion engine. The tests would use the tank, three Shuttle main engines, and other components in actual firings to verify the design and operation of the main propulsion system. The program would consist of 15 test firings, 11 at or near the full 8-min duration. (MSFC Release 76-137) —MSFC announced preparations for the arrival of the first Space Shuttle orbiter in mid-July for a series of tests at MSFC’s dynamic test facility. The orbiter would arrive at the Redstone airfield in 1978 atop a modified Boeing 747 and be off-loaded by KSC personnel. On the ground, the orbiter would become the responsibility of MSFC personnel, who would move it to the test facility and mate it with the rest of the Space Shuttle elements for vibration tests. This would be the first time all elements of the Shuttle were united. Tests were scheduled to run from spring to winter of 1978. (MSFC Release 76-141) —MSFC announced completion of tests on minitank 5, a small aluminum tank coated with a spray insulation that would be used to protect the Space Shuttle’s external tank and its highly volatile liquid hydrogen contents from engine exhaust or aerodynamic heat. This was the fifth of 13 such tanks to be tested at MSFC. The tests were to determine the effectiveness of Martin Marietta’s foam insulation against stress encountered during Shuttle launch and space flight. Besides acoustic and vacuum tests, the minitanks would undergo pressure, boiloff, and holding tests with liquid hydrogen; the hold test would determine the effect of a 7-hr idle period on a full tank’s insulation system. The test period of 7 hr was estimated to be the longest time a fueled Shuttle would have to wait on a launch pad before liftoff. %ISFC Release 76-142) —MSFC announced completion^, the only totally new structure built exclusively for testing the Space Shuttle external tank: the pneumatic test facility at Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans, which would accommodate the tank measuring 47 m long (more than half the length of a football field) and 8.4 m in diameter. Empty, the tank would weigh about 34 000 kg. The pneumatic facility would be used for proof tests and leak tests of the external tank’s liquid hydrogen tank; the proof test would pressurize the tank with gaseous nitrogen and apply a series of external loads with 9 hydraulic cylinders. The leak test would verify that no out-of-specification leaks existed. Martin Marietta Aerospace was prime contractor at Michoud for external tank production. (MSFC Release 76-143)

December 10, 1963
Hook-up of three global satellite tracking networks into a single central console at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was announced. Console allows combinations of operators at 51 communications points around the world in the satellite tracking and data acquisition network, the manned space flight tracking network, and the deep space instrumentation facilities. (AP, NTT, 12/11/63)

April 24, 1972
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)

February 6, 1964
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced major reorganization. KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said objectives of reorganization were to: (1) realign Apollo program management functions in accordance with concept of NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller that these functions be standardized at NASA Hq. and the three manned space flight centers; (2) separate and strengthen administrative and technical support functions; and (3) reduce number of offices reporting to Dr. Debus and delegate more authority and responsibility to Assistant Directors. Under realignment there were five Assistant Directors, with authority to act for Center Director within their areas of responsibility: Program Management, Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Support Operations, and Instrumentation. Program Management was divided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and the Apollo Program Management Office, which was aligned as counterpart organization with Apollo program offices in NASA Hq. and the other manned') space flight centers (Manned Spacecraft Center and Marshall Space Flight Center). Unaffected by the change were Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five staff offices. New NASA Hq. office, NASA Regional Inspections, was attached to KSC. msc’s Preflight Operations Div. was renamed msc Florida Operations but its basic relationship to KSC was unchanged. Other NASA Center elements attached to KSC, such as GSFC Field Projects Branch, remained unchanged, (ksc Release.10-64)

June 3, 1963
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)

July 26, 1972
Group of 60 Civil Air Patrol cadets from 32 states and Puerto Rico arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center for week-long space flight orientation course. Cadets would attend lectures on NASA programs, tour msfc laboratories, and visit Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (msfc Release 72-92)

June 30, 1975
Development of the Spacelab by the European Space Agency for NASA’s Space Shuttle continued. An annual Spacelab status review 4—5 June attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Roy Gibson, ESA Director General, established schedule milestones, determined readiness for the preliminary design review, and discussed arrangements for the first Spacelab flight. They also discussed plans for the instrumentpointing system and the first Spacelab payload, follow-on Spacelab procurement by NASA, and terms and conditions for use of the Space Shuttle—Spacelab system. On 6 June, the recommendations of 10 teams—which had met at Marshall Space Flight Center in May to discuss Spacelab systems, avionics, structures, environmental control and life support, software, test and integration, and payload operations and accommodations—were presented to the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight for concurrence. At the same time ESA was preparing similar recommendations at the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC). Beginning on 9 June, combined NASA—ESA teams met in Noordwijk to consider the 1772 review-item discrepancies prepared by both agencies and, after 2.5 days, had processed all of them. (Spacelab Newsletter 75—2, 3 July 75)

January 29, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $1,356,000 contract to Blaw-Knox Co. for design and fabrication of three 85-ft.-diameter dish-shaped antennas to be used in manned space flight tracking network for Project Apollo lunar mission, (gsfc Release G-4-64)

October 23, 1974
The satellite relay system planned for the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz space mission was tested by Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center communications engineers. Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May) and the Apollo S-band, steerable, high-gain antenna were tested together for the transmission of voice, television, and simulated telemettry data in preparation for the first spacecraft-to-satellite-to-ground routing employed in the manned space flight program. Signals were transmitted between JSC and the ground station in Rosman, N.C., via the Ats 6 in a simulation of mission conditions, (jsc Release 74-264; jsc Roundup, 8 Nov 74)

July 18, 1994
The impact of a huge Fragment G, a two-mile-wide piece of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, was as great as 6 million megatons of TNT when it hit Jupiter early July 18, according to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. A similar piece hit late July 18, and a further piece was expected on July 20. In contrast the total energy that could be created on Earth with atomic bombs was 10,000 megatons. The comet left a scar larger than Earth's diameter on Jupiter's gaseous surface. Scientists began to study the long-term effects on Jupiter of the comet's impact. The media also focused on the work of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in tracking developments on Jupiter and the excellent view of Jupiter for astronomers at the South Pole. In the final stage of the comet barrage that ended late July 21, four large comet fragments hit Jupiter, creating tremendous fireworks for watching astronomers. Furthermore, as a result of the scars made by the fragments, white hot gases from the planet's interior erupted through the holes in great fireballs. In measuring the dazzling light produced, astronomers believed they had detected hydrogen sulfide, which could contribute to Jupiter's colors. The potential dangers associated with the comet collision with Jupiter led the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology to propose legislation that, if passed, would direct NASA to submit a plan by February 1995 for a 10-year program to catalog "all comets and asteroids that are greater than one kilometer in diameter" traveling along orbits that intersect that of the Earth. (LA Times, Jul 18/94; C Trib, Jul 18/94; LA Times, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; W Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; B Sun, Jul 19/94; C Trib, Jul 19/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; W Times, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 20/94; B Sun, Jul 20/94; CSM, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; P Inq, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; C Trib, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 22/94; NY Times, Jul 22/94; W Post, Jul 22/94; B Sun, Jul 22/94; USA Today, Jul 22/94; W Times, Jul 22/94; Time, Jul 25/94; LA Times, Jul 26/94; NY Times, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 26/94; CSM, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Aug 1/94)

February 3, 1976
Tests on the Lageos—a geophysical research satellite expected to remain in orbit several million years—concluded at Goddard Space Flight Center at the end of Jan., NASA announced, and the satellite would be shipped to the Western Test Range in California for launch in late April. Called the “cosmic golfball” because of its 426 special reflectors designed to return laser pulses to their exact point of origin on the earth, Lageos would provide a stable point in the sky to permit measurement of the relative locations of participating ground stations within a few centimeters; these measurements would provide scientists with models of earth’s crustal motion, useful in predicting earthquakes. Manager of the Lageos project would be the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 76-17)

September 25, 1998
NASA awarded its combined space operations contract to Lockheed Martin, covering operations at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida; Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama; and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The contract, worth US$1.9 billion for the first five years, with a five-year renewal worth an additional US$1.5 billion, covered the cost of directing, monitoring, and downloading data from spacecraft. NASA estimated that the contract, consolidating work previously done under 17 separate contracts, would save US$1.4 billion over 10 years.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Space Operations Co. Awarded Contract To Manage NASA’s Space Operations,” contract announcement c98-p, 25 September 1998; Peter Behr, “Lockheed Team Wins NASA Contract; $3.4 Billion Big Beats Out Boeing,” Washington Post, 26 September 1998; Anna Wilde Mathews, “Lockheed Group Wins NASA Pact for $3.44 Billion,” Wall Street Journal, 28 September 1998.)

April 2, 1963
Newly created nasa Management Advisory Committee on Manned Space Flight visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Chairman of committee was Dr. Marvin J. Kelley, retired President and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories; other members were Dr. Hendrick W. Bode, James McCormack, Dr. Hector R. Skifter, and Dr. Arthur E. Raymond. (Huntsville Times, 4/4/63)

November 29, 1985
30 p.m. they had done in four hours a job given them to complete in five. NASA referred to the first activity as ACCESS (assembly concept for construction of erectable space structures), researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center explained, and the second as EASE (experimental assembly of structures in extravehicular activity). Together they were the first flight demonstration of construction of large space structures, so called because they were distinguished by different assembly methods and physical characteristics. The astronauts used no tools in the construction, rather they snapped together prefabricated components to form the EASE/ACCESS structures. EASE/ACCESS should provide NASA with valuable on-orbit construction experience as well as a comparison of assembly rates and techniques used in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tank tests. The activity should also help evaluate potential assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques for the proposed space station and identify ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. TV views at NASA Headquarters showed the astronauts trading places twice during their work and appearing in almost complete control of a job that had never been done before in space. Ross had the only complaint, saying his gloved hands were sweating and that he was using too much oxygen. When the two had finished assembling the six required pyramids, astronaut David Leetsma at mission control told them to take a break. "I'd be willing to do at least one more," Ross replied. "It feels good to do some good hard work." The two then proceeded to begin work again. Spring once hit his feet against the tower, and Ross by mistake hit a switch with his hand that turned on an outside light, the only "accidents" that occurred during the exercise, although they triggered a warning from Atlantis's commander Brewster Shaw, Jr. "You guys are going great but just remember to be careful. The way that thing shakes up there, it's not going to be easy to chase anything down if it breaks loose," he cautioned. (WPost, Nov 30/85, A1; Marshall Space Flight Center Release 85-60)

April 24, 1972
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton told annual meeting of shareholders in Van Nuys, Calif., that he expected higher net earnings on lower sales volume in 1972. He predicted that Lockheed would receive substantial orders for L—1011 TriStar transport in coming years. (Pearlstine, WSJ, 5/2/72, 17; Lockheed pio) May 3—11:	Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space met to plan program for parent Committee. Italian space expert Franco Fiorio asked 28 members present if scientists from smaller countries would be allowed to stand in line and buy tickets to board Soviet or U.S. manned space laboratory. Dr. Fernando Mendonca of Brazil said advances in space technology were providing data that could help speed economic development in poorer countries but U.N. itself had neither technical manpower nor finances to assist these countries in using data. During debate over remote sensing by satellite, Sweden tried to open discussion of what U.N. could do to protect economic interests of small nonspace power from possible commercial exploitation by countries collecting data from satellites. Only Argentina supported Swedish view; majority, including U.S. and U.S.S.R., said such discussions were premature. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, renewed U.S. pledge that data from satellites would be shared with other countries without discrimination. All members of Subcommittee were invited by NASA to inspect data processing center at Goddard Space Flight Center but only six countries accepted. (Teltsch, NYT, 5/14/72, 15) May 4:	Areas ozone sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 60-km (37.3-mi) altitude to measure performance of new parachute deployment technique and measure payload pendulation below parachute. Technique provided greater parachute opening shock and was expected to reduce parachute fouling experienced with older techniques. Parachute and payload performed nominally and experimental objectives were met. (nasa proj off)

June 30, 1963
Based on net value of awards, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded almost one third of nasa’s FY 1963 contracts to industry ($949.8 million). Second highest was Manned Spacecraft Center ($737.2 million), followed by Western Operations Office ($412.3 million) and Goddard Space Flight Center ($303.5 million). (M&R, 1/20/64, 9)

May 22, 1975
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)

November 12, 1972
GTE International, Inc., subsidiary of General Electronics Corp., announced it had received contract valued at about $4 million from Western Union International, Inc., for construction of satellite communications earth station in People’s Republic of China. Station would be ground link for first direct communications satellite between China and Europe, (gte Release) Primary objective of Explorer 48 was to measure spatial and energy distribution of primary galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation— within sas program to make investigations of celestial sphere from above earth’s atmosphere and search for sources inside and outside our galaxy, radiating in x-ray, gamma ray, ultraviolet, infrared, and other regions of electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma ray telescope was first satellite version of evolution of digitized spark-chamber telescopes that had begun with balloon-borne instruments. Advanced detector could establish gamma ray event and reject events that simpler instruments might identify erroneously. It could study gamma rays exceeding 20 mev in energy, in region of electromagnetic spectrum able to penetrate galactic and extragalactic matter. On Nov. 19 half of experiment’s high-voltage supplies were turned on and experiment was pointed toward earth. Real-time data acquisition indicated proper functioning of experiment, with detection of earth albedo gamma rays. Remaining high-voltage power was turned on Nov. 27. Experiment and spacecraft control section were functioning normally. Spacecraft was cylinder 59 cm in diameter and 51 cm high (23-in dia by 20). When deployed, four solar paddles—27 cm wide and 135 cm long (10.5 by 53 in)—provided raw power. Unique was separate development of spacecraft control section and experiment package, which had permitted flexible concurrent development of experiments and minimized costs by fabrication of standardized control section. NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team was responsible for cost-reimbursable launch preparation. Goddard Space Flight Center and Applied Physics Laboratory crew performed ground test and checkout. Satellite was designed and built at gsfc, which managed project. Langley Research Center managed Scout. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72—204; gsfc proj off) November 16:	Briefing on results of low-cost-design concept completed by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. under NASA contract was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. Study had been conducted under NASA Low Cost Evaluation Project begun in May by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Information from panels was to be correlated and incorporated into program planning and execution. (msfc Release 72-147)

December 4, 1973
Wendell S. Smith, Head of the Experiment Management Office of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, died in Baltimore, Md., of cancer at age 38. He had joined nasa in 1959 and had worked on early investigations of the meteorology of the upper atmosphere. In early 1973 he had headed a NASA group in a cooperative experiment with Soviet scientists to verify corresponding satellite measurements. (W Star-News, 12/16/73, C7) December 14:	A nasa C-45 aircraft equipped as a remote-sensing platform flew from Redstone Arsenal Airstrip, Ala., on the first flight in a series to study geological phenomena and water quality. The aircraft, obtained free from the Army and equipped by Marshall Space Flight Center with multispectral cameras and other fittings, covered three sites in Alabama with high- and low-altitude multispectral photography. The aircraft later would be used to investigate water resources, agriculture, land resources, ecology, and archaeology. It would also support the Earth Resources Technology Satellite and the Skylab earth resources experiment package. A thermal scanner would be added to the aircraft’s equipment early in 1974. (msfc Release 73-201)

August 1, 1985
NASA announced that it had completed with the Italian National Research Council's National Space Plan Office (PSN/CNR) selection of U.S. and Italian principal investigators for the cooperative tethered satellite system (TSS), which NASA had scheduled for a first flight in 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle. The system, using the Space Shuttle as a base of operation, would provide a unique reuseable facility remote from the orbiter for space science investigations in the upper atmosphere and in plasma-electrodynamic interactions. 101 The overall objectives of the TSS program were to demonstrate the successful operation of a tethered satellite, perform the initial electrodynamic science and plasma investigations, and develop a reusable facility capable of supporting a broad range of electrodynamic experiments in the ionosphere. On the first TSS mission, a NASA-supplied deployer mechanism would send the Italian-developed and -built satellite upward from the Space Shuttle orbiter to a distance of as much as 12 miles. The motion of the conducting tether across geomagnetic field lines would generate several thousand volts of energy to provide a broad range of electrical operating conditions. Researchers could also use the overall system to artifically generate and study field-aligned currents and associated plasma effects. On the second TSS mission, the satellite would be at the end of a nonconducting tether at 62 miles in the earth's atmosphere, an area previously explored only sporadically, mainly with sounding rocket payloads. The tethered satellite would permit investigation of the region on a global scale over several days. The TSS-3 mission would be a follow-up to the TSS-1 electrodynamics mission, with deployment from either the Space Shuttle or the proposed space station. A memorandum of understanding signed in 1984 by NASA and PSN/CNR established the TSS program. NASA's Marshall Space flight Center had responsibility for project implementation. NASA's office of space science and applications selected Peter Banks, Stanford University (Shuttle Tether Electrodynamic Tether System); Robert Estes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation of Electromagnetic Emissions by the Tether); Gordon Gullahorn, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation and Measurement of Dynamic Noise in Tethered Observatory Satellite Systems); Konstantinos Papadopoulos, Science Applications, Inc. (Theory and Modeling of the Tether); and Nobie Stone, Marshall Space Flight Center (Research on Orbital Flight Plasma-Electrodynamics). PSN/CNR selected Silvio Bergemaschi, Instituto Meccanica, Padova University (A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of TSS Dynamics); Marino Dobrowolny, Instituto Fisica Spazio (Research on Electrodynamics Tether Effects); and Franco Mariana, University of Rome (Magnetic Field Experiment for the TSS Missions). (NASA Release 85-115)

May 21, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that experiment teams for the Spacelab 3 mission had begun analysis of the 250 billion bits of data obtained during the mission, and preliminary results were excellent. In the area of materials science, two of the three experiment teams had begun to examine crystals grown during Spacelab 3. In one experiment, a mercury iodide crystal the size of a sugar cube grew from a seed crystal in the vapor crystal growth system; via the vapor transport technique, the crystal grew at a carefully controlled rate over a 104-hour period. Researchers would remove the crystal from the glass ampoule within the next few weeks for analysis to determine its quality and properties as an X-ray and gamma-ray detector for applications in scientific research, medicine, and industry. Two fluid mechanics experiments ended successfully; the geophysical fluid flow cell experiment completed more than 102 hours of experiments designed to provide information for the first time on convention in spherical rotating shells with a radial gravity field. Co-investigator Dr. Fred Leslie said of the experiment, "The films of one of the Jovian (Jupiter) scenarios indicated the formation of a 'Red Spofi similar to that present on Jupiter. This data should be useful to meteorologists and astrophysicists in modelling the large-scale circulations of fluids under the influence of rotation, gravity, and convection." Three atmospheric and astronomical observations were completed during the Spacelab 3 flight. The atmospheric trace molecules spectroscopy experiment operated for 50 hours providing 19 sequences of more than 150 independent atmospheric spectrally resolved measurements. Researchers would use these to analyze the earth's atmospheric composition chemically and physically for the stratosphere and mesosphere between 10 and 150 km. The information also would provide extremely detailed measurements of the minor and trace components of the atmosphere, which was crucial to understanding the evolution of earth's climate, and would aid in the analysis of pollution causes and effects. The experiment also provided the first high-resolution infrared spectrum of the sun, which indicated some surprising evidence about its molecular constituents. Four of the six life sciences experiments completed successfully were part of the Ames Research Center's life sciences payload. The research animal holding facilities proved a suitable animal habitat in which the two squirrel monkeys and 24 rats adjusted to spaceflight and demonstrated their suitability for research in orbit. One primate apparently developed symptoms of space adaptation syndrome but recovered in a manner analogous to human experience. "In addition to the successful results from each of these experiments," said Dr. George Fichtl, Spacelab 3 mission scientist at Marshall Space Flight Center, "the overall success of the mission has proven the importance of the Spacelab concept. During this mission, we have proven that a microgravity environment is an important environment for the growth of crystals, the study of fluid mechanics, and measurement of the effect man is having on this environment. We have also proven the need for man's presence in performing these tasks." (MSFC Release 85-28)

December 30, 1973
U.S.S.R. Chief Marshal of Aviation Konstantin A. Vershinin died at the age of 74 after a long illness. Vershinin had directed Soviet military aviation during World War II. After the war he had commanded the antiaircraft defense forces and had been Chief of the Air Force and U.S.S.R. Deputy Minister of Defense. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 1/4/74, VI; NYT, 1/3/74, 36) During December:	NASA employee retirements totaled 215 during the month, including 37 at Headquarters, 58 at Marshall Space Flight Center, 50 at Langley Research Center, 22 each at Goddard Space Flight Center and Johnson Space Center, 18 at Kennedy Space Center, and 8 at Lewis Research Center. Among retirees were Dr. Homer E. Newell [see Dec. 26], nasa Associate Administrator; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth [see Dec. 28], NASA Director of Key Personnel Development; Vincent L. Johnson [see Dec. 26], Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences; Dr. Charles A. Berry [see Dec. 21], nasa Director of Life Sciences; General Counsel Arthur D. Holzmann; William T. O’Bryant, Director of Lunar Programs in the Office of Space Science; C. Dixon Ashworth, Manager of the Astronomy and Solar Observatory Programs; Director Adelbert 0. Tischler of the Low Cost Systems Office; and Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, Research Council Chief in the Office of Science and Technology, (nasa Off Personnel; nasa Off Comptroller)

March 22, 1985
NASA announced that the third phase of the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) magnetotail probe, a U.S., West German, and United Kingdom scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, was underway. Gilber Ousley, AMPTE project manager of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said that the first AMPTE magnetotail release of barium occurred March 21 at 4:20 a.m., EST and that the release conditions had been well within established criteria. The German ion release module spacecraft immediately detected a magnetic field change as expected. The satellite would make one additional release of barium and two of lithium (the tracers) into the earth's magnetotail. The U.S. satellite would analyze the charged-particle space environment around the magnetotail to determine the effects on the environment of the injected elements. Ousley also said that all ground stations except the one in Argentina reported clear weather and that the observatory at Kitt Peak, Arizona, reported visual sighting with the naked eye for about 20 minutes. The airborne NASA Convair 990 and Argentine Boeing 707 observation aircraft had recorded the event. The first phase of the AMPTE project had consisted of lithium releases September 11 and 20, 1984, into solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Lima, Peru. Results of the experiment indicated that the artificial comet was "eroded" by the solar wind much faster than previously anticipated. The only scheduled AMPTE experiment remaining after the March-April releases was formation July 13 or 14, 1985, of another artificial comet on the opposite flank of the magnetosphere from the December experiment. All releases had to satisfy several criteria, including clear voice communications between the U.S. AMPTE science data center located at Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Lab and the German Space Operations Center in West Germany, where German scientists gathered to view the data. The latter sent the command for release through their center and NASA's Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the U.S. portion of AMPTE for NASA's office of space science and applications; Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab under contract to NASA had built the U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release 85-42) July II: Dr. Mario Acuna, project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), announced that the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) project, an international scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, would produce on July 18 or 20 at midnight EDT the world's second artificial comet. In the fourth and final phase of the project, a West German satellite would release at 70,000	miles above earth two barium canisters into the solar wind on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere. The release would create an artificial comet expected to be visible in the southwestern United States to the unaided eye for approximately four minutes. In the first phase of the AMPTE project, the West German satellite released September 1984 lithium into the solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere. Preliminary results of that experiment indicated that less than 1% of the solar wind gained access to the magnetosphere under the conditions in which the releases took place. In the second phase, the German satellite created on December 27, 1984, a barium cloud on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Peru. Data from the artificial comet indicated that the solar wind eroded it much faster than scientists had anticipated. Releases on March 21 and May 13, 1985, of barium and lithium into the earth's magnetotail region ended the third phase of the AMPTE experiments. Acuna said of those releases, "Although, disappointingly, no tracer ions were detected by the U.S. satellite (Charge Composition Explorer) located inside the magnetosphere, this fact is in itself a very significant result. It implies that fundamental revisions to our current models of the magnetosphere need to be made to account for these negative observations." (NASA Release 85-105)

February 18, 1972
Group of 49 industrialists and educators from England, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, France, Italy, Holland, and Belgium visited Kennedy Space Center during week-long orientation arranged by London Financial Times. Group also visited NASA Hq., Goddard Space Flight Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Manned Spacecraft Center. (ksc Release 40-72)

December 31, 1964
NASA announced that its Office of Technology Utilization had issued Technical Briefs describing two instruments for measuring the rates of human respiration and heartbeat. The devices were a pneumotachometer (Tech Brief 64-10259) which would measure respiration rates per minute on a breath-to-breath basis and a cardiometer (Tech Brief 64-10258) which would compute the heartbeat rate from the wave-form output of an electrocardiograph (eicg) and visually display the data in beats per minute. Both were developed in connection with NASA’s manned space flight program. (NASA Release 64-311) A NASA technology utilization report described the effects of extremely low temperatures on structural metals. Based on studies at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, the report outlined some of NASA’s experience with various metallic materials and their capabilities at cryogenic temperatures. (nasa Release 64-325) NASA Tech Brief 64-10006 described a speed-sensing device to help power crane operators judge payload movements more precisely. Visual and audible signals would be produced in the crane cab to indicate the rate of load movement. The device would eliminate the necessity of a relay man to transmit hand signals to the crane operator, (nasa Release 64-300)

December 5, 1972
Newspaper editorials commented on close of Apollo program with Apollo 17 launch. Los Angeles Times: “Thanks to the marvels of satellite communications, 3,000 European doctors were able recently to ‘attend’ a medical meeting in San Antonio via television. A computer designed for the space agency is helping Detroit design safer steering linkages in cars and trucks. A technique for clarifying spacecraft photos of the moon is being used by hospitals to provide much sharper x rays. The thousands of men and women who have participated in the Apollo program, and the American people who supported it, have all cause for great pride in Apollo. It has been one of the best investments this country ever made, one of the most rewarding adventures it ever undertook.” (LA Times, 12/6/72) Christian Science Monitor: “To the layman, what has been learned about the moon and space has been an extension of our knowledge of the universe, not a radical departure. In this light, it is comforting to think that the Apollo program, remarkable though it has been historically, may illustrate that even the farthest reaches of today’s unknown may prove to be no more than the captive of tomorrow’s familiar.” (CSM, 12/6/72)	_ New York Times: “Even as the world awaits this final launch, debate continues about the wisdom of the entire Apollo project. Some consider the moon landings the most brilliant scientific achievement in history; others still look at the whole venture as a waste of resources needed for urgent requirements here on earth. Yet one fact about the venture is beyond dispute: in the years 1969-72 men landed on another celestial body for the first time and showed they could live and work in the bizarre and literally inhuman conditions on that foreign planet. Long after most other developments of the twentieth century are forgotten, future generations will recall this as the century in which men broke the bonds of terrestrial gravity and began their cosmic destiny.” (NYT, 12/6/72, 42) Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (command module pilot), and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt (lunar module pilot and geologist)—was launched at 12:33 am EST Dec. 7, with illumination from S-IC 1st stage creating brilliance of morning sun. Liftoff, witnessed by crowd estimated at 500 000 and by nationwide and foreign TV viewers, was visible to naked eye as far as South Carolina to north and Cuba to south. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 170-km (105.6-mi) apogee and 168-km (104.4-mi) perigee. Following checkout, spacecraft was inserted into trajectory lor moon at 3:13 ground elapsed time (get) as planned, csm separation from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:42 GET and docking with lm at 3:57 get were shown on TV. During docking possible ring latch malfunction was indicated. Troubleshooting revealed latches 7, 9, and 10 were unlocked. Latch 10 was locked by pushing on handle; latches 7 and 9 were locked and manually fired to lock handles. Following hatch replacement, csm/lm combination was ejected from S-IVB stage at 4:45 get. S-IVB lunar impact maneuver targeted stage to strike moon’s surface Dec. 10. Midcourse correction (MCC-1) was not necessary because of nominal trajectory. MCC—2 maneuver was performed on time at 35:30 get, changing velocity 3 m per sec (9.9 fps). Cernan and Schmitt entered LM at 40:10 get and discovered docking latch 4 improperly latched. Evans moved latch handle 30°^t5°, disengaging hook from docking ring. Mission Control and flight crew decided to wait until second LM entering at 59:59 get for further action on latch. Remainder of LM housekeeping was nominal and LM was closed out at 42:11 GET. Heat flow and convection demonstrations were conducted as planned; results were satisfactory. MCC-3 and -4 were not required because of near-nominal trajectory. LM housekeeping was resumed at 59:59 get and completed at 62:16 get with all systems nominal. Evans, following ground instructions, stroked docking latch 4 handle and succeeded in cocking latch. Latch was left in cocked position for csm-lm rendezvous. Planned trajectory was modified continually because of late liftoff; coast toward moon was accelerated to ensure arrival of spacecraft at lunar orbit insertion (loi) at scheduled GMT time. GET clock was updated 2 hrs 40 min at 65:00 get to place all events on original flight plan schedule. Crew began one-hour visual-light-flash phenomenon observation at 68:19 GET and reported seeing bright to dull light flashes. Cernan reported continuing gas pains during private consultation via separate radio link with Dr. W. Royee Hawkins, Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations. He was told to continue taking antigas pills and to alter diet. Crew jettisoned scientific instrument module (sim) door at 84:12 GET and said SIM bay looked good. S-IVB 3rd stage impacted on lunar surface at 89:39 GET (3:32 pm EST Dec. 10) at 4° 12' south latitude and 12° 18' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 seismometers. Evans described crew’s excitement at reaching vicinity of moon: “We’re breathing so hard, the windows are fogging up.” Schmitt interrupted running commentary on lunar topography with shout: “Hey I just saw a flash on the lunar surface!” When assured by Mission Control that impact of possible small meteor would have been masked on seismometers by S-IVB 3rd-stage impact, Schmitt groaned: “Just my luck.” Cernan—who had orbited moon during May 18-26, 1969, Apollo 10 mission—described sight as “still just as impressive.” Descent orbit insertion (DOI-1) was performed at 90:31 get. CSM and LM undocked and separated on schedule at 107:48 get. Circularization maneuver placed csm in orbit with 129-km (80.2-mi) apolune and 100-km (62.1-mi) perilune. DOI-2, at 109:50 get, inserted lm into orbit with 111-km (69.0-mi) apolune and 11-km (6.8-mi) perilune. Powered descent was initiated and Challenger touched down on Taurus-Littrow site at 113:02 get (2:55 pm est Dec. 11). Cernan descended lm ladder four hours later, at 117:02 get, and said: “As I step off at the surface at Taurus-Littrow, I’d like to dedicate the first step of Apollo 17 to all those who made it possible.” Schmitt, first geologist to walk on moon, followed and asked, “Hey, who’s been tracking up my lunar surface?” Cernan said surrounding hills looked like “wrinkled skin of an old, old, 100-year-old man.” Astronauts deployed lunar roving vehicle. Cernan made short test drive and said, “Hallelujah, Houston! Challenger’s baby is on the roll.” As Cernan and Schmitt set up TV equipment, Cernan called to Schmitt: “Hey, Jack, just stop. You owe yourself 30 seconds to look up over the South Massif and look at the Earth.” Schmitt replied: “What? The Earth? You seen one earth, you’ve seen them all.” Cernan unfurled U.S. flag on lunar surface while Schmitt took his picture. Cernan said, “It’s got to be one of the most proud moments of my life.” Flag had “flown in the mocr [Mission Operations Control Room] since Apollo 11. And we very proudly deploy it on the Moon, to stay for as long as it can, in honor of all those people who have worked so hard to put us here and to put every other crew here and to make the country, the United States and mankind, something different than it was.” While preparing to traverse to Apollo lunar surface experiment package site, Cernan inadvertently knocked extension off of lrv right rear fender and repairs were made with tape. Astronauts crossed to alsep site, where they deployed alsep. Color TV camera beamed live telecast to earth. LRV fender again fell off during traverse to Steno Crater, lunar station 1A. Crew deployed surface electrical properties experiment and explosive packages during 7-hr 12-min lunar surface exploration. First eva ended at 124:13 get. Second eva began 1 hr 20 min late, at 140:35 get (6:28 pm est Dec. 12). Cernan and Schmitt, on instructions from Mission Control, improvised replacement for lost lrv fender extension. Four chronopaque maps were taped together and held in place by two portable utility lamp clamps. “Call me the little old fender maker,” Cernan said. Cernan and Schmitt visited lunar stations 2, 2A, 3, 4, and 5. They deployed explosive packages, obtained photos, and collected and documented soil samples. At station 4, Shorty Crater, Schmitt shouted: “There is orange soil! It’s all over! Orange!” Cernan confirmed finding: “Jack that is really orange. It’s been oxidized.” Schmitt dug trench and extracted sample which he described to Mission Control: “An essential portion of the zone . . . actually has a crimson hue, or red hue. Outside of that it’s orange. And outside of that, it’s gray.” Scientists on ground immediately speculated that soil might have originated from volcanism on moon as recently as 100 million yrs earlier. If so, it would contradict “dead moon” theory that moon had always been cold and inert. Dr. Robin P. Brett, head of MSC Geochemistry Branch, told press, “What we have been witnessing may be one of the most significant finds of Apollo geology.” Schmitt revisited ALSEP site to verify that lunar surface gravimeter had been leveled properly. EVA-2 ended at 148:35 get (2:05 am EST Dec. 13), after 7 hrs 37 min. Total distance covered during second eva was 19 km (12 mi). Third eva began 50 min late at 163:35 GET (5:26 pm est Dec. 13). Cosmic ray detector was retrieved before start of traverse to prevent exposure to low-energy solar protons from small solar flare. Cernan and Schmitt took black and white and color photos and collected 66 kg (145.9 lbs) of samples. Samples included blue-gray breccias, finegrained vesicular basalts, crushed anorthositic rocks, and soils. EVA-3 ended at 170:48 get {0:41 am est Dec. 14), after 7 hrs 16 min. During EVA—3 Evans, orbiting in CSM 113 km (70 mi) above lunar surface, identified series of volcanic domes in Aitken Grater, on moon’s far side. Before entering Challenger for last time, Cernan and Schmitt stepped before TV cameras. Cernan said: “To commemorate not just Apollo ITs visit to the Valley of Taurus-Littrow but as an everlasting commemoration of what the real meaning of Apollo is to the world, we’d like to uncover a plaque that has been on the leg of our spacecraft.” He read inscription: “Here man completed his first exploration of the Moon, December 1972 A.D. May the spirit of peace in which we came be reflected in the lives of all mankind.” Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, congratulated astronauts from Mission Control at msc and conveyed Godspeed message from President Nixon. As astronauts boarded LM, Cernan said: “I believe history will record that America’s challenge of today has forged man’s destiny of tomorrow. And, as we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came and, God willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. God speed the crew of Apollo 17T Total time for three EVAs was 22 hrs 5 min 4 sec, during which Cernan and Schmitt traveled 35 km (22 mi) in LRV, collected 115 kg (250 lbs) of samples, and took 2120 photos. Good-quality TV transmission was received throughout evas. Astronauts depressurized lm and discarded excess equipment, im lifted off lunar surface at 188:02 get (5:55 pm EST Dec. 14). TV cameras in CSM provided excellent picture in Mission Control as lm approached. Cernan in lm said, “Good to see you .... It’s been a good trip.” Evans replied, “Good to have you all back up here.” Observing that “America and Challenger are . . . good tight Navy formation,” Cernan told Evans, “Command module looks as good as the day they put it on the pad.” Evans answered, “And, you know, so does Challenger.” CSM and lm docked in lunar orbit at 190:17 get and Cernan and Schmitt transferred to csm with samples and equipment, lm ascent stage was jettisoned as planned. Impact of stage on lunar surface at 195:57 get was recorded by four Apollo 17 geophones and Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 alseps. Explosive packages were detonated and events were picked up by lunar seismic profiling geophones. Flash and dust from EP 7 explosion were seen on TV. Insertion into trajectory for earth began at 236:42 get, after csm’s 147 hrs 48 min in lunar orbit. December 17-19:	Spacecraft left moon’s sphere of influence at 250:40 get, traveling at 1173 m per sec (3851 fps). Evans left CSM at 257:34 get (3:27 pm est Dec. 17) for 1-hr 7-min inflight eva to retrieve lunar sounder film and panoramic and mapping camera cassettes in three trips to sim bay. TV pictures relayed to Mission Control showed him cavorting in weightlessness in stiff white pressure suit and attached to 7.6-m (25-ft) line. Following space walk, astronauts settled down for final two days of mission. cm separated from sm at 304:04 get, 15 min before entry interface at 121 920 m (400 000 ft). Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and cm splashed down in mid-Pacific 6.4 km (4.0 mi) from prime recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 304:31 GET (2:25 pm est Dec. 19). Recovery helicopter dropped swimmers, who installed flotation collar and attached life raft. Astronauts were transported to recovery ship for postflight examination. They would be flown to Houston via Samoa the following day. CSM was retrieved by recovery ship for transport to San Diego, Calif. Apollo 17 achieved primary objectives—to make selenological survey and sampling of materials and surface features in preselected area of Taurus-Littrow region, emplace and activate surface experiments, and conduct inflight experiments and photography. Launch vehicle and spacecraft system performances were near nominal throughout mission. Only minor discrepancies occurred, with no effect on safety or mission objectives. Flight crew performance was good. Mission was judged officially to be “a great success.” Accomplishments included sixth manned lunar landing and return, first geologist-astronaut on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (74 hrs 59 min 38 sec), longest single lunar surface eva (7 hrs 37 min 22 sec), longest total lunar surface EVA time (22 hrs 5 min 4 sec), longest total lunar distance traversed with LRV (35 km; 22 mi), longest Apollo mission (12 days 13 hrs 51 min), most samples returned (115 kg; 250 lb), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Apollo 17 was 14th and last scheduled mission in Apollo series and 11th manned Apollo mission. Apollo 16 had flown April 16-27. Highlights of Apollo program had been first manned orbit of moon by Apollo 8 (Dec. 21-27, 1968), first landing of men on moon during Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969), and first use of lunar roving vehicle on moon during Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug 7, 1971). Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-220K; msc Transcript 07629; NYT, 12/8-20/72; W Post, 12/8-20/72; nasa pio) December 7:	President Nixon sent message to Apollo 17 crew following successful launch: “With the final mission of the Apollo lunar exploration series man completes another step in his quest for knowledge of his universe and of himself. Those who come after will stand on the shoulders of the men of Apollo and their dedicated support team. I wish you good luck and Godspeed.” {PD, 12/11/72, 1734-5)

July 26, 1985
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)

June 25, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two 9-mo contracts for parallel design studies of a biological holding facility for Spacelab. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. received $242 640 and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received $177 360 to develop conceptual designs of habitats for live biological specimens supporting life-sciences space flight research programs. The habitats—consisting of the structure and the environmental-control, food and watering, waste-management, lighting, and instrumentation systems—were to be suitable for a wide variety of specimens with emphasis on the adult rhesus monkey and the adult laboratory rat. (MSFC Release 75-133) 25 June—3 July: The countdown demonstration test, a step-by-step dress rehearsal for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, was successfully completed at Kennedy Space Center. The rehearsal culminated in actual fueling of the Saturn IB and a simulated launch of the Apollo at 3:50 pm EDT on 2 July. The cryogenic propellants loaded for the “wet” portion of the test were off-loaded and the final portion of the count repeated with crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton aboard the spacecraft. A second simulated ignition and liftoff occurred at 2 pm EDT on 3 July. During the test, a leak detected in Brand’s spacesuit was traced to one of the pressure-sealing slide fasteners. Modifications were made and the spacesuit was successfully retested. {Spaceport News, 26 June 75, 1;KSC Release 115—75;Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)

April 5, 1962
Army launched Nike-Zeus missile in what was described as a successful intercept of a simulated icbm nose cone. Apriif!: nasa sponsored a day-long technical symposium in Washington on results of the MA-6 three-orbit space flight. Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and officials of Project Mercury reviewed the findings of the Feb. 20 flight and stressed the conclusion that the presence of the astronaut had been indispensable to successful completion of the three-orbit mission. On the Glenn effect—the firefly-like particles Glenn reported seeing outside Ms capsule during each of the three sunrises—Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief, Theoretical Division, Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that study had shown them to be flakes of paint from the spacecraft.

April 23, 1973
Richard W. Cook, Deputy Director, Management, at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire in June, msfc announced. He would be succeeded June 3 by John S. Potate, who was attending Massachusetts Institute of Technology, on leave from his position of Director of the Apollo Program Control Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight. Potate had joined the omsf in 1969. (msfc Releases 73-47, 73-77; msfc Org Ann 0101)

November 2, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center forwarded the experimental payload for the first launch of NASA’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to Goddard Space Flight Center, where the payload would be integrated with its launcher, a Black Brant sounding rocket. The integrated unit would undergo checkout before being sent to N. Mex. for firing by White Sands Missile Range early in Dec. The payload consisted of nine scientific experiments on processing materials in near-weightlessness. After the first launch, three flights per year carrying similar payloads had been planned through 1980. All payloads were to be recovered by parachute for ground analysis. The low-cost SPAR missions would provide data on space processing until Space Shuttle flights began in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75—233)

May 16, 1974
A new method using tiny electronic body sensors, developed by Ames Research Center for remotely recording physical responses during space flight training and research programs, was being used to measure the precise walking patterns of children with cerebral palsy, NASA announced. Patients could be free of cumbersome equipment that had hindered obtaining accurate gait measurements. (NASA Release 74-131) 17—24 May: Sms 1 (sms-a Synchronous Meteorological Satellite)—first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit—was launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration from Eastern Test Range at 5:31 am edt. The lst-stage propulsion of the three-stage Thor-Delta launch vehicle was less than normal. The 2nd stage burned to near propellant completion, compensating for the deficiency but leaving insufficient propellant to complete the planned second burn. The spacecraft entered a lower-than-planned transfer orbit with a 32 895km apogee, 180-km perigee, 9-hr 37-min period, and 24.5° inclination. The apogee boost motor boosted the spacecraft into a near-geostationary orbit with a 32 828.3-km apogee, 30 747-km perigee, 20-hr 39-min period, and 2.0° inclination, with an eastward drift of approximately 56° per day. The auxiliary propulsion system was fired at 3:00 am EDT 19 May to place the spacecraft in operational attitude. A planned series of aps firings between 19 and 24 May increased the orbit to geosynchronous altitude, eliminated orbital drift, and stopped the satellite at 45° west longitude. An early post-launch review of flight data revealed no spacecraft anomalies, and the first photos were transmitted 24 May. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a geosynchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to accomplish operational mission requirements and evaluate and check out the spacecraft—were met and the mission was adjudged successful 17 Dec. Operational control was turned over to NOAA10 Dec. after checkout. The 272-kg satellite (628 kg at launch) would, for the first time, provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean. Its data-collection systems would be key elements in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment to be conducted during the summer, collecting meteorological, hydrological, oceanographic, seismic, and tsunami data. In addition, Sms 1 would monitor solar flare activity for future manned spacecraft and supersonic aircraft flights. Sms 1 was the first in a series which would include two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (sms-c, to become Goes 1 on launch), developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce for its Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) system. The sms project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications. GSFC also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA mors, 10 May, 20 May, 18 Dec. 74; NASA, Mgr Small Launch Vehicles & Inti Prog, interview, 31 Jan. 75; gsfc, sms Proj Mgr, interview, 4 Feb 75)

April 16, 1965
Saturn V launch vehicle Is-ic stage) was static-fired for the first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F—1 engines were ignited in a test which lasted 6V(> sec. during which they generated a thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (160,000.000 hp.). This was the first full cluster test and was made on a recently completed 400-ft.-tall test stand. The S—ic was the first stage of 364-ft.-tall Saturn V-Apollo combination that would ultimately take astronauts and equipment to the moon. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller congratulated MSFC personnel on the successful test: “. . . As this was one of the key milestones in the whole lunar landing program, its successful performance. 12 weeks ahead of schedule, has a great bearing on our program.” (mfsc Release 65-92; Marshall Star, 5/5/65, 5)

August 15, 1961
Explorer XII (S-3) placed into highly eccentric orbit by Thor-Delta from Atlantic Missile Range, which would provide detailed evaluation of behavior of energetic particles between 170- and 50-000-mile altitude. Under Goddard Space Flight Center, this “windmill” satellite carried six experiments developed by Ames Research Center, State University of Iowa, University of New Hampshire, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Several days were required to confirm orbit.

February 29, 1984
NASA announced the establishment of seven intercenter teams to conduct advanced development activities for high potential technologies to be used in Space Station design and development. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would lead three of the intercenter teams; JSC, three of the teams; and a lead center for the seventh team would be assigned later. The teams would identify emerging technologies for advanced development for Space Station design and establish test beds into which prototype technology hardware could be integrated, tested, demonstrated, and evaluated. MSFC would be the lead center for the Attitude Control and Stabilization System, the Auxiliary Propulsion System, and Space Operations Mechanisms. JSC would be the lead center in the Data Management System, Environmental Control and Life Support System, and the Thermal Management System. The Electronic Power System would have a leader designated later. Assisting on various assignments would be the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Langley Research Center (LaRC), Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), KSC, ARC, National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), and Lewis Research Center (LeRC). (NASA Release 84-31). During February: The mission of ESA’s first preoperational remote-sensing satellite, ERS-1, would be mainly to monitor ice and coastal and ocean zones, the agency announced. Among the instruments in the ERS-1 payload would be an active microwave instrumentation package operating in the C-band and combining the functions of a synthetic aperture radar, a wave scatterometer, and wind scatterometer for the purpose of measuring wind fields and the wave image spectrum and taking all-weather high-resolution images of coastal zones, open oceans, ice areas, and (on an experimental basis) land. Germany, the Netherlands, France, and Canada, each built a C-bank scatterometer for comparison of data in order to evaluate the optimal technical characteristics of the C-band scatterometers on board ERS-1 and to check the mathematical models used for data processing. This experimental campaign organized by ESA would operate in the North Sea, in conjunction with a German scientific platform supplying “sea truth” data, and about 40 kilometers off the Brittany coast, in conjunction with a French oceanographic vessel supplied by the Centre National d’Exploitation des Oceans (National Center for Ocean Exploitation). This would allow comparison of the data acquired by the various scatterometers and data acquired by conventional means on board the platform and the oceanographic vessel. (ESA Release, Feb 6/84)

September 14, 1998
At a ceremony marking its official opening, Virginia Governor James S. Gilmore III announced that Reston-based DynCorp was the first major investor in the Commercial Spaceport Launch Pad at Virginia Space Flight Center on Wallops Island, the nation’s third commercial spaceport. The Virginia Commercial Space Flight Authority, a collaborative effort of the state, the Center for Innovative Technology at Old Dominion University in Virginia, NASA, and private industry, had developed the communications facility, located at one end of NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility. The spaceport was one of 18 sites competing to launch the VentureStarTM, a privately owned space plane still in development, which could eventually carry construction materials to the ISS.(Sonja Barisic, “Firm Gives a Big Boost to Spaceport,” Roanoke Times (VA), 15 September 1998; Karen Jolly Davis, “$4.5 Million Contribution Gives Wallops Island Spaceport a Boost,” Virginian Pilot and the Ledger-Star (Norfolk, VA), 15 September 1998.)

July 9, 1976
NASA announced that Dr. Noel J. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, had selected Drs. Charles R. Chappell and James L. Burch of Marshall Space Flight Center as members of the flight team for the proposed Electrodynamics Explorer (EE) satellite mission, consisting of 2 satellites in polar orbit to study physical processes in the atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere from high and low orbit. Dr. Chappell’s proposal for the mission was a cold-plasma instrument, a retarding ion-mass .spectrometer; Dr. Burch proposed a high-altitude instrument for measuring medium-energy plasma. The 2 scientists participated in the project study phase during the past yr, and would work on the flight team with the EE study office at Goddard Space Flight Center in preparing a project plan for the dual-satellite mission. (NASA Release 76-123) At ceremonies in the town of Smiljan, Tesla’s birthplace, President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia praised the “orientation” of Tesla and his compatriots in the U.S. in their support for Yugoslavia during World War II. Later, at a luncheon, Tito reviewed Tesla’s achievements and urged the Yugoslavs to create conditions that would induce talented youths to remain and not leave their country to go abroad. At an informal meeting Dr. Fletcher presented Tito with photographs of Yugoslavia taken by a U.S. satellite, and received from the celebration committee a “golden plaque” bearing Tesla’s picture to be presented to President Ford. President Ford’s message at the ceremonies had stated that Tesla’s work “stands as a link between our two countries in the history of notable accomplishments in science and engineering.” (FBIS, Tanjug Domestic Service, 9-10 July 76, 11-16)

September 11, 1998
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFC’s previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFC’s Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.’s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, “Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center,” revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, “Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait,” 14–20 September 1998.)

November 26, 1964
usn announced $36,000 contract with the Convair and Electric Boat divisions of General Dynamics Corp. for analytical and design studies of a flying submarine—a small craft capable of flying to and submerging for operations in relatively closed waters. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/27/64) November 27: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced that about 100 of the 140 personnel in the Kennedy Space Center Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div. would move from Marshall Space Flight Center to ksc by Aug. 1965. ( nasa Release 64-298; NYT, 11/28/64,16)

November 6, 1961
NASA informed Marshall Space Flight Center that management of the Agena B vehicle system would be retained at Marshall Space Flight Center.

January 9, 1972
New York Times editorial praised “encouraging response” of public and major corporations that would enable Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library to reopen Jan. 17 after shutdown for lack of operating funds [see Jan. 3]. “But it is evident that the fate of the privately financed research divisions has merely been deferred— unless continuous and long-range efforts are made to put this vital facility on a sound financial footing.” (NYT, 1/10/72, 32) January 10—13:	Third Annual Lunar Science Conference held by NASA and Lunar Science Institute at Manned Spacecraft Center was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 16 foreign countries. Foreign visitors included Soviet scientists Y. I. Belyayev, M. S. Chupakhin, and K. P. Florenskiy, who participated in conference, consulted with U.S. scientists, looked at lunar samples stored at msc, and helped select samples to return to their colleagues in U.S.S.R. NASA provided three grams (one tenth ounce) of lunar material collected on Apollo 14 mission as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for exchange of samples. Samples included chip from widely studied crystalline rock, small piece of 9-kg (20-lb) boulder, and core samples soils, and polished thin sections. Conference papers dealt with scientific results of Apollo lunar landing missions, analysis of Soviet Luna 16 samples, and results of study of lunar surface by U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1. Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden discussed their observations of lunar surface made from lunar orbit during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Dr. N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight Center representative of Apollo Soil Mechanics Investigation Science Team, discussed mechanical properties of lunar soil. Washington Post later compared conference with First Lunar Science Conference in 1970, when “there were few facts available and many theories.” At third conference, “situation seemed to have reversed.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said, “You’re not throwing facts out into a vacuum any more.” Among facts stated at conference were: moon once had strong magnetic field, of which remnants remained to suggest moon once had metallic core up to 280 km (175 mi) thick; lunar crust was 65 km (40 mi) deep and layered; existence of extinct plutonium 244 in Apollo 14 samples indicated plutonium had been trapped when lunar crust solidified shortly after origin of solar system; and Copernicus Crater had been gouged 850 to 950 million yrs ago, making process one of more recent major lunar events. Dr. James R. Arnold of Univ. of California at San Diego reported that moon’s radioactive elements were concentrated in two broad plains, Ocean of Storms and Sea of Rains. “As we go away from this region ... we drop to quite low levels of radioactivity.” Scientists agreed that these radiation emissions should not prove hazardous to astronauts who might visit for short period. Dr. Isidore Adler, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, reported that map of lunar surface chemistry produced from Apollo 15 x-ray data indicated highlands of moon contained more aluminum than did plains. Finding supported hypothesis that moon’s early crust was rich in feldspar. Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ., Apollo Program chief seismic investigator, debated presence of volcanoes on moon with Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Dr. Latham said that while main episode of lunar vulcanism seemed to have ceased 3 billion yrs ago, “it’s by no means certain that we do not have continuing vulcanism on a very minor scale on the moon.” Dr. Gold continued to support theory that moon was dead, rigid body with basins of compacted dust. Dr. Leon T. Silver of California Institute of Technology proposed theory of “parentless lead” on moon to explain presence in some lunar locations of more lead than could have been produced by decay of radioactive uranium. In moon’s extreme vacuum it was possible for vaporized lead to travel great distances from its parent, uranium. Dr. Silver said other materials could be distributed over lunar surface in same way, all of which could confuse analysis of moon’s age. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory discussed tiny piece of green glass among Apollo 14 samples that scientists had nick-named “Genesis bean.” Bean and other glass fragments were almost identical chemically to rare meteorites, Howardites. Evidence suggested green glass had originated on moon and not from meteorite impacts on earth and thus might be some of earliest material of solar system. Consensus of conference on bulk composition of moon was summarized by Dr. Gast: feldspar-rich highland material with anorthosite as one prevalant component, basalts (solidified lava, low in radioactive elements and relatively young) in plains and basins, and KREEP (highly radioactive material rich in potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus). Conference closed with discussion of geologic setting of Apollo 16 Descartes landing site and plans for mission’s extravehicular activity. Soviet scientists returned to U.S.S.R. Jan. 23 with lunar samples for Soviet Academy of Sciences, (msc Release 72-06; NASA Release 72—18; Marshall Star, 1/12/72, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/14/72, 22; NASA Trans Sect) January 11:	Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was released from Patrick Air Force Base Hospital where he had been treated for bacterial pneumonia since Jan. 4. (AP, B Sun, 1/11/72)

September 25, 1961
Dr. George N. Constan of Marshall Space Flight Center named as acting manager of the new NASA Saturn fabrication plant near New Orleans by Director von Braun of Marshall Space Flight Center.

January 20, 1973
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 276.8-km (172-mi) altitude. The objective was to test the performance of the rocket configuration that would be used for a series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches during the manned Skylab mission scheduled for May. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The calroc launches would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions, to acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that on the ATM. Black Brant VC would be used for all launches. Taking part in the program, managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, were Ames Research Center, Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and the White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (gsfc proj off; msfc Release 73-42)

March 18, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: “The F-l engine development program has an impressive list of accomplishments. A year after the contract was signed full-scale components were undergoing tests, and in 27 months complete engine systems testing had begun. Full thrust and full duration tests have become routine. The engine has been gimbaled during hot firing. We expect successful completion of the Preliminary Flight Rating Tests this year .... “When design of the F-l was begun in 1959, combustion instability was known to be a potential problem. Accordingly, early in the program tests of various injectors for the thrust chamber were conducted, and a design was selected which had not experienced unstable combustion. For about a year, from mid-1961 to mid-1962, engine tests were conducted without this phenomenon occurring. Then, on June 28 last year we were testing development engine #008 on the test stands in California. A test run which was scheduled for the full 2y2 minutes running time was interrupted after 106 seconds of satisfactory performance by a rupture of a valve casting. The rupture was traced to combustion instability. Since this occurrence, several cases of combustion instability have taken place. “This phenomenon is not unique to the F-l, but has occurred in the development of most liquid rocket engines .... “We are presently concentrating on combustion instability and are making progress. With the contractor at Rocketdyne, we have made an exhaustive survey of all test data having a bearing on the problem .... “To summarize, the F-l engine development over the last four years has made satisfactory progress . . . .” (Testimony) March 18: Frederick R. Kappel, at&t board chairman, said in speech before New York Chamber of Commerce that telstar ii communications satellite would be equipped with instruments “far more resistant to radiation” than telstar i. Like its predecessor, telstar n would be launched by nasa at at&t expense. (NYT [West. Ed.], 3/19/63)

July 15, 1987
NASA named a board to investigate the July 13, 1987, Atlas Centaur 68 accident which resulted in extensive damage to the vehicle. James B. Odom, Director of the Science and Engineering irectorate, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was appointed Chairman of the Board. The Board was expected to report the results of its investigation to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly,h)0*0*0*Associate Administrator for Space Flight, by August 14, 1987. (NASA Release 87112; LA Times, July 14/87; NY Times, July 16/87)

July 29, 1965
At the Honors Convocation of the aiaa meeting in San Francisco the following presentations were made: Rodney C. Wingrove, Research Scientist at nasa Ames Research Center, received the Lawrence Sperry Award for his contribution to controlled reentry and precise landings of U.S. manned spacecraft; Dinsmore Alter, Director Emeritus of Griffith Observatory, received the G. Edward Pendray Award for an “outstanding contribution to aeronautical and astronautical literature”; Lloyd L. Kelly, President, Link Group, General Precision, Inc., received the DeFlorez Training Award for “an outstanding improvement in aerospace training”; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, received the premier Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award “for significant contributions indicative of American enterprise and ingenuity in the art and science of space flight.” This award included a $5,000 honorarium, (arc Release 65-15; msfc Release 65-151; aiaa Honors Convocation Program)

October 25, 1973
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, presented 104 Skylab awards to employees from nasa Hq., Johnson Space Center, Kennedy Space Center, and Marshall Space Flight Center during an msfc ceremony attended by Skylab 2 crew Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz. Also participating were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, and Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider, (nasa Release 73—156; Marshall Star, 10/31/73, 1)

August 25, 1975
NASA’s use of the firefly s two light-producing chemicals, luciferin and luciferase, to test for the chemical presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), an energy-storage compound present in every living cell, had increased interest in luminescence as a tool for medical research, the New York Times reported. Research done in 1948 by Johns Hopkins Univ. scientists had demonstrated that ATP was the third essential ingredient—along with luciferin and luciferase—necessary for the firefly’s glow, and that the amount of light generated was directly proportionate to the level of ATP present. The Hopkins scientists had also developed a simple test for life itself, since luciferin and luciferase added to any living matter could reproduce the firefly’s glimmer. NASA applied this information, with more sophisticated lightdetection instruments, to develop a test for life on Mars for use aboard the Viking spacecraft (launched 20 Aug.) NASA scientists working with the firefly chemicals at Goddard Space Flight Center had developed many applications, including a method of detecting bacteria in water; this permitted speedy diagnosis of urinary infections, as well as testing the effect of various antibiotics on particular infections. Univ. of Calif, scientists continued the research, adapting the techniques for related work in measuring creatine phosphokinase (CPK) in the bloodstream. CPK, present in all human blood, was produced in abnormally high quantities during muscle-cell degeneration that accompanied cardiac arrest or muscular dystrophy. CPK could be treated to produce ATP and, with the application of firefly chemicals, to produce a glow proportionate to the amount of CPK in the bloodstream. Researchers had used the measurements as a quick blood test to tell whether a patient had suffered a heart attack. (NYT, 25 Aug 75) 26 August—3 September: NASA launched Symphonie 2, France and West Germany’s second experimental communications satellite at 9:42 pm EDT 26 Aug. from Eastern Test Range. A three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle boosted the spacecraft into a synchronous transfer orbit with a 37 974-km apogee, 413-km perigee, 678.3-min period, and 13.2° inclination. On 29 Aug. at 11:48 am EDT, ground controllers activated the onboard liquid-fueled apogee motor to circularize the. orbit at geosynchronous altitude. By 31 Aug. Symphonie 2 was in an orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 35 364-km perigee, 23-hr 47-min period, and O.CP inclination. NASA’s primary objective for the mission—to launch the Symphonie 2 into a synchronous transfer orbit with sufficient accuracy to enable the satellite to accomplish its operational mission—had been successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on 3 Sept. When finally positioned at 11.5° west longitude over the equator, the 402-kgSymphonie 2 would provide 1200 telephone, 8 voice, and 2 TV channels for experimental communications between Europe and the African and South American continents. Second of two experimental comsats developed by the French-West German Consortium Industriel Franee-Allemand pour le Satellite Symphonie (CIFAS), under the direction of Germany’s Gesellschaft fur Weltraumforschung GFW and France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Symphonie 2 would expand the French-West German experimental satellite TV and telegraph communications program begun with the launch of Symphonie 1 on 18 Dec. 1974. In October 1973 NASA had agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis, and in June 1974 had signed a launch services contract with the consortium. Estimated cost of hardware and services was $12 million. Goddard Space Flight Center, under the direction of the Office of Space Science, was responsible for the launch vehicle and for limited tracking during initial activities. When the satellite separated from the vehicle third stage, the Symphonie Project Operations Group in France and West Germany would assume operational responsibility. (NASAMORs S—492— 204— 75— 02, 25 July, 3 Sept; GSFC SSR, 31 Aug 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21—27 Aug 75; NASA Release 75— 234)

May 26, 1965
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)

May 13, 1965
mariner iv, 78,277,013 mi. from earth at 9 a.m. est, had covered 251,691,170 mi. along its orbit. The Mars probe was travelling 46,214 mph relative to earth and was returning data and scientific information continuously, (nasa Release 65-159) President Johnson transmitted to Congress a plan to merge the Weather Bureau, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the Central Radio Propagation Laboratory of the National Bureau of Standards into an Environmental Science Services Administration. “The new administration will then provide a single national focus for our efforts to describe, understand, and predict the state of the oceans, the state of the lower and upper atmospheres and the size and shape of the earth ... as well as enhance our ability to develop an adequate warning system for the severe hazards of nature . . . which have proved so disastrous to the Nation in recent years.” He added that Federal agencies “concerned with the national defense [and the] exploration of outer space” would receive improved services and that combining of offices and technical facilities would save money, (White House Release) Gemini GT—4 countdown rehearsal at KSC with Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) was delayed because of a minor fueling problem. Launch of the GT—4 mission was scheduled for June 3. (ap, Galveston News-Tribune, 5/14/65) An Emeraude rocket was successfully fired by France from the Hamma-guir range, Algerian Sahara, to a planned altitude of 112 mi. It was topped by a mockup of the Topaze rocket which was to be the second stage of the Diamant launcher that France was developing. (Reuters, NYT, 5/18/65; Root, Wash. Post, 5/18/65; M&R, 5/31/65, 11) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center researchers Dr. John B. Schutt and Charles M. Shai announced development of a new series of inorganic spacecraft paints with promise of commercial application; report given at a meeting of the Philadelphia Society for Paint Technology and the Philadelphia Section of the American Chemical Society. The paints would utilize an alkali-metal silicate as a binder and an inorganic phosphate as a wetting agent. They would adhere to most metals and non-metals; would not crack, peel, chalk, flake, or fade when subjected to temperatures between 1,800°F and —320°F; would be washable; could be made in any color; and would have a long shelf life, (gsfc Release G-13-65) American Broadcasting Co. notified the Fee it was preparing plans for a domestic communications satellite to relay network television programs to affiliated stations for rebroadcast, thereby raising for the first time the question of a company other than ComSatCorp owning and operating a comsat. (Gould, NYT, 5/14/65, 1) NBC announced it would televise the June 3 Gemini GT^l spaceflight in color. It would be the first live-color coverage of a space flight, (Doan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/14/65) Cornell Univ, astronomers at Arecibo radiotelescope facility revealed that their radar observations of the planet Mercury April 25 indicated that Mercury rotated on its axis once every 59 days, rotating in the same direction as its orbit. This new study confirmed clearly that Mercury did not have a retrograde rotation and laid to rest the classic view that Mercury did not rotate on its axis at all. The astronomers had reported their findings on Mercury’s rotation in Washington last

August 14, 1963
fcc Chairman E. William Henry predicted in address to American Bar Association’s Committee on Communications, meeting in Chicago, that a single communications satellite eventually may equal carrying capacity of all telephone cable circuits between U.S. and rest of the world. Last year 5 million telephone calls were made from U.S. to 176 countries. Existing facilities probably will be used to capacity by 1965, he said, and $500-million international communications system will be in operation by 1970. New transistorized cable, with capacity of almost six times present capacity, will be available. (Wolters, Chic. Trib., 8/15/63) August 15: stncom ii communications satellite was successfully maneuvered into synchronous position 55° west longitude, over Brazil and South Atlantic Ocean. The satellite was slowed from westward drift speed of 1.2° per day to nearly zero drift by firing of onboard nitrogen jets. Previous firings of hydrogen peroxide jets occurred Aug. 11, when syncom ii was slowed from 7° drift per day to 2.7° drift per day, and Aug. 12. when satellite was reduced to 1.2° drift. Firings were directed by engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and actual command was executed from ground station at Lakehurst, N.J. stncom n was now stationed about 22,300-mi. altitude and traveling at speed of about 6,800 mph, matching earth’s rotation speed of 1,040 mph at equator to keep it on station. It was hovering in figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator, nasa Administrator James E. Webb called completion of the positioning maneuvers the culmination of “one of the outstanding feats in the history of space flight.” (nasa “stncom n Fact Sheet”; nasa Release 63-185)

August 4, 1965
Personnel of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center would be augmented to meet the increasing tempo of Gemini and Apollo manned space flight operations, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Over the next ten months, approximately 200 persons would be transferred from msfc to MSC. Total number of personnel to be provided from other NASA activities had not been determined, (msfc Release 65—199)

March 27, 1987
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced the composition of the Atlas Centaur 67 Investigation Board. The Board, chaired by Jon R. Busse, Director, Office of Flight Assurance, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would investigate the loss of the Atlas Centaur 67 mission on March 26, 1987 and recommend corrective action. The mission vehicle was destroyed 51 seconds after an apparently normal liftoff. (NASA Release 8745)

October 29, 1962
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 230-lb. payload to 116-mi. altitude before landing in Atlantic Ocean 59 mi. from launch site. Flight tested performance of three photometers developed for use in Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) satellite to be launched by nasa in 1964. Other instrumentation obtained data from the comparatively young stars Gamma Cassiopeia and Delta Persei, for use in star-evolution study being conducted by University of Wisconsin. Launch was under management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.

April 7, 1965
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm a 5-yr. 8175,125,000 contract for integration and checkout of instrument units for Saturn IB and Saturn V programs. Initially announced in 1964, the contract would give IBM the additional responsibility for structural and environmental control systems and integration of all systems, (msfc Release

November 5, 1972
nasa launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to measure spectrum of planetary atmosphere. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

September 16, 1974
Two scientists had predicted that in 1982 a rare alignment of all nine planets on the same side of the sun would produce major earthquakes, Newsweek reported. In their book The Jupiter Effect, John Cribbin of the British magazine Nature and Stephen Plagemann of Goddard Space Flight Center warned that increased solar activity caused by the alignment, which occurred every 179 yrs, would alter wind directions in the upper atmosphere. The frictional effect exerted on the solid earth by atmospheric circulation would change with the winds. The consequent braking of the earth’s rotation rate would trigger earthquakes in areas, like California, under geological stress. (Newsweek, 16 Sept 74, 57)

December 1, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $358,808 contract to Bryson Construction Co., Inc., Ala., for building a non-destructive facility for testing rocket materials in simulated space environments. Four shielded “radiographic laboratories” would provide areas where rocket materials would be exposed to radiation and would have equipment for searchray, motion radiography, radioisotope, and radiography testing, (msfc Release 65—290)

August 20, 1998
A fire that started in a shed containing an air compressor spread to another building of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), causing extensive damage. No one was injured, and firefighters were able to stop the blaze before it reached laboratories containing hazardous and flammable materials. Fire investigators had not determined the cause of the fire. NASA did not permit the investigators to survey the damage immediately, because of sensitive material housed in the affected building.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire,” 20 August 1998.)

August 9, 1985
A flight today of an F—14 marked the completion of the latest phase in the plane's aileron-rudder interconnect (ARI) program, which was intended to coordinate turns, prevent wing rock, and resist spins at high angle-of-attach flight conditions, the DFRC X-Press reported. Dryden Space Flight Center (DFRC) modified the F—14 X's basic analog flight control system for ARI. Although earlier configurations were successful in flight tests, pilots noted a deficiency in loss of roll power in high angle-of-attack flight regions. NASA then developed a "cross control" feature in the ARI system to correct the problem. The cross control feature allowed the pilot to roll the aircraft opposite to lateral stick input but in the direction of the rudder pedal input. This gave the F—14 pilot roll power needed for tactical maneuvering while the aircraft was in a high angle-of-attack mode. Flight tests of the cross control feature began in June 1985. Two NASA Ames-DRFC F—15 project pilots, three Navy pilots, and one Grumman pilot flew these initial evaluation flights. As part of the evaluation program, four other Ames-DRFC pilots not involved in the F—14 program flew the aircraft. NASA Ames-DFRC pilot Ed Schneider said after his flight that "The new modification permits improved rolling performance at angles of attack above 30°, yet the system retains spin resistance and wing rock suppression, both ARI features." Navy personnel taking part in the evaluation would make presentations on program results to NAVAIR. Navy pilot Lt. Commander Chuck Baucom would also present results at the Society of Experimental Test Pilots' September symposium. (DFRC X-Press, Aug 16/85, 2)

November 28, 1986
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded an $8.9 million fiveyear contract to Calspan Corporation for operation of the Marshall Problem Assessment Center and the Safety Issue Assessment Center. Under the contract, Calspan would receive problem reports and safety issues from the contractors of Marshall's numerous projects, check the accuracy and completeness of the reports, track the closeout of proposed corrective actions, perform trend analysis and special study into causes of problems and safety issues, and appraise Marshall management on a daily basis. (NASA Release 86163)

January 17, 1985
NASA successfully launched today an Aerobee liquid-fueled, sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, marking the end of that rocket series, which was the oldest continuous rocket-firing program. NASA's Sounding Rocket Division had launched 536 Aerobees with a 94% success rate. The Aerobee's reliability made it the workhorse vehicle for high-altitude studies. Commenting on the program, Maury Dubin, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) physicist, said "virtually everything that's been done in space research can be attributed to sounding-rocket technology. The Aerobee and other sounding-rocket research precipitated the rise of many disciplines, from astronomy to the upper atmosphere." The Aerobee program began in 1946 when Aerojet Engineering Corp. received a U.S. Navy contract to build the rockets, and the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) had supplied technical direction; Dr. James Van Allen had been project director. The Aerobee name, the Bumblebees, derived from a combination of Aerojet and APL's series of Navy missiles. NASA had used Aerobees extensively during the Internatl. Geophysical Year (July 1957 to December 1958) to gather information on the atmosphere, cosmic radiation, auroras, and geomagnetism. The Aerobee rockets consisted of a series of five with each rocket carrying as many as six experiments that included equipment such as cameras, vacuum bottles, mirrors, grids, sensing devices, lenses, and other mechanical PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	„ units. Most rockets recorded data and simultaneously transmitted it via telemetry to ground stations. The final Aerobee payload tested a new spectrograph that would be flown on NASA's Astro mission to record extreme ultraviolet Dayglow emissions in earth's upper atmosphere. George Kraft, GSFC flight support section director, said that, although the demise of small liquid-fueled sounding rockets was imminent, "sounding rockets would continue to be an important element in NASA's support of the scientific community. They're virtually the only vehicles that can conduct studies in the 40 km (25 miles) to 200 km (125 miles) high zone of the atmosphere." Balloons could travel only about 50 km (31 miles) high and satellites were ineffective below 200 km (125 miles) high. GSFC's Wallops Flight Facility managed the NASA sounding-rocket program. (GSFC Release 85-6)

April 11, 1994
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)

October 19, 1964
NASA announced three-month expedition at sea using converted Navy aircraft transport to launch sounding rockets would be conducted next year as part of International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy). 40 or more scientific experiments would be carried by Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets as well as Areas and Hasp weather rockets to areas of the upper atmosphere and the ionosphere that cannot be reached by land-based rockets. Exact locations of the launches had not yet been determined, but it had been decided that a number of experiments would be made in region of the magnetic equator in eastern portion of the South Pacific Ocean. NASA Wallops Station was assigned project management of the expedition and Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for coordinating most of the scientific experiments, being provided by universities, other Federal agencies, and NASA field centers. Project was under overall direction of NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. ( nasa Release 64-246; Wallops Release 64-73)

March 3, 1978
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'

October 9, 1964
First major test of revamped NASA worldwide tracking network, part of preparation for manned earth-orbital space flights in Project Gemini. During nine-day drill, simulated flight missions were conducted which involved Goddard Space Flight Center, Mission Control Center, and eight sites in the worldwide tracking network. (msc Roundup, 10/14/64,1; Goddard News, 10/19/64,1)

March 5, 1973
NASA and space shuttle contractors held the third quarterly Space Shuttle Review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Attended by 400, the review provided information on external tanks and solid rocket boosters. (Marshall Star, 3/7/73, 1)

March 26, 2008
NASA announced the resignation of S. Alan Stern as Associate Administrator for NASA’s SMD. During his career with NASA, Stern had served as Principal Investigator for the New Horizons Mission to Pluto and as a member of the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin announced that Edward J. Weiler would replace Stern as interim Associate Administrator for NASA’s SMD. Before accepting this position, Weiler had served as Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC).(NASA, “NASA Administrator Announces Science Mission Directorate Leadership Changes,” news release 08- 088, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08088_ SMD_AA_change.html (accessed 13 January 2001).)

August 24, 2009
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)

July 31, 1963
usaf launched Thor-Agena D with unidentified satellite from pmr. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963) During July: nasa Marshall Space Flight Center selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth and Douglas Aircraft Co. to conduct parallel studies of manned Mars exploration flight “in the unfavorable time period” (1975-85). Under seven-month contracts, the companies would outline the mission and development program for the Mars flight, identifying spacecraft and booster systems and selecting mdst promising mission profile. (Space Bus. Daily, 7/5/63; LA. Times, 7/9/63; Marshall Star, 7/10/63,8)

February 28, 1964
NASA announced Saturn contract modifications totaling $16,448,169 had been awarded to Chrysler Corp. Space Div., which was assembling two Saturn I first stages and 12 Saturn IB first stages at NASA Michoud Operations. One award was for expansion of Chrysler’s Saturn booster reliability testing program at Michoud. Other two awards were for increased engineering support at Marshall Space Flight Center and John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-48)

April 30, 1971
Marshall Space Flight Center announced retirement of Director of Program Management Lee B. James, effective May 31. James, who would return to academic community, would be replaced in acting capacity by James T. Shepherd, Deputy Director (Technical), Program Management. (msfc Release 71—77) During April: nasa issued Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific and Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1970—1972: Annual Report to The National Science Foundation. In FY 1972 budget, NASA was seeking authorization of $3,271 billion. Effect on programs would be: Funds for basic research would remain at FY 1970 level in FY 1971 and rise in FY 1972, reflecting increased funding for Viking and initiation of outer planets Grand Tour project. In applied research, estimates for FY 1971 reflected 10% increase over 1970 and slight increase in FY 1972, primarily for earth resources surveys and space station. Budget authority for development activities would decline in 1971 and 1972, primarily as result of completion of Apollo program and reduction in nasa—aec nerva program effort, r&d funds were requested in FY 1972 for space shuttle technology and engine development facilities. (Text)

September 10, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists conducted interrogation of OGO I satellite through Rosman, N.C., tracking station, and 15 experiments were turned on to confirm their operation. Signals were weaker than previously received, because OGO i’s solar panels were not locked onto the sun; the satellite’s solar panels were successfully commanded to turn 42° into a more favorable sun angle, thus ensuring satisfactory power levels. As of this date, 19 of the 20 onboard scientific experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, which were being evaluated by experimenters. (NASA Release 64-232; GSFC Release G-26-64)

December 27, 1962
Goddard Space Flight Center officials reported that they had received “indications the voltage had recovered somewhat” in relay satellite, but doubted that its communications mission would be accomplished.

September 29, 1962
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced that the project management of the liquid hydrogen-fueled Centaur launch vehicle and the hydrogen-fueled M-l rocket engine would be transferred from Marshall Space Flight Center to the Lewis Research Center. Studies were being initiated to adapt Centaur as a stage to other boosters. Mr. Webb said: “The transfer wlli allow the Marshall Center to concentrate its efforts on the Saturn vehicles for the manned lunar landing program. ... It wlli permit the Lewis Research Center to use its experience in liquid hydrogen to further the work already done on one of the most promising high-energy rocket fuels and its application to Centaur and the M-l.”

December 23, 1972
NASA announced appointment of Raymond J. Sumser as Director of Personnel, effective Jan. 21, 1973. Sumser had been Personnel Director at Goddard Space Flight Center since July 1967 and was awarded NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1972. (NASA Ann) “if private enterprise finds it profitable to do so after paying all costs, including any environmental costs imposed by third parties.” He opposed governmental subsidizing of sst because “a governmental decision to produce an sst largely at its own expense is a step toward socialism and away from free enterprise.” Committee Chairman, Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), criticized failure of Administration witnesses to testify on possible sst plans. “If nothing is planned, why don’t they come forward and say so?” (Testimony; upi, W Post, 12/28/72, A7)

March 31, 1963
Radio and optical astronomers of the Mount Wilson and Palomar observatories announced the discovery of what probably are the brightest objects in the universe observed so far. Their brilliance, they believe, may make it possible to penetrate two to three times deeper into space than was considered possible with present-day telescopes. Five of these super-bright celestial bodies have so far been recognized. Radio astronomers detected them by their radiations of energy in the longer wavelengths, at radio frequencies. They were identified in the third Cambridge (England) Catalogue of Radio Sources as 3C—48,3C-196,3C—286, 3C-147, and 3C-273. The objects are so bright that they had been thought to be nearby stars in our own Milky Way Galaxy, but there is now growing evidence that they are very distant galaxies involved in titanic explosions. The study of such distant objects is vital to cosmologists in determining the kind of universe we live in—whether it will continue expanding, stop expanding, or will eventually contract. {NYT, Western Edition, 3/26/63, Wm. L. Laurence) During March: nasa scientists discovered a new “hot spot in the sky” over Wallops Island, Va., where in winter the temperatures 34 to 60 mi. above the earth reach more than 75° F and winds blow at speeds approaching 400 mph. Currently there is no existing scientific theorv to account for the super-high-altitude, jet-streamlike wind and hot air that seems to blow over Washington, Baltimore, and Annapolis during the winter. Details of the discovery were distributed this month in a nasa technical note entitled “Preliminary Measurements of Temperatures and Winds Above 50 KM (31 mi.) over Wallops Island.” Authors of the pamphlet are Dr. William Nordberg and Wendell Smith, of the Goddard Space Flight Center. (Balt. Sun, 3/31/63)

June 2, 1964
NASA engineers at the Goddard Space Flight Center were puzzled 'by the question of how a colony of fleas managed to infiltrate a special chamber which was supposedly protected against invasion even by bacteria. The chamber had been designed and installed to test, under conditions simulating those of space, optical equipment to be placed on board the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. One possible explanation for the presence of the fleas suggested that they entered concealed in the fur-lined parkas worn by technicians adjusting equipment inside the low-temperature chamber. (Wash. Daily News, 6/2/64)

December 30, 1975
President Ford had signed legislation establishing a 17-member U.S. Metric Board to plan for voluntary conversion of the nation to the metric system. Dr. Ernest Ambler, acting head of the National Bureau of Standards, said the signing of the bill would encourage U.S. industry and commerce to export products made to metric dimensions, which “should stimulate additional international trade.” (SBD, 30 Dec 75, 299) During December: Goddard Space Flight Center and the Fla. Dept, of Natural Resources had approved the first long-range, space-assisted program to develop an “early warning system” for the onset of red tide, an ocean-borne organism that had left tons of dead fish rotting on beaches around the world. Dr. Warren A. Hovis of GSFC had designed an ocean-color scanner capable of detecting subtle variations in the color of coastal waters that might indicate changes in concentration and species of marine phytoplankton, especially the red-tide dino-flagellate Gymnodinium breve. Red tide had been a major problem because of oxygen depletion in ocean water from fish decomposition, and eye and respiratory infections caused by toxic particles produced in the organism. Shellfish beds affected had been closed for months by authorities. An outbreak of red tide in 1971 had cost the state of Fla. more than $20 million in lost tourist business. The ocean scanner, developed for use in the Nimbus-G pollution-sensing spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1978, could be used in photographic overflights by aircraft and Landsat spacecraft, in connection with on-site sampling of ocean waters by research ships, to detect the organism in time to take countermeasures and warn the public about affected areas. {Spaceflight, Vol 17 No. 12, Dec 75, 425)

January 16, 1964
nasa announced selection of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen to nasa Mississippi Test Operations and Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn launch vehicle test program. Contract called for supply of up to 30 tons of liquid hydrogen per day by no later than mid-1965, would be renewable annually through December 1970. (nasa Release 64-10)

September 1, 1988
The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on

June 8, 1961
Astronomers of Lick Observatory positioned 36-inch refractor telescope so as to intersect the path of Echo I at its predicted point of maximum elevation. Prediction of Goddard Space Flight Center was confirmed at exact time and within 10 minutes of arc.

November 19, 1993
NASA announced that the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had been selected to design and build, in-house, the Space Station Furnace Facility, the first major element of Space Station scientific instrumentation and the focus of microgravity materials science research on the Space Station. (NASA Release 93-211)

May 17, 1985
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)

May 7, 1963
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contracts to naa Space and Information Div. and Space Technology Laboratories (stl) for studies of manned Mars landing-and-retum missions. Each contract called for nine-month studies to determine requirements for possible Mars missions and to decide what research would be required during next several years to implement such a flight program. Other studies of manned Mars missions were being managed by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, emphasizing use of Apollo-class booster and spacecraft; Ames-managed studies emphasized Mars-landing mission with no restrictions as to type of vehicle and spacecraft. (Ames Release 63-21)

October 5, 1999
Analyzing data from NASA’s Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) spacecraft, researchers proved for the first time that smoke from forest fires inhibits rainfall. TRMM, a mission of the United States and Japan and part of NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, had been producing continuous data since December 1997. Daniel Rosenfeld of the Institute of Earth Sciences at Hebrew University in Jerusalem had studied the data, finding that clouds polluted with heavy smoke significantly inhibit warm rain processes. When smoke pollutes them, cloud tops must “grow considerably above the freezing level” to produce rain through a different process. Rosenfeld remarked that the results of his research had validated earlier studies, which showed that urban air pollution inhibits rainfall. Christian D. Kummerow, a TRMM scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) commented that such findings were “making the first inroads into the difficult problem of understanding humanity’s impacts on global precipitation.”(NASA, “Spacecraft Provides First Direct Evidence: Smoke in the Atmosphere Inhibits Rainfall,” news release 99-110, 5 October 1999.)

October 19, 1964
NASA launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with sixth payload of Japan-U.S. experiments in cooperative program to investigate properties and characteristics of the ionosphere. Payload was sent to 521-mi. altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean 840 mi. from launch site. Telemetry during flight was intermittent, so preliminary results of the experiments were inconclusive. For the cooperative experiments, Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo, supplied radio frequency (RF) resonance probe and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center supplied Langmuir probe. (Wallops Release 64-75)

April 20, 1963
Dr. Michael J. Lipschutz, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center astrochemist, reported at American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington that 2,900-1'b. iron meteorite Navititas found in Mexico in 1872 had been on earth for 800,000 years. In addition, meteorite may have traveled through space for 300 million years in asteroid belt before impacting on earth. Age was measured by examination of radioactive age of certain of meteorite’s chemical elements. (Goddard Release)

January 23, 1962
Construction contract for Saturn umbilical tower (Launch Complex 34, Cape Canaveral) was awarded by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Consolidated Steel and Ets-Hokin-Galvin. Cost of the 240-ft. steel tower was estimated at $504,900.

March 1, 1965
First Saturn V booster (S-ic-t) had been moved to static test stand at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to prove out its propulsion system. The 280,000-lb. stage, developed jointly by msfc and Boeing Co., had two tanks with total capacity of 4,400,000 lbs. of liquid oxygen and kerosene, and five F-l engines, each weighing ten tons, which provided total thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (msfc Release 65-47; Marshall Star, 3/3/65, 1, 6)

April 23, 1973
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Marshall Space Flight Center Director, announced personnel actions to reduce the Center’s total Civil Service personnel to 5214 by June 30. Separation notices had been given to 108 employees—87 at Huntsville, Ala., and 21 at msfc installations elsewhere. A total of 67 MSFC employees would receive notices of change to lower grade, with 15 losing some salary. Reassignment of 57 would be made concurrently with the reduction in force, (msfc Release 73-45)

August 30, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced appointment of Dr. Charles R. O’Dell as project scientist for Large Space Telescope (lst). Dr. O’Dell was Chairman of Univ. of Chicago Dept, of Astronomy and Astrophysics and Director of university’s Yerkes Observatory, (msfc Release 72-118)

April 30, 1968
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences he was greatly concerned about future of entire space program without propulsion capability of nuclear rocket program. Nuclear propulsion was “a must for our future space needs.” Failure to proceed into development phase would result in “losses of experienced personnel and cost-increase effects on the total program. ... A one-year delay in funding could result in as much as two years delay in having an operational nuclear engine.” Nuclear vehicle as 3rd stage on Saturn V could significantly improve payload and mission versatility, and improved capability could be utilized “to improve mission effectiveness, to increase the mission and payload reliability, and to extend the spectrum of potential missions in the late 1970’s and the 1980’s. Equally important . . . for high energy missions requiring the launch of two or more Saturn V’s, with subsequent rendezvous in earth orbit, we will be able to reduce the number of Saturn V’s needed through the utilization of a nuclear vehicle,” at substantial cost savings. In response to questions by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.), Dr. von Braun said space program was “cutting edge of our technology advancements and of many advances in the applied sciences . . . [because] no other program . . . involves so many branches of technology and science.” Reduction in NASA’s S60-million NERVA request to $11 million recommended by House would be disastrous because to make manned space operations useful, “plenty of payload” was required. AEC funding for NERVA had been approved, hut if cuts were made in NASA funding, program would be nonexistent. (Testimony; Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 5/1/68, A3)

April 7, 1976
The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International Corporation was awarded a $6.9 million contract by Goddard Space Flight Center to produce RS-27 engine systems for the Delta launch vehicle. The contract called for delivery of 10 engines between March and Sept. 1977. NASA had returned 12 Rocketdyne-built H-1 engines for use in producing the new RS-27 systems. (Rockwell Release RD-6)

July 13, 1988
The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA general counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27, 1985. He began his career at NASA in September 1982, as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8898)

October 25, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $169 000 contract for the study of hydrogen as a possible energy source, to the Institute of Gas Technology, Chicago, 111. The 10-mo study was to evaluate methods of producing large quantities of hydrogen and select a few of the most promising for follow-on studies. It was also to identify industrial and residential uses and estimate costs of developing technology. (msfc Release 74-207)

May 7, 1975
Canada’s Anik 3 (Telesat—3) domestic communications satellite was launched by NASA at 7:35 pmEDTfrom Eastern Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. Originally scheduled for March, the launch had been postponed because of a strike by McDonnell Douglas Corp. workers [see 10 Feb.]. The satellite was placed in the planned highly elliptical transfer orbit with a 35 945-km apogee, 231.4-km perigee, 634.3-min period, and 24.75° inclination. Ground control fired the spacecraft’s apogee kick motor at 1:30 pm EDT on 10 May, circularizing the geosynchronous orbit at 38 000 km; the spacecraft was drifting toward its final operational location at approximately 104° west longitude. Anik (Eskimo word for brother) 3 was third in a series of Canadian domestic comsats; Anik 1 (launched 9 Nov. 1972) and Anik 2 (launched 20 April 1973) were operating at 114° and 109p west longitude, providing TV and telephone service to the most remote areas of Canada. Built by Hughes Aircraft Co., Anik 3 was 1.8 m in diameter and 3.3 m high, weighing 544 kg at launch and 272 kg in orbit. With power from 23 000 solar cells and enough battery capacity to maintain full service during a solar eclipse. Anik had 13 channels that could transmit up to 10 color TV transmissions or 9600 telephone circuits or analog or digital data. The NASA—Telesat Canada contract defined the NASA mission objective as the placement of the satellite in a synchronous transfer orhit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place the spacecraft into a stationary orbit with enough residual stationkeeping propulsion to meet mission-lifetime requirements. This objective was met and the mission was adjudged successful on 20 May. NASA would be reimbursed for launch hardware, services, and DOD range support. The project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA MORs, 25 April 75, 20 May 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 1—7 May 75; NASA Releases 75—113, 75—131)

December 26, 1965
Planning Research Corp. of Los Angeles received a one-year, $48,229 contract from NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to conduct an independent reliability assessment of the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/26/65, D6)

July 31, 1976
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, published a book, Tektites and Their Origin, which noted that a piece of the moon could be purchased for a small amount. Tektites, the glass pebbles that fall from the sky, are ejecta from lunar volcanoes and not debris of meteorite impacts on the moon or the earth as previously suggested. Lunar missions that discovered tektite-like glass in the dust at some sites, the study of microscopic tektites from the bottom of earth’s seas, and the volcanic appearance of some layered tektites caused the change in ideas. (Goddard News, July 76, 3)

August 19, 1972
Last in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was held over White Sands Missile Range by Martin Marietta Corp. under Air Force Research Laboratories direction. Decelerator was dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft) to check out parachute system at subsonic conditions. In previous tests rocket motors had boosted speed after balloon had carried system to desired altitude. [See July 11 and 26, Aug. 13, and Dec. 14.] (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio; NASA Release 72-118) Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of stars in ultraviolet range between 1000 and 3000 A to investigate composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space and stellar sources. Secondary objective was to evaluate onboard computer, light baffle, inertial reference unit, electronically scanned star tracker, and heat pipes. Spacecraft carried two experiments—Princeton experiment package (pep), 80-cro (32-in) Cassegrainian telescope and photoelectric spectrometer; and Univ. College London (ucl) x-ray experiment containing three telescopes and collimated proportional counter. All spacecraft operations were carried out as planned, with spacecraft checkout completed Aug, 24, experiment checkout completed Aug. 26, and stabilization and control system checkout completed Aug. 28. By 2:00 pm edt Aug. 29 Oao 3 had completed 120 orbits with systems operating almost perfectly, pep was viewing bright star Zeta in constellation Ophiuchus and obtaining excellent data. UCL experiment was undergoing calibration and alignment and would begin observing x-ray sources in September. Fourth OAO launched by NASA, Oao 3 at 2200 kg (4900 lbs), 2 m wide and 3 m high (7 x 10 ft), was heaviest and most complex automated spacecraft developed by U.S. It had new gyro inertial reference unit with four star trackers, electrically scanned star tracker, precision digital solar-aspect sensor, and onboard computer that could handle 16000, 18-bit words and store 1024 ground commands. OAO-B had crashed Nov. 30, 1970, when shroud failed to separate after launch. Oao 2 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was still returning valuable data. Oao 1 (launched April 8, 1966) had failed because of high-voltage arcing in star trackers and malfunction in power supply system. OAO program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72-156)

June 11, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $3.2-million contract by Space Shuttle prime contractor Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. to Avco Corp. Aerostructures Div. to manufacture the intertank section of the shuttle’s external tank. The intertank would provide support between the liquid-oxygen tank and the larger liquid-hydrogen tank. The disposable external tank, 47 m long and 8.4 m in diameter, would carry liquid propellant for the Space Shuttle’s three main engines. (MSFC Release 75 — 116)

June 19, 1991
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the selection of TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California, for one Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer/Earth Probe Spacecraft (TOMS/EP). The contract was to provide for the design, development, fabrication, assembly, test, integration, launch, and post-launch support of the aircraft. (NASA Release C91-t)

November 6, 1973
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from Woomera, Australia, carrying a Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy experiment to a 167.4-km (104-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 7—8:	Scientists from the European Space Research Organization (esro), nasa Hq., Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and four U.S. universities met at Marshall Space Flight Center on project SOREL, a sunorbiting relativity experiment. SOREL, a satellite to orbit the sun and measure relativistic gravity phenomena, had been proposed by esro in 1970. Final results of the mission definition study and Sorel’s scientific merits and technical feasibility were discussed, (msfc Release 73-161; msfc pao)

November 20, 1961
NASA Launch Operations Directorate announced establishment of Offices of Financial Management and of Procurement and Contracts to support NASA activities at Cape Canaveral, previously done by Marshall Space Flight Center.

August 24, 1994
NASA announced the discovery in the southern constellation Scorpius of an unusually bright X-ray source by an instrument aboard NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. It remained to be determined whether the new source was a black hole, a pulsar, or some new object, according to B. Alan Harmon of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 94-140)

November 12, 1985
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) issued a request for proposals to LTV, Martin Marietta, and TRW to compete for a contract to design, develop, and manufacture an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). The three companies worked previously on OMV definition studies and had until December 20, 1985, to respond. NASA expected to award the contract in June 1986 and planned the first OMV flight for early 1991. The contract would include provisions for testing and hardware flight testing before the OMV's actual operational missions. The company selected would build one vehicle, with NASA having an option to request construction of a second. Often called a "space tug," the OMV would transfer satellites and other objects between earth orbits and would extend the reach of the Space Shuttle by about 1000 miles. It would have the ability to retrieve satellites from high orbits, bring them back to the Space Shuttle for maintenance and repair, then return them to their operational orbits. The OMV would also be able to reboost satellites as their orbits gradually decayed. The OMV would be an unmanned spacecraft, 15 feet in diameter and approximately 4 feet long. Its life would be about 10 years with refurbishment and on-orbit maintenance included in the design. NASA expected initially to deploy the OMV from the Space Shuttle for short duration missions; later the OMV would remain in orbit for extended periods for use in both Space Shuttle-based and space station-based modes of operation. (NASA Release 85-151) Civilian Programs

September 29, 1994
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)

July 21, 1965
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center had issued 11 new contracts and modified one other to provide for further studies and component development on the Apollo Extension Systems (Aes). (msfc Release 65-186)

April 13, 1965
Reported that Dr. William I. Donn of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont Geological Observatory, Dr. Wilbur G. Valentine of Brooklyn College, and Dr. Bertram D. Donn of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had challenged presently accepted ages of the earth (4.5 billion yrs.) and the sun (5 billion yrs.). They had asserted that the oldest of continental rocks were so very ancient that the sun’s and the earth’s ages allowed too little time for continent formation by earthly processes and from earthly materials. Two alternative explanations were proposed:	(1) either the sun and the earth must be much older, perhaps by a half-billion years or more; or, (2) the original continents were thrown down upon the planet’s surface when objects from space— hundreds of miles across in size—crashed into the earth. Research results had been published in the Bulletin of the Geological Society of America. (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/13/65)

January 7, 1963
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded preliminary, 90-day contract for development of variable-thrust RL-10 rocket engine to Pratt and Whitney Aircraft. The hydrogen-powered engine would be capable of operating at as little as 12.5 per cent of its rated thrust and be capable of restarting in space. Throttleable RL-10 engines had been test-fired in feasibility studies at Pratt and Whitney plant and nasa Lewis Research Center. (Huntsville Times, 1/8/63) communications agency Telespazio in

November 7, 1994
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and a consortium led by Texas Instruments' Metallurgical Materials Division were trying to use advanced aerospace materials to develop a demonstrator automobile engine significantly lighter and more efficient than the ones in present use. They planned to use high-temperature, high-strength materials developed for the defunct National Aerospace Plane. NASA would provide funding under its Aerospace Industry Technology Program. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)

January 23, 1999
Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the “holy grail” of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, “Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time,” news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)

March 6, 1997
NASA researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, announced a plan to collaborate with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California, to explore the potential of the substance Aerogel, which has tremendous insulating capabilities. Scientists said that they were optimistic that they could manipulate the material, rendering it transparent and, therefore, especially useful in constructing energy-efficient windows for homes and automobiles. During the 1930s, a researcher at Stanford University had discovered Aerogel, often called frozen smoke because of its hazy appearance. NASA engineers had used Aerogel as an insulating agent aboard Mars Pathfinder in 1996. Although the substance is the lightest solid known⎯only three times the density of air, a block of Aerogel weighing less than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) can support 0.5 tons (450 kilograms or 0.45 tonnes). Aerogel’s large internal surface area, which disperses heat throughout its structure, causes the material’s extreme insulating capability⎯a 1-inch-thick (2.5-centimeter-thick) Aerogel window would offer the same insulation value as 15 panes of glass. John M. Horack, Assistant Laboratory Director for Space and Science Communications at MSFC, called the development of Aerogel “a great example of how NASA space research generates scientific knowledge that can be used to improve the quality of life on Earth.”(NASA, “NASA Research in Space May Redesign Household Windows,” news release 97-34, 6 March 1997. 215 Warren E. Leary, “Microbe Peril from Mars Is Possibility, Panel Warns,” New York Times, 7 March 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Warn on Mars Bugs,” 7 March 1997; Mark Carreau, “Fear of Martians,” Houston Chronicle, 7 March 1997.)

March 16, 1961
NASA Robert H. Goddard Space Flight Center officially dedicated at Greenbelt, Md., dedication address delivered by Dr. Detlev Bronk, President of the National Academy of Sciences. It was the 35th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s successful launching of the world’s first liquid fuel rocket. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard accepted the congressional medal honoring her husband.

August 8, 1963
With launching of Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Kronogard Range, Sweden and U.S. completed series of sounding rocket experiments to study noctilucent clouds near Arctic Circle. Sponsored by nasa and Swedish Committee for Space Research, program included launchings of Areas rockets with payloads to measure winds and Nike-Cajun rockets with payloads to make direct cloud samplings during 1961 and 1962. Four Nike-Cajun rockets with rocket grenade payloads were successfully launched during summer 1963, these experiments measuring upper atmosphere temperatures, winds, pressure, and density and measuring changes in size of artificial cloud particles created by smoke puffs from the payloads. Experimenters were scientists from Institute of Meteorology, Univ. of Stockholm; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had responsibility for U.S. coordination in the project. (nasa Release 63-179)

August 26, 1964
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached 95.3-mi. altitude in satisfactory flight to measure ambient electron density, measure ion densities, and monitor solar ultraviolet radiations. Instrumented payload, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, contained CW propagation experiment, probe with Gerdien condenser, planar ion trap, and planar secondary emission detector. Another objective of the flight was to test efficiency of the 12.267 mc/s shroud antenna at D-region altitudes; one of the antennas performed unsatisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)

February 12, 1962
In NAS-sponsored lecture on “Geomagnetism” for Voice of America broadcast, Dr. James P. Heppner of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said: “Each new space experiment adds to the list of unanswered questions about our electromagnetic environment.” He pointed to the changes in the scientific concepts of the boundary of the earth’s atmosphere and of relationships between the earth’s magnetic field and solar radiation that have resulted from data already acquired by satellites and probes. • Soviet officials indicated that newsmen may be allowed to cover the next Soviet space shot, a report later denied.

August 23, 1996
NASA’s analysts at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), who had investigated the causes of the Challenger explosion, joined the probe into the crash of TWA flight 800, which exploded near Long Island, New York, on 17 July 1996. NASA offered the services of its MSFC investigative team to analyze why the center fuel tank of the Boeing 747 had exploded. Officials from the National Transportation Safety Board led the investigation, with support from a variety of other agencies, including NASA, the U.S. Navy, and the FBI.(Robert Davis, “Challenger Experts Aid in TWA Probe,” USA Today, 23 August 1996; Eric Malnic, “Experts at NASA Join Probe of TWA Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 23 August 1996.)

March 5, 1999
The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, “NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft,” news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)

February 25, 1972
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, received Hermann Oberth Award of Huntsville, Ala., Chapter of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics for outstanding scientific achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. He was cited at awards banquet in Huntsville, for his “many valuable contributions to lunar science, planetary formation, and better understanding of the origin of the solar system through the Apollo program; high resolution astronomy through the Stratoscope and lst (large space telescope) programs; the science of our sun through the ATM . . . program; stellar astronomy, earth resources, and life sciences through the Skylab program; the future of high energy astronomy through HEAO . . . and the promising possibilities for scientific payloads through the Shuttle program.” (msfc Release 72-14)

January 12, 1996
G. Porter Bridwell retired after nearly 40 years of service at MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Bridwell had served as Director of MSFC from 1994 until his retirement. He left the Center with an annual operating budget of US$2.5 billion and more than 3,000 employees. Bridwell had spent most of his career at MSFC, serving briefly as Acting Director of Stennis Space Center in 1987, and at NASA Headquarters from 1993 to 1994. Bridwell had also been a member of the space station redesign team. During his tenure, Bridwell had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, the Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Exceptional Achievement Medal, attaining the rank of Meritorious Executive.3 NASA announced that J. Wayne Littles would take over as the new Director of MSFC.(NASA, “Littles Named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 96-3, 16 January 1996. 1)

April 5, 1973
The National Academy of Engineering announced election of 70 members, including Director Edgar M. Cortright, Jr., of Langley Research Center; Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Marshall Space Flight Center Director; Ames Research Center engineer Robert T. Jones; Robert J. Parks, Assistant Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director for Flight Projects; and Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph V. Charyk. (nae Release, 4/5/73)

March 28, 1994
GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)

March 8, 2006
In a comprehensive survey published in the Journal of Glaciology, H. Jay Zwally, of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Maryland, and a team of NASA scientists confirmed

September 12, 1972
NASA launched Javelin sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and particles experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)

November 12, 1999
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Ball and Aerojet—General Picked To Study New Weather Sensor,” news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)

June 3, 1974
Operation of a demonstration solar heating and cooling unit was begun at Marshall Space Flight Center, using three house trailers to simulate a residence. Continuing studies would combine NASA and industry capabilities to improve efficiency and minimize cost. Efforts included development of a computer-simulation procedure for technical and economic evaluation of the systems, studies to explore mass-production effects on solar-collector costs, definition of a commercially practical absorption-cycle air conditioner that could be operated with water at 353 K (176°F) to 357 K (183°F), verification of the absorptive coating stability and application of coatings to lower-cost materials, and evaluation of other thermal storage techniques, such as melting and freezing waxes, as used in spacecraft, (msfc Release 74-77)

November 6, 1973
NASA activities in solar heating and cooling were summarized by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Aeronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy in hearings on H.R. 10952, the Solar Heating and Demonstration Act. Thermal control of spacecraft had been a NASA challenge since the space program’s inception. NASA and its contractors had developed competency in materials, thermal control coatings, heating and cooling technology, and thermal analysis technology which bore directly on the collection and use of solar energy. In the Skylab program Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a thermal coating with unique properties that increased solar collection efficiencies, resulting in higher operating temperatures. The higher temperatures allowed more efficient operation of absorption refrigeration cycles. NASA’s work in solar heating and cooling included advanced research and technology, a residential systems engineering demonstration program, and the planned use of a large new office building as a test bed to obtain realistic engineering and operating experience. (Transcript)

October 13, 1985
NASA announced that, effective October 13, Carroll Dicus, Jr. was appointed chairman of the NASA Board of Contract Appeals and chairman of the Inventions and Contributions Board, succeeding Frederick Lees who retired in September. From 1968 to 1974 Dicus was an attorney in the chief counsel's office at Goddard Space Flight Center and from March 1974 to October 1980 an administrative judge on the NASA Board of Contract Appeals. He then went to the U.S. Postal Service where he was an associate judicial officer and vice chairman of the Board of Contract Appeals. Dicus is a graduate of Johns Hopkins University and the University of Baltimore Law School. (NASA anno., Oct 85)

April 30, 1965
Operational control of U.S. weapons to intercept and destroy armed satellites had been assigned to the Space Defense Center at Colorado Springs, Denver Post reported. The Space Defense Center included the Space Detection and Tracking Systems (Spadats), which recorded the launches of all space vehicles, foreign and domestic, and logged precise orbital data until they decayed in the earth’s atmosphere. (Partner, Denver Post, 4/30/65) During April: More than 100 delegates from Eurospace toured U.S. aerospace installations, including NASA Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, and facilities of U.S. firms corresponding to Eurospace member companies. Purpose of the U.S. European Space Conference was to bring together top industrial leaders from European and American aerospace companies to review problems posed for the industry by evolution of space technology. (M&R, 4/26/65, 9)

October 19, 1973
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center meteorology experiment to a 42.7-km (26.5-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The launch was in conjunction with a Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970) overpass. Because only one of four optical channels transmitted data and the thermistor was reading open, no significant data were received, (nasa Rpt SRl)

January 29, 1985
NASA announced it had selected Grumman Data System Corp. for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for a high-speed (Class VI) computer system for Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The fixed-price contract would require Grumman to provide hardware, software, documentation, and services for installation and maintenance of a scientific- and engineering-computations system in support of MSFC's programs in thermal, electrical, load, and structural-design characteristics that influence flight-vehicle and payload performance. The five-year contract, to begin no later than August 1985, would cost about $42 million and provide for a total lease period, with renewal in periods of one to 12 months, not to exceed 60 months. (NASA Release 8515)

August 1, 1973
Samples of the material used by NASA for Skylab’s makeshift sunshade during the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission had been subjected during the mission to high-intensity ultraviolet radiation at the Air Force Systems Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center, afsc announced. The tests, to determine the degree of degradation the material experienced from solar uv radiation, had been requested by Marshall Space Flight Center. This accelerated “aging” of the samples enabled NASA engineers to decide that it was not necessary to replace the shield during the Skylab 1—2 mission, (afsc Release 01P 104.73)

December 20, 1962
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, told National Rocket Club that ariel (U.K.-U.S.) satellite was “just beginning to show signs of trouble.” Launched April 26, 1962, the satellite was designed for one year of transmitting life. Wasielewski said some of the experiments aboard the satellite were “not doing as well as some others,” that the radio signals from some of the experiments were fading.

March 28, 1986
James E. Kingsbury, director of the Science and Engineering Directorate at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, was named to manage an ad hoc group formed to requalify the motor of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster for flight. The booster rockets, said NASA, could be ready in one year. Kingsbury said that all of the current hardware could be modified and reused, a comment that surprised outside engineers. (NASA Release 8636; W Post, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 30/86)0*April

July 31, 1990
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a fiveyear, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90aa)

September 5, 1972
Grumman Corp. and American Aviation Corp. had agreed in principle to merge American Aviation with Grumman’s commercial aircraft programs, Wall Street Journal reported. American manufactured sport, utility, and training aircraft. Grumman manufactured, sold, and serviced Gulfstream II corporate jet, and Ag-Cat agricultural aircraft. (WSJ, 9/6/72) September 7:	Skylab Orbital Workshop was delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. President Walter F. Burke in Huntington Beach, Calif., ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Workshop would be moved to U.S. Naval Facility at Seal Beach Sept. 8 for transfer to U.S.S. Point Barrow and 14-day voyage to Cape Kennedy. Workshop, weighing 25 000 kg (55 000 lb), was largest section of Skylab experimental space station scheduled for 1973 launch. (nasa Off Admin; Miles, LA Times, 9/8/72)

July 30, 1975
Potential propellants for the Space Shuttle had been tested at an underground facility at Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Testing was part of a selection process to find a compatible propellant for the auxiliary motors that would separate the Orbiter from the two solid-rocket boosters. Three candidate propellants were tested at a simulated altitude of 40 000 m. Reusable ballistic test-evaluation system motors, each loaded with 45 kg of propellant, were fired seven times, burning for 2 sec and generating 53 400 newtons of thrust. Exhaust plumes were directed at 15- by 15-cm tiles of thermal protective material at various distances and angles; after the tests, the tiles were checked for erosion of the surfaces and edges. Pressure and temperature were measured in the rocket plumes, and surface temperatures and heating rates were measured on 21 selected material samples. All data and samples were sent to Marshall Space Flight Center for analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 3)

March 15, 1965
The S-ib-1, Chrysler-built first stage of NASA’s Saturn IB, arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center from Michoud Operations in New Orleans for static-firing tests. The stage was 21 ft. in diameter, 80 ft. in length, and weighed 90,000 lbs. For Saturn IB program, its eight engines had been uprated to 200,000 lbs. thrust each and weight had been reduced by some 16,000 lbs. It would be returned to Michoud Operations in about six weeks for post-firing checks. Saturn IB vehicles would be used for earth-orbital missions of Apollo spacecraft. ( msfc Release 65-60)

December 5, 1962
Sodium-vapor experiment launched with Nike-Apache vehicle from nasa Wallops Station was not successful because the payload did not perform properly. Flight was part of current upper-atmosphere studies being conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.

January 19, 1993
NASA scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica in 1992 was as severe as in any previous year. Ozone is destroyed by chorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which are used as solvents, propellants, and coolants.  On September 23, 1992, the surface area of the ozone hole reached 8.9 million square miles. Measurements were taken by the Nimbus-7 and Meteor-3 Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) instruments. (NASA Release 93-14; UPI, Jan 19/93)

October 16, 1991
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)

July 30, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded two parallel one-year contracts to two firms to study feasibility of developing a drill for probing some 100 ft. below the moon’s surface: Northrop Space Laboratories received $509,992; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Defense and Space Center, $570,624. Astronauts on post-Apollo lunar missions would use the drill as a geological research tool to bore holes for geophysical measurements, (msfc Release 65-194)

April 3, 1963
Aerobee 150A rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 147-mi. altitude in experiment to flight-test components of equipment for Eogo satellite and to measure propagation of vlf signals through ionosphere. Flight was joint project of Stanford Research Institute and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-32; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)

August 23, 1962
Electricians began to return to work at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsvllie, Ala., after a ten-day walkout. Estimated 70% of total construction work-force, including workers of other trades who had refused to cross electricians’ picket lines, had returned to work. Hearing on the strike by President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission was scheduled for August 27.

April 6, 1977
NASA reported that Goddard Space Flight Center engineers had tracked a sailboat through the Bermuda Triangle to test the use of satellites for small craft search-and-rescue missions. Signals from a small transmitter on the vessel, relayed by meteorological satellite Nimbus 6 and applications technology satellite Ats 1, allowed GSFC controllers to monitor the ship’s position. The experiment also successfully tested a push-button distress-alarm system designed by retired NASA engineer James L. Baker. (NASA Release 77-72)

December 15, 1993
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).

December 7, 1965
Fourth Chrysler-assembled Saturn ib first stage left NASA Michoud Assembly Facility aboard the nasa barge Palaemon for static-firing tests at Marshall Space Flight Center. Trip would take about seven days, (msfc Release 65-295)

May 2, 1975
Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, and Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Corp. Space Div., were awarded the National Aeronautic Association’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for individual accomplishment in making the Landsat— formerly the Earth Resources Technology Satellite—program the outstanding aerospace event of 1974. The presentation was made at a dinner in Washington, D.C., jointly sponsored by the NAA and the National Aviation Club. Choice of the two officials as representative of the NASA-industry team “which abundantly proved during 1974 the value of remote sensing to space” was the unanimous decision of the selection committee of 26 distinguished leaders and authorities. The committee also paid particular tribute to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Aerospace Group and RCA’s Government and Commercial Systems Group for their roles in the earth-resources and environmental surveys by Landsat. (NAA Release, 6 March 75; NASA Activities, April 75; Goddard News, June 75)

June 12, 1963
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center employee Dave M. McGlathery became third Negro registered at Univ. of Alabama, first at Huntsville Extension Center. (Smith, NYT, 6/14/63, 16)

December 11, 1964
First launch of NASA Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was conducted at Wallops Island, Va., the rocket reaching 6,000-ft. altitude in successful test. For this first test upper stage was inert, the main objectives being to demonstrate compatibility of Aerobee 350 with Aerobee launch-tower rail system and evaluate performance of Aerobee 350 during first-stage (Nike) boost. Preliminary evaluation of test indicated NASA Goddard Space Flight Center could proceed with plans to launch complete live Aerobee 350 without redesign of the rocket or the launcher rail system. (NASA Rpt. SRL)

October 30, 1964
U.S. Army’s Redstone rocket, developed by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center team when it was formerly part of Army Missile Command, was officially retired from active military operation in ceremony at Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Ala. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, spoke on Redstone’s contributions to U.S. space exploration, including serving as launch vehicle for first and second U.S. manned space flights. Redstone was replaced as military missile by Army’s Pershing. (Marshall Star, 10/4/64,10)

May 7, 1975
An Italian launch crew launched Explorer 53 (SAS—C) Small Astronomy Satellite for NASA from San Marco launch platform, located in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Kenya, at 6:45 pm EDT (1:45 am local time 8 May) on a Scout launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered near-equatorial orbit with a 523.35-km apogee, 502.18-km perigee, 94.88-min period, and 2.995° inclination. Primary objectives of the Explorer 53 mission were to measure the x-ray emission of discrete extragalactic sources, to monitor the intensity and spectra of galactic x-ray sources from 1.0 kev to 50 kev, and to monitor the x-ray intensity of the star Sco X— 1. During a preliminary in-orbit checkout, controllers noticed that a stuck nutation damper was causing the spacecraft nutation, or coning, angle to be 4° rather than the planned 0.2°. Energizing the z-axis coil reduced the coning angle to 0.5°. Although the damper could not be freed despite repeated attempts, the nutation could be kept within reasonable limits so that scientific objectives could be achieved. A committee would evaluate the problem. Other spacecraft anomalies included intermittent operation of the spinning digital solar-aspect detector, and irregular and noisy operation of the spacecraft star sensor. Neither problem was expected to seriously degrade the mission. The 195-kg satellite was designed to extend and complement the capabilities of Explorer 42 (Uhuru, launched 12 Dec. 1970 as the first satellite dedicated entirely to the study of x-ray sources in space) and Explorer 48 (launched 16 Nov. 1970 to study galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation). Explorer 53, with its broad spectral range, provided higher energy resolution than previous satellites and permitted a study of physical conditions near an x-ray source. The spacecraft’s quasi-three-axis stabilization system allowed much longer continuous observation of sources. Data from Explorer 53 would provide the basis for the more detailed x-ray studies to be made by High Energy Astronomy Observatories A and B scheduled for launch in 1977 and 1978. The experiment aboard Explorer 53 was designed and built by the Center for Space Research of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The spacecraft control section was designed by the Applied Physics Laboratory of the Johns Hopkins Univ. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program for the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center was responsible for the Scout launch vehicle. Italy was responsible for the assembly, checkout, and launch of the Scout on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASAMORs 6 May 75, 15 May 75; NASA Releases 75—101, 75—121)

September 11, 1985
When launched August 12, 1978 from Cape Canaveral, ICE was known as the International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE-3). The 1054-lb. 16-sided spacecraft became the first spacecraft to orbit at the sun-earth libration point (that point in space where a satellite is suspended in a gravitational equilibrium between the sun and the earth-moon system) and the first to traverse the earth's distant geomagnetic tail. ISEE-3 also was the first spacecraft to make multiple swings by the moon and the first to use a lunar gravity-assist maneuver for targeting-escape trajectory. It made more gravity-assist maneuvers (five) than any other spacecraft. After the spacecraft completed most of the objectives of its original mission, it remained in good operational condition and had approximately 75% (150 lb.) of its total propellant reserves (200 lb.). Engineers at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), under the leadership of Dr. Robert Farquhar, developed a plan that would divert ISEE-3 from its libration point orbit, take it past the moon five times, and propel it out toward Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although the spacecraft was not designed for cometary investigation (it had no cameras or dust detectors), GSFC scientists believed it was well-suited for measurements of a comet's plasma properties, a chief objective of cometary exploration. In addition, the trajectory developed by Farquhar and his colleagues brought the spacecraft within range of a March 1986 upstream intercept of Comet Halley. That 1986 upstream pass, following an October 31, 1985 distant pass, was important because ICE would provide data on the solar-wind state upstream from Halley and earth-based telescopes would then observe the effect of the solar wind on Halley's tail. The spacecraft would return in July 2012 to the vicinity of earth, where a lunar gravity-assist maneuver could place the spacecraft into an earth orbit from which it might be retrievable. (NASA Release 85-121)

July 24, 1986
Dr. James C. Fletcher released to members of Congress a statement indicating that employment at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, would increase from 12,600 to 14,000 employees during Space Station development, with a potential for another 1,000 jobs should JSC take on additional Space Station tasks. "Another way to look at this," he warned "is that without the Space Station program, JSC's employment level likely will not grow significantly over the next few years." The projected increase notwithstanding, officials at the JSC were concerned with their status because of the recent decision to move the habitation module's development to the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville Alabama. They were assured, however, that the move had to do with coordinating the habitation module and the module structure and that "the Johnson Space Center's role as NASA's preeminent center of excellence in manned spacecraft systems is not changing." (NASA Release 8698; NY `"Times, Jul 26/86; W Post, Jul 26/86)

March 16, 1965
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala., received an honorary doctorate of laws from Iona College. (NYT, 3/17/65, 38)

May 22, 1975
Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) was monitoring water resources in Miss. and the effects of pollution on the water system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. As part of the NASA earth resources program, three data-collection buoys placed in the Pearl River were transmitting water-quality data to Landsat 2, which relayed the data to a tracking station at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) for processing. Processed data on water temperature, dissolved oxygen, acidity/alkalinity, and conductivity were received in the Miss. Air and Water Pollution Control Commission, where state investigators could identify a pollution source within 15 min of a satellite pass over the buoys. A similar experiment was being conducted in Mobile Bay by NASA and the Marine Environmental' Sciences Consortium. Data from the experiments would help evaluate the usefulness of the system and suggest improvements. (MSFC Release 75—97)

November 12, 1972
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

December 3, 1975
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)

May 21, 1998
Chryssa Kouveliotou of the Universities Space Research Association led a team of astronomers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in confirming the existence of magnetars, a special class of neutron stars with a magnetic field one thousand trillion times the strength of Earth’s. The team calculated the strength of SGR1806-20, first discovered in 1979, by combining data from NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer satellite and the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics.(UniSci Science and Research News, “‘Magnetar’ Generates Most Intense Magnetic Field in Universe,” 21 May 1998; C. Kouveliotou et al., “An X-ray Pulsar with a Superstrong Magnetic Field in the Soft Gamma-Ray Repeater SGR1806-20,” Nature 393, no. 6682 (21 May 1998): 235–237; NASA, “Strongest Stellar Magnetic Field Yet Observed Confirms Existence of Magnetars,” news release 98-87, 20 May 1998.)

November 28, 1994
NASA and contractor engineers were studying a number of existing engine designs as they tried to lower the propulsion technology risk for private development of a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) in the early 2000s. Operability rather than performance would be the key to any RLV engine. According to Len Worlund, director of the Advanced Transportation Technology Office at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to get reusability, NASA and its partners were working to build components that better withstood repeated firings. They were also trying to lower the high turbine temperatures that had saddled the Shuttle's engines with crack-prone cooling shields that required frequent repairs. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)

October 6, 1999
NASA researchers at MSFC unveiled an experimental 50-foot (15-meter) track using magnetic levitation (maglev) technology to propel a 30-pound (13.6-kilogram) model of a spacecraft, at a speed of 60 miles (97 kilometers) per hour, in 0.5 seconds. MSFC researchers had sought to reduce launch costs, as well as to reduce space-vehicle size with the development of a maglev launch-assist system. The maglev track was theoretically capable of propelling and releasing a spacecraft at 600 miles (965 kilometers) per hour; wing design would then lift the craft and “give it a kick start” before the ignition of the rocket’s engines. MSFC Manager of Launch Technologies Sherry Buschmann commented that the researchers believed the use of maglev technology could cut launch vehicle size by 20 percent. NASA’s industry partner in the experimental technology was PRT Advanced Maglev Systems Inc. of Park Forest, Illinois.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “New NASA Track Races Toward Cheaper Trips to Space,” news release 99-260, 4 October 1999; Kent Faulk, “NASA Spacecraft Float to Future: Researchers Test Levitation as Way To Boost Launches,” Birmingham News (AL), 7 October 1999.)

December 18, 1974
NASA launched Symphonie 1, French and West German experimental communications satellite, at 9:39 pm est from Eastern Test Range on a three-stage, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The 402-kg satellite entered a transfer orbit with a 38 071-km apogee, 402-km perigee, 688.2-min period, and 13.2° inclination. Nine seconds after the Thor-Delta’s 3rd stage separated from the 2nd stage, the inertial measurement unit (the altitude-sensing portion in the 2nd-stage guidance system) stopped functioning, but the failure did not affect the path of the already separated 3rd stage. In addition, the main engine cutoff was achieved by fuel depletion with 430 kg liquid oxygen remaining instead of with the planned depletion. The anomalies, which did not affect the mission, were under investigation. Ground controllers in West Germany activated the apogee kick motor, the first using liquid propellant, at 6:00 pm est 21 Dec., putting the spacecraft in circular geosynchronous orbit with 35 810-km apogee, 35 767-km perigee, 23-hr 56-min period, and 0.3° inclination. The spacecraft was despun and three-axis-stabilized and its large solar panels were successfully deployed 24 Dec. Symphonie 1 drifted eastward to its final station at 115° W longitude over the west coast of Africa and began operations 2 Jan. 1975. The NASA mission objective—to launch the spacecraft into a transfer orbit that would permit the onboard propulsion system to place it in an accurate synchronous orbit—was satisfied and the mission was adjudged successful 6 Jan. Symphonie 1 would provide 1200 telephone circuits, 8 voice channels, and 2 color TV channels for experimental communications between Europe, Africa, and South America. The first of two Symphonie satellites, provided for by a French-West Germany agreement signed June 1967, the satellite was developed by a French-German industrial consortium under the direction of the French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) and the West German Gesell-schaft fur Weltraumforschung (Gfw). In October 1973 NASA agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis and in June 1974 signed a launch services contract with CNES-Gfw. Goddard Space Flight Center in cooperation with French and West German ground stations was responsible for tracking the spacecraft during launch and transfer orbit operations. GSFC was also responsible for the launch vehicle. (nasa mors, 13 Dec 74, 6 Jan 75; NASA prog off, interview, 29 Aug 75; NASA Release 74-316)

July 13, 1961
Mercury-Redstone 6 was static tested for 30 seconds at Marshall Space Flight Center to ensure satisfactory operation of the turbopump assembly.

December 15, 1965
Brazil successfully launched the first Nike-Apache sounding rocket from its Natal Range in a joint program with NASA to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere with emphasis on the effects of cosmic rays. Launching was conducted by the Brazilian Space Activities Commission (cnae). Instrumentation for the rocket payload and the telemetry ground support equipment was constructed by Brazilian technicians at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 6580; nasa Release 65-328)

January 25, 1974
A new medical device, the mobile automatic metabolic analyzer (mama) developed from Apollo and Skylab technology to measure energy expended by ambulatory patients, was presented to the Univ. of Alabama Medical School by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center. The instrument—primarily a mass spectrometer—:would accurately measure metabolic activity, recording oxygen consumed, carbon dioxide produced, and nitrogen and moisture exchanged to gauge the progress of severely disabled persons through phases of rehabilitation. mama was developed and manufactured at msfc under NASA’s technology utilization program, (nasa Release 74-18)

March 22, 1973
nasa launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center magnetospheric physics experiment to a 239.8-km (149-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) During March: A large comet from 16 to 160 km (10 to 100 mi) in diameter was discovered past Jupiter’s orbit by Czechslovakian-born astronomer Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, using a telescope at Hamburg Observatory in Bergedorf, West Germany. Dr. Brian Marsden, Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s Central Telegram Bureau, said later that Comet Kohoutek should reach perihelion, its closest point to the sun— 21 million km (13 million mi)—Dec. 27, “when it should shine perhaps as luminously as the star Sirius.” Its nearest approach to the earth would be 121 million to 129 million km (75 million to 80 million mi) in mid-January 1974. The comet should be visible six weeks before, and northern hemisphere observers should enjoy a good view of it Jan. 10-15, 1974. (Alexander, W Post, 4/15/73, G7)

June 23, 1961
Director of Marshall Space Flight Center directed that further engineering work on Saturn C-2 configuration would be discontinued, and that efforts would be applied to clarification of the Saturn C-3 and Nova concepts.

December 12, 1970
Uhuru (Explorer XL]I) Small Astronomy Satellite was (aimdied into an equatorial orbit by Italy Iron the San Marco launch platform off the coast of Kenya, East Africa, on Kenya’s Independence Day. “Lfhuru" was the Swahili word for “freedom." Boosted by a four-stage Scout vehicle to map x-ray sources both within and beyond the Milky Way Galaxy, the satellite was the first launched for the United States by another country. At left Mrs. Marjorie Townsend, project manager, discussed satellite performance with a colleague during p re flight tests at Goddard Space Flight Center. During first day of operation Uhuru was expected to collect more data than had been obtained with sounding rockets in past eight years. Satellite’s Jong observing time, rather than the few minutes for sounding rockets, would permit observation of x-ray sources from 30 to 50 times fainter than those observed thus far, probably increasing number of observed x-ray sources from 540 to several hundred. Uhuru was first in series of three explorers in Small Astronomy Satellite program to survey sky above earth’s atmosphere and identify x-ray, gamma-ray, UV, and infrared sources. It was first U.S. satellite launched by another country. Under NASA and Univ. of Rome agreement NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team, trained at Wallops Station, conducted assembly, checkout, and launch services on cost-reimbursable basis, sasb would be launched in October 1971 and SAS-C in December 1972. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 70-203)

May 14, 1973
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from Kiruna, Sweden. The first carried a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 123-km (76.4-mi) altitude to study ion composition and density in the ionospheric D- and E-regions at polar latitudes. A second Nike-Apache carried a Dudley Observatory and Univ. of Stockholm payload to a 103-km (64.0-mi) altitude to collect background data during the absence of noctilucent clouds for comparison with data obtained by two Nike-Apaches launched from Kiruna Aug. 1 and a Nike-Cajun launched from Kiruna Aug. 2. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily and experimental objectives appeared to have been achieved, (nasa Rpts srl)

July 16, 1986
Lawrence B. Mulloy, a manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, in charge of the solid rocket motors that were held responsible for the Challenger accident, announced his retirement after more than 30 years of Government'-0*service. He was among those who opted for liftoff of the illfated Shuttle and was repeatedly faulted for this judgement by William P. Rogers, chairman of the commission investigating the accident. He was the third Marshall manager to retire since the accident, following William R. Lucas and George B. Hardy. (W Post, Jul 17/86; P Inq, Jul 17/86; B Sun, Jul 17/86)

September 20, 1999
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.

November 5, 1962
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $12 million worth of contracts for tracking-network modification in preparation for lengthy manned space flights. Contracts were awarded to: Canogo Electronics Corp., for tracking antenna acquisition aid systems; Radiation, Inc., for digital command encoders; Collins Radio Corp., for RF command systems; and Electro Mechanical Research Corp., for pcm systems.

February 1, 1983
NASA transferred operation and management of its Landsat system to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) during ceremonies at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Beginning in 1972 with the launch of Landsat 1 (Erts 1, the Earth-resources technology satellite), the Landsat program was a research and development effort to determine the usefulness of satellite multispectral data from synoptic views of the Earth’s surface for agricultural and urban planning, geologic exploration, land management, and snowmelt and flood-runoff analysis. Over the following 10 years NASA had operated four Landsats, including Landsat 4, launched in July 1982, and a ground system at GSFC. Landsat 1 and Landsat 2 were no longer operating; Landsat 3 would be retired later in 1983 because of degradation related to age. In 1979 the Reagan administration told NASA to transfer operation to NOAA so that the latter agency could work toward eventual commercialization of the system. NASA had relinquished operation of Landsat 4 (except for the thematic mapper, which NASA would continue to use), the control center at GSFC, and the multispectral-scanner data-processing facility, also at GSFC, and would hand over control of the thematic mapper early in 1985. NOAA would also take over the Landsat 4 backup spacecraft (the Landsat D now in final checkout by General Electric) that would replace Landsat 4, probably in mid-1985. NOAA would reimburse NASA for the use of buildings and utilities. (NASA Release 83-7) JPL would go ahead with efforts to reestablish contact, which would be unsuccessful if the lander had multiple problems. No telemetry dala were available to diagnose the situation. The 64-meter Deep Space Tracking Network antenna, near Canberra, had bombarded the lander on Mars with 80-to 100-kilowatt signals, said George Gianopulos, Viking team leader at JPL. Gianopulos said that commands from JPL through Australia could be up to 40° off the receiving line into the leader’s antenna dish and still be picked up. Getting into the lander to reset the switch “is going to be a neat trick,” he added. Launched August 20, 1975, and designed for a 90-day mission, Viking 1 had shown “incredible stamina” in the harsh environment of Mars. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) could provide power for years, but in 1982 its four nickel-cadmium batteries began to show their age. Viking could be instructed to charge or discharge batteries to keep them functioning longer. A command sent November 19 to repeat this exercise apparently got into the antenna-pointing subroutine and switched the crucial communications antenna to point away from Earth. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 28/83, 1)

July 23, 1972
Fairchild Industries, Inc., and Western Telegraph Co. announced formation of new company, as yet unnamed, to enter domestic satellite field. Spokesman for Fairchild and Western (which had no connection with Western Union Telegraph Co.) said new company would use Fairchild’s satellite systems and development and manufacturing capabilities. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/72) August 4:	Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 159-km (98.8-mi) altitude. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily but telemetry signal was sporadic after 150 sec. Payload landed on ground and was recovered. Launch was first of two; second would be Aug. 5. (NASA Rpt SRL)

August 7, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of United Technologies Corp. for negotiation of a fixed-price contract of $1,775 million for solid-propellant booster separation motors (BSM) for use on the first 6 development flights in the Space Shuttle program, beginning in 1979. The BSMs would separate the two reusable solid rocket boosters (SRB)—each SRB requiring eight BSMs, four forward and four aft—approximately 110 sec after launch. (MSFC Release 75—175)

August 5, 1964
At NASA Hq. awards presentation ceremony, Joseph Mandelkorn of Lewis Research Center and William R. Cherry of Goddard Space Flight Center jointly received NASA Contributions Award for development of improved (n-on-p) radiation-resistant solar cells. Mandelkorn received $5,000 cash award and Cherry, $1,000. William W. Smith, formerly of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and Bruce W. Schmitz of JPL received $1,000 award for their contribution of Trajectory-Correction Propulsion System, used recently in ranger VII lunar photography mission. Wilmer H. Reed III of LaRC received $1,500 award for his contribution of a Test Unit Free-Flight Suspension System. Howell D. Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., of Langley Research Center, received $1,700 award for their contribution of Dynamic Precession Damper for Spin Stabilized Vehicles. Awards were presented by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. HughL. Dryden. (Program)

August 9, 1974
Thiokol Corp. had been awarded an $8 900 000 contract for strap-on motors for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle, NASA announced. Delivery would run from May 1975 through May 1976. The contract called for 124, TX—354-5 (Castro II) rocket motors, 41 upper-burn nozzle closure plugs, and documentation for the Thor-Delta, which was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The Castro II strap-ons had a thrust of about 270 000 newtons (60 000 lbs). (NASA Release 74-219)

August 13, 1975
Dr. Wernher von Braun—German-born rocketry pioneer and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—had undergone successful surgery at Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore for removal of a malignant tumor, the Washington Post reported. (AP, W Post, 13 Aug 75)

July 2, 1965
NASA had awarded an $8,150,833 contract modification to General Electric Co. for supporting the Computation Laboratory at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, (msfc Release 65-169)

April 11, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a ten-month, $10,934,377, cost-plus-award fee contract to Mason-Rust Co. to continue support services at Michoud Operations, New Orleans, and at its Computer Operations Office in Slidell, La. (msfc Release 65-84)

April 17, 1972
Goddard Space Flight Center was awarding $100 000 contract to rand Corp. to plan and coordinate study for Broadcasting Satellite System. RAND would provide improved analytical tools for technical guidance and support of broadcasting satellite services development, (gsfc PAO; SBD, 4/20/72, 273)

December 11, 1975
A Black Brant VC sounding rocket, first of a series scheduled over the next 5 yrs in a Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, was launched to an altitude of 225 km from the Army’s White Sands missile range and traveled downrange about 80 km, providing about 5 min of near weightlessness during its coast phase. The rocket carried nine space-processing experiments in a 143-kg payload assembled at MSFC. The next flight had been scheduled for the spring of 1976. (MSFC Release 11 Dec 75)

October 25, 1961
NASA selected Pearl River site in southwestern Mississippi, 35 miles from the Michoud plant in New Orleans, for static test facility for Saturn and Nova-class vehicles, completed facility to operate under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center.

February 15, 1991
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)

January 13, 1972
Symposium on significant accomplishments in sciences was held at Goddard Space Flight Center. GSFC scientists presented papers covering their studies and experiments in astronomy during 1970. Dr. Norman H. MacLeod said imagery obtained by high-resolution infrared radiometer on Nimbus 3 (launched April 14, 1969) could now be handled quantitatively and might permit estimations of the location, amount, and seasonal changes in water available. Data could be used by governments for better management of natural resources. Study of effect on earth’s surface temperature and climatology of climatic modification by carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and aerosol was discussed by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool. Study had indicated that “runaway greenhouse effect” from accumulation of man-made carbon dioxide alone probably was not possible. But, as aerosol dust in air increased, albedo increased “very fast, compared to the opacity in the infrared; as the albedo increases, the solar radiation decreases, and the surface temperature goes down.” Temperature could decrease in next 30 yrs as much as about 3 K [5.4°F], Several climatologists had suggested that “3K decrease in global temperature is sufficient to trigger an Ice Age!” (Transcript)

December 10, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that NASA's first experiments to construct large structures in space were a success [see Space Transportation System/Mission, Nov. 30 and Dec. 2]. EASE (Experimental Assembly of Structures in Extravehicular Activity) and ACCESS (Assembly Concept for Construction of Erectable Space Structures) carried out by astronauts Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring "went exactly as we had planned, and all experiment and Space Transportation System objectives were met," said Ed Valentine, mission manager for the EASE/ACCESS payload flown on Space Shuttle mission 61 -B. Those objectives included gathering data to compare assembly rates and techniques in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tests, evaluating potential space station assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques, and identifying ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. "Preliminary data obtained from live downlink TV looks very good," Valentine explained. "But we won't be able to make a complete analyses until we see the rest of the data," which was in the form of videotape and film shot while Ross and Spring performed the construction tasks. Once the data were analyzed and reported, Valentine said, it would give large space structure designers baseline data on the two construction approaches studied. "They can then determine which approach would be appropriate for a particular task," he explained. On December 11 Valentine said he would meet for a debriefing with the Space Shuttle crew and principal investigators. Then in about three weeks the principal investigators would receive the videotape and film shot during the experiments, and Valentine would publish a final report in about three months. (NASA Release 85-66)

May 14, 1973
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah), Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee Chairman, urged in a letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher that the NASA Administrator “promptly appoint an investigative board to make a detailed inquiry” into the malfunction of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop—as ground crews at Marshall Space Flight Center studied options for overcoming the loss of the spacecraft’s protective shield, torn away during its May 14 launch, and of augmenting its electrical power, (upi, NYT, 5/17/73; Marshall Star, 6/13/73, 1)

October 6, 1964
Final S-I booster in Saturn I rocket program was static-fired at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for its second and final time. The 156-sec. test was “entirely satisfactory.” This S-I stage, the second one built by Chrysler Corp. for NASA, would power the last (SA-10) Saturn I launch vehicle. First Saturn I booster was static-fired at msfc in April 1961. Today’s firing ended about three-and-a-half years of testing in which r&d and flight vehicles underwent a total of 55 firings for cumulative time of 3,867 sec. (Marshall Star, 10/14/64,1)

December 4, 1973
NASA announced plans for a 1976 launch of a Laser Geodynamic Satellite (lageos). The satellite would provide information for mathematical models on the earth’s movements and strains which caused natural disasters such as earthquakes. The measurements made by the spacecraft would be accurate within 2 cm (0.75 in) of actual earth movement. LAGEOS would be a solid sphere weighing about 380 kg (835 lbs) and measuring 0.6 m (2 ft) in diameter. It would be fitted with 600 laser Tetroreflectors designed to permit accurate laser ranging from ground stations. Marshall Space Flight Center, under the overall direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, had been assigned definition and development responsibility for the satellite, (nasa Release 73-261)

December 22, 1972
Retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees as Marshall Space Flight Center Director and appointment of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, to succeed Dr. Rees in January 1973 were announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Rees, with Dr. Wernher von Braun, had pioneered U.S. space and rocket activities. He had succeeded Dr. von Braun as msfc Director in 1970. Dr. Petrone had been Apollo Program Manager at Kennedy Space Center before becoming Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. in 1969. Dr. Fletcher commended Dr. Rees for “successful completion of the Marshall Center’s role in the Apollo program. The performance of the Saturn launch vehicle . . . has been magnificent. The development of the Lunar Roving Vehicle and its performance ... is a tribute to his leadership.” (nasa Release 72-244)

February 19, 1974
A nine-month, $321 394 study contract to provide NASA with engineering concepts, requirements, and design trade-offs for a zero-gravity atmospheric-cloud-physics-experiment laboratory to fly on the space shuttle had been awarded to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The proposed laboratory would permit study of “trigger” actions in clouds, such as the formation of ice crystals or water droplets, electrical charges on droplets, and waterdroplet—icecrystal interactions to aid in the ultimate control and modification of hazardous weather conditions. The laboratory could be reused on at least 20 Spacelab missions. ( msfc Release 74-27; msfc pao)

April 5, 1991
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)

August 5, 1965
First full-duration static test of Saturn V first stage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.

April 23, 1965
Successful completion of formal flight qualification tests of the uprated II—1 rocket engine for use in the Saturn tr space vehicle was announced jointly by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, under whose technical direction the engine was being developed, and by Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., its manufacturer. Two engines were used for the qualification program. In 51 firings they operated successfully for 4,581 seconds—more than 75 min.—and produced 200,000 lbs. of thrust (188,000 lbs. was previous power rating). i msfc: Release 65-96)

July 11, 1963
Senators Warren G. Magnuson and Henry M. Jackson announced three nasa study contracts awarded to Boeing Co.: $199,920 contract to continue studying methods of recovering Saturn first-stage rocket boosters for reuse; $106,000 award to continue studying large clustered solid-propellant rocket motors; and $84,108 contract to study vehicle-integrated rocket powerplant with air augmentations. Contracts were let by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. (7/l 1/63)

April 1, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center began a six-month study of the feasibility of adapting the backup Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount to fly on the space shuttle for solar observations. NASA anticipated that modified atm instruments positioned in the shuttle payload bay could provide low-cost scientific returns on early shuttle flights, (msfc Skylab Off, interview, Jan 75; Covault, Av Wk, 15 April 74,24-5)

February 13, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a 90-day $950 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp. for studies, analysis, planning, and design required to define the interface and performance relationships of the solid-fueled rocket motor to the solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tank, and orbiter of the sDace shuttle. Award of the 90-day contract was necessary to continue the overall development schedule of the total space shuttle system. A contract award to Thiokol in November 1973 to develop the motors for the shuttle had been delayed pending the resolution of a protest filed by Lockheed Propulsion Co. (NASA Release 74-130; Huntsville Times, 17 Feb 74)

January 18, 1962
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center selected Rohr Aircraft Corp. to negotiate for the manufacture and erection of three 85-foot-diameter parabolic antenna systems to be located at Pisgah National Forest (Rosman, N.C.), Fairbanks, Alaska, and an undetermined location in eastern Canada. When completed, these facilities in addition to similar system completed at Gilmore Creek, Alaska, would serve as the core of nasa’s wide-band satellite instrumentation network. They would receive and record telemetry from large “second generation” satellites including Nimbus and the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).

February 8, 2000
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Sun’s atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets,” news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)

April 1, 1991
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center was testing a beta version of Com's newest OSI routing software. The software was comparable to that known as Open Shortest Path First, which allows intermediate systems to talk to each other and figure out the best way to send information on the network from point A to point B. (Government Computer News, Apr 1/91)

June 11, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $1 323 565 contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to provide liquid hydrogen to East Coast space program users from June 1, 1972, through March 31, 1973. Liquid hydrogen would be distributed to Government agencies and contractors in Saturn V booster and space shuttle activities. Under interagency agreement, NASA contracted for all liquid hydrogen used by NASA and Dept, of Defense in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 72-69)

November 14, 1962
Monetary awards for patentable inventions were made to nasa employees under provisions of the Incentive Awards Act of 1954 as follows: George A. Smith of nasa Ames Research Center; Arlen F. Carter, George P. Wood, and Adolf Busemann of nasa Langley Research Center; David G. Evans, Warner L. Stewart, Edward F. Baehr, H. Allen, Jr., C. C. Ciepluch, E. A. Fletcher, Samuel Stein, David M. Straight, and John W. Gregory of nasa Lewis Research Center; William J. D. Escher and Thomas L. Greenwood of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.

January 26, 1978
NASA announced it had launched the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) from KSC at 12:36pm EST on Jan. 26, 1978, aboard a Delta rocket. KSC had delayed the launch for 4hr to secure an access door on the Delta heatshield. The Delta had injected IUE into a transfer orbit with 46 342km (28 784mi) apogee, 167km (104mi) perigee, and 28.7° inclination. IUE was part of a joint program by NASA, ESA, and the United Kingdom’s Science Research Council (SRC); more astronomers (200 from 17 countries) would use IUE than had used any previous satellite. The satellite’s telescope, aimed by ground controllers, would examine the ultraviolet spectrum between 1 150 and 3 200A, a region inaccessible to study from the ground. Studies would range from planets in earth’s solar system to some of the most distant objects in the universe, including quasars, pulsars, and black holes in space. Astronomers would study a wide range of stars to learn how they were born, live, and die; the material between these stars from which they are formed and are still forming; strange objects emitting radio waves or x-rays, or both; the sedate nearby galaxies and the violent distant quasars; and earth’s planetary neighbors and their satellites. IUE would complement and extend current NASA observations from the two orbiting astronomical observatories, OAO 2 and Copernicus, and ESA’s TD 1 satellite. IUE’s follow-on would be the 10-ton Space Telescope (ST) to be launched by the Shuttle in 1983. The IUE spacecraft was an octagonal cylinder approximately 1.5m tall and 1.3m between opposing faces. Overall length of 4.2m included a telescope tube at the forward end and an apogee motor extending from the rear. Solar arrays on opposite sides of the spacecraft when unfolded in space would measure 4.3m (14ft) wide. Spacecraft weight was 14791b, of which 2721b was scientific instrumentation. After stabilization, the spacecraft would continuously point one of its two solar arrays at the sun. Goddard Space Flight Center would have a constant view of IUE; ESA’s Villafranca station near Madrid, Spain, a view at least lOhr per day. GSFC had designed, integrated, and tested IUE and provided U.S. ground-support facilities; ESA had built the solar array and the Madrid ground facilities. SRC, in collaboration with Univ. College, London, had provided four television camera detectors to transform spectral displays into video signals for transmission to the ground. The joint agreement had allocated 16hr of viewing time a day to NASA, 8hr to be shared jointly by ESA and the United Kingdom. The U.S. had spent $57 million on the spacecraft, Delta rocket, and other items; ESA had spent $21 million; SRC and Univ. College had spent $9 million. (NASA Release 78-8; MOR S-868-78-01 [prelaunch] Jan 19/78, [postlaunch] Feb 2/78; NYT, Jan 27/78, A-8; ESA Release Jan 20/78; Goddard News, Jan-Feb 78, 1)

March 19, 1987
NASA selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Silver Spring, Maryland, to negotiate a contract for systems, engineering, and support services. The services provided by the contract would be in support of the Mission Operations and Data Systems Directorate, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8739)

December 13, 1964
relay I began its third year in orbit and could still send clear, high-resolution television and audio signals across oceans and continents. The communications satellite had circled the globe 5,685 times and accomplished 186 demonstrations and 2,139 experiments, with a transponder-on time of 334 hours. The relay i project was directed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 64-213)

July 31, 1985
NASA announced that one of the satellites in the COSPAS/SARSAT system, an international program with the U.S., USSR, Canada, and France serving as major partners, made possible the rescue of a man 140 miles off Cape Henry, Virginia. On April 17 Jack Boye departed Miami to sail to New York Harbor for the dedication of a memorial to Vietnam veterans of Airborne 173, his wartime squadron. Three days into the sail his radio went out, and a storm caused the sloop's electrical and electronic equipment and engine to fail and the boat to capsize. When the boat rolled over and started filling with water, Boye activated an emergency position-indicating radio beacon that trailed at the stern of the boat. An orbiting Soviet sea and rescue satellite, one of three USSR and two U.S. satellites equipped with sea and rescue equipment in the COSPAS/SARSAT satellite system, first received the distress signal and beamed it to the Rescue and Command Center at Scott Air Force Base, Illinois, who alerted rescue forces. After an electronic search for the distress signal, a Coast Guard aircraft located the sloop and requested assistance from a navai ship in the vicinity. The USS Detroit sent a whaleboat with the ship's doctor to the sloop. To date, the COSPAS/SARSAT system had been instrumental in the rescue of more than 400 people. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the U.S. portion of the system; Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for system research and development. (NASA Release 85113)

November 10, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded contracts worth $500 000 each to Martin Marietta’s Denver Division and to TRW Systems Group, to define the Spacelab payload called AMPS (atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space). The definition studies would emphasize flexibility, low cost, and an evolutionary approach to environmental research. One of the first payloads considered for Spacelab, AMPS had been conceived as a manned orbiting scientific laboratory to study the nearspace environment of earth and the effects on it of changes in incident solar energy and of emissions from earth. Instrumentation would include a laser beam to define the composition of the various constituents of earth’s atmosphere. Missions would last from 7 to 30 days, with extensive involvement of the scientist crews in conducting the experiments. (MSFC Release 75— 239; SBD, 20 Nov 75, 108)

April 15, 1966
Representatives of Intelsat (International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium) toured NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and received briefing on msfc programs and research projects, (msfc Release 66-77)

June 7, 1975
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. successfully conducted the first ignition test of the Space Shuttle’s Integrated Subsystem Test Bed engine at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The test, conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center, lasted for 0.8 sec. It was first of a series of 8 ignition tests leading up to the firing of the Space Shuttle main engine. Initial evaluation of data indicated that all the test parameters were satisfactory and that the test objective was achieved. All ignition tests would be of short duration, none reaching full engine thrust. (Roundup, 20 June 75, 4; Marshall Star, IT June 75, 4)

October 13, 1961
The American Rocket Society presented its major annual awards as follows: Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Medal to Dr. Weraher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; Astronautics Medal to Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Mercury astronaut, for his MR-3 flight of May 5; James H. Wyld Memorial Medal to Harrison A. Storms, Jr., of North American Aviation; Propulsion Medal to Robert B. Young of Aerojet-General Corp. for his role in development of Titan II engine; G. Edward Pendray Award to Kraft Ehricke for his contribution to astronautical literature; and Research Medal to Dr. James Van Allen of State University of Iowa for basic research.

January 8, 1965
Application for patents on a recoverable single-stage spacecraft booster was filed with the U.S. Patent Office by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Invented by Philip Bono, a space engineer at Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., the booster was called Rombus (Reusable Orbital Module—Booster and Utility Shuttle) and would have the capability of placing approximately 1 million lb. in circular orbit 175 mi. high and could be reused 20 times. Rombus would have its own propulsion for orbiting, deorbiting, and landing retrothrust, would employ eight strap-on, jettisonable liquid hydrogen fuel tanks. The vehicle resulted from a NASA—funded study but was not presently being developed. (Marshall Star, 1/13/65, 1-2; Seattle Post-Intelligence, 1/8/65)

July 19, 1972
NASA announced Marshall Space Flight Center award of contracts and fund transfers totaling more than $49 million for scientific experiments for first High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), scheduled for launch in 1975. Receiving awards were Columbia Univ., $8 929 059; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, two awards of $7 821 720 and $5 357 245; Univ. of California at San Diego, $5150 000; California Institute of Technology, Washington Univ. of St. Louis, and Univ. of Minnesota, $6 198 683 for joint experiment; Naval Research Laboratory, $7 919 000; and Goddard Space Flight Center, $8 250 000. (nasa Release 72-145)

April 29, 1991
Tom McGlynn, a Computer Sciences Corporation software scientist for the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) Science Support Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, described four data analysis systems developed for GRO. The GRO launched by Atlantis carried four instruments designed to study overlapping portions of gamma rays, the highest energy radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)

February 3, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was readying its first Saturn V S-IC stage, designated S-ic-t, for static firing late this spring, NASA reported. The s-ic-t, a static test stage, would be hot-fired on a captive test stand in MSFc’s West Test Area and would be ground tested repeatedly over a period of many months to prove out the propulsion system, (nasa Release 65-27)

September 30, 1976
The Marshall Space Flight Center announced 3 Sept, the start of hot-firing tests of the steering system for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB). First series of tests, which would continue into Oct., would confirm design of the thrust-vector control steering system developed by MSFC engineers as part of the center’s responsibility for SRB design and development. The system under test would provide power to move the nozzle of the SRB in any direction, steering the Shuttle in the first 120 sec of flight during SRB burn. Data from the first series of tests would be evaluated to refine the system design; after any needed modifications, a second series of tests would certify the system. Thrust-vector control units would be provided in 1978 to Thiokol Corp., MSFC contractor for the SRB solid-fuel rocket motor, for testing under actual firing conditions. (MSFC Release 76-163) —MSFC announced it had delivered the first production case segment for the SRB motor to Thiokol’s Wasatch Div. in Utah on 27 Sept., beating the schedule by 3 days. All case segments for the first motor were to arrive at Thiokol by the end of 1976. The delivered segment, almost 4 m in diameter and 4.2 m long, weighed more than 5990 kg. Eleven segments would be used in each motor; joined, the segments and nozzle would measure more than 38 m long, over three fourths of the total SRB length. (MSFC Release 76-173) —MSFC announced 30 Sept, that personnel of the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti. Corp., had fired a developmental test engine for the Space Shuttle for 650 sec, longest test to date. The same engine had been fired for 300 sec 2 days earlier. The tests, at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Bay St. Louis, Miss., would produce component- and system-operation data from extended-duration firings at increasing power levels. (MSFC Release 76-174)

July 26, 1988
NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)

November 7, 1974
The appointment of Richard G. Smith as Deputy Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, effective 18 Nov., was announced by Center Director William R. Lucas. Smith would also continue as acting director of MSFc’s Science and Engineering Directorate. Since 1960, Smith had held positions of increasing responsibility in the Science and Engineering Directorate, including Saturn Program Manager from 1970 to 1973. (msfc Release 74-218)

June 25, 1976
Dr. John F. Clark, scheduled to retire 1 July as Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, had been selected to serve after that date at NASA Hq as special assistant to the Associate Administrator, according to an announcement by Dr. Robert S. Cooper, GSFC deputy director and Dr. Clark’s successor. Dr. Clark agreed to stay at GSFC through 14 August to review actions needed to finalize design activities associated with a stability problem in the Delta second-stage engine, Dr. Cooper said, and would also serve as adviser on the Delta’s readiness for the Palapa and Itos launches later in 1976. (GSFC announcement 1997)

December 26, 1964
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said the Florida Times-Union: “Any statement of what space exploration will be like 100 years from now is ... in the same league as crystal ball gazing. . . . Any specific projects which we may describe . . . will fall far short of activities that will be routine a century from now. “One hundred years ago the ‘iron horse’ was the fastest means of travel available. . . . Airplanes were unknown. In this atmosphere Jules Verne sat down and wrote . . . ‘From the Earth to the Moon’ published in 1865. . . . His spacecraft carried three men (and two dogs), was launched from the east coast of Florida, circled the Moon, and returned to Earth during a round trip that took 11 days. . . . Jules Verne used a huge cannon buried in the sand to boost his capsule to escape velocity. . . . Today we are using Saturn chemical rockets to propel our Apollo spacecraft outward for its first trip to the Moon. And by the year 2064 altogether new means of propulsion will make our present-day launch vehicles and spacecraft appropriate relics for the Smithsonian Institution. . . .” (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/64)

August 29, 1976
Scientists all over the world had been invited to propose experiments for the second Spacelab mission, NASA announced, asking that they submit by 1 Oct. their letters of intent to propose, with actual proposals due by 3 Dec. Final selection of experiments would be made in Aug. 1977; proposals would be evaluated in the areas of space science (including life sciences), applications, and space technology. Primary intent of the second Spacelab mission would be to evaluate the laboratory’s system and subsystem performance, but space and resources would be available for experiments. Second objective of the The 26-m “Venus disk" at NASA's Goldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., in use with rectenna (in. background) for solar-energy conversion experiments. (NASA 76-H-685) mission would be to demonstrate the broad capabilities of Spacelab for scientific research, especially in astrophysics (astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar physics). Proposals should designate a principal investigator as the point of contact with NASA, to manage the efforts of any other persons involved in the experiments. As the second mission payload would not include a pressurized module as the design for Spacelab 1 did, instruments would be mounted on pallets exposed to space with a remote manipulator system available if needed. Experiments would be controlled remotely by persons at the payload-specialist station in the Space Shuttle orbiter’s aft flight deck. Power, data distribution, and thermal control would be available from flight subsystems in a pressurized igloo on the forward pallet. Spacelab, a reusable space laboratory, was under construction in Europe by the European Space Agency for NASA. Marshall Space Flight Center was the lead center for Spacelab development, as well as for the Shuttle main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster. (NASA Release 76-152)

March 5, 1976
Simultaneous measurement of ocean-surface conditions from an aircraft and from an altimeter on NASA’s Geos 3 satellite 840 km above the surface was the mission of a NASA-Navy team just back from a month’s expedition to Newfoundland. Correlation of aircraft data on actual surface conditions with remotely sensed data from Geos 3, launched 9 April 1975, would demonstrate satellite capability of making accurate and rapid sea-state measurements. Newfoundland was chosen for the experiments because it exhibited a wide range of climatic and oceanographic conditions within a relatively short time period. Measurements taken were sea ice, sea state, surface-wind field, and determination of atmospheric refractivity. Each pass of the satellite—8 to 10 times a day— would produce 10 to 15 min of data relayed to Goddard Space Flight Center via tracking stations at Bermuda, Madrid, or Winkfield, England. Satellite observations plotted for the North Atlantic would be compared with aircraft data and with daily Navy-NOAA forecast maps. The team consisted of 8 persons from the Naval Research Laboratory and 11 representatives of Wallops Flight Center and Lockheed contractors. (NASA Release 76-39; WFC Release 76-2)

March 6, 1987
James Elliott, a spokesman for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying an upperatmosphere plasma experiment, detonated when its second stage malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87)

August 16, 1961
Centaur vehicle C-l was tested and accepted by Marshall Space Flight Center.

July 7, 1963
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite June 28 from nasa Wallops Station, using Scout booster. Goddard Space Flight Center Satellite Situation Report listed the satellite as “research satellite for geophysics.” (AP, Wash. Post, 7/7/63; gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., 6/30/63)

May 17, 1974
A prototype direct-readout ground station, designed by Goddard Space Flight Center to receive high-resolution weather photos from satellites, left gsfc for Dakar, Senegal. It was to play a key role in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) to study tropical weather patterns. Using the ground station, planners could quickly advise scientists aboard participating ships to focus attention on specific weather conditions and could route aircraft into regions where cloud development was detected. The prototype unit, which produced real-time images as large negative or positive transparencies with a resolution four to eight times greater than units already in use, consisted of four vans weighing a total of 12 000 kg. Future models would weigh 270 kg and could he built at modest cost by other countries. (NASA Release 74-129)

December 20, 1993
NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)

April 17, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $3 850 000 contract modification to Rockwell International Corp. for architectural and engineering services and construction of test and industrial facilities for the space shuttle main engine, NASA announced. (NASA Release 74-97)

May 7, 1963
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carried 153-lb. instrumented payload to 139-mi. altitude in experiment from Wallops Island to study spectra] emission lines in upper atmosphere and measure their intensity as function of altitude, thus determining distribution of certain molecular and atomic species in upper atmosphere. Experiment was designed by The Johns Hopkins Univ. under nasa research grant administered by Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-46)

September 4, 1963
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., with nuclear emulsion payload to study very-low-energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Payload reached 150-mi. altitude, was recovered from an inland lake approximately 90 mi. from launch site. Instrumentation and nuclear emulsions were in excellent condition, but analysis of nuclear emulsions would require considerable time. Experiment was project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)

April 16, 1976
Dr. John F. Clark would retire 1 July after 10 yr as director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA announced. His successor would be Dr. Robert S. Cooper, deputy director of GSFC. Dr. Clark had come to NASA in 1958, serving from 1963 to 1965 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications, after which he was appointed to his post at GSFC. An authority in atmospheric and space sciences, Dr. Clark while director at GSFC had been responsible for major advances in communications, weather and climate, earth resources, space physics, and space astronomy. (NASA Release 76-71)

June 5, 1973
The appointment of French engineer Robert L. Mory as European Space Research Organization (esro) Sortie Lab liaison officer at Marshall Space Flight Center was announced by msfc. Mory had been esro launcher coordinator for NASA launches of ESRO scientific satellites, a member of the commission to create esro in February 1963, and an esro member since April 1964. (msfc Release 73—72)

March 9, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center hosted group of 61 Navy, Air Force, and civilian personnel from Navy Field Office for Manned Orbiting Laboratory at Los Angeles. The group received briefings on Apollo and Saturn programs and saw facilities at Marshall. They had previously visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were scheduled to tour NASA Kennedy Space Center, (msfc Release 65-52)

January 12, 1994
McDonnell Douglas awarded Computer Sciences Corp (CSC), with EER Systems and CTA, Inc., a five-year, $49 million subcontract to support NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The Systems Engineering, Integration and Management Support Services contract would support several space observation missions. (Def Daily, 12 Jan/94)

December 15, 1964
At a symposium sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Dr. Norman F. Ness likened the earth to a kind of comet with a long magnetic tail that extended for an unknown distance. The “new look” was drawn from results of the first detailed mapping of the earth’s magnetic field on the nighttime side of the magnetosphere by explorer xvm (imp I, Interplanetary Monitoring Platform), launched Nov. 26,1963. Until recently, scientists had believed that the earth’s magnetosphere was basically spherical; however, data from explorer xviii indicate that countless magnetic lines of force stretched out like the tail of a comet to an unknown distance in space, apparently beyond the moon. Within this comet-like tail, the lines of force in the Northern Hemisphere were directed towards the sun; in the Southern Hemisphere, away from the sun. In between, there was a neutral zone. Dr. Ness characterized this neutral zone, which had been hypothesized but never before detected, as a thin sheet which was a permanent part of the earth’s environment and virtually void of any magnetic activity. Though the neutral zone’s exact role was unknown, Dr. Ness speculated that it might be responsible for formation of the auroras, creation of the Van Allen radiation belt, and presence of the gegenschein. Ness concluded that in view of the evidence from explorer xviii, “The only difference between the earth and a comet is that the earth possesses a strong magnetic field and comets do not.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/16/64; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/16/64; Wash. Daily News, 12/16/64; Toth, Detroit News, 12/16/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64; AP, NYT, 12/16/64, 30; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 25)

July 10, 1972
U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., dissolved temporary restraining order it had issued June 29 and refused to grant preliminary injunction against NASA reduction in force of 503 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. Suit brought by American Federation of Government Employees charged NASA with violations of Civil Service Commission rules applicable to reductions in force. (Bell, Birmingham [Ala.] Post-Herald, 7/11/72)

June 9, 1991
The Huntsville Times published a history of NASA in connection with its Marshall Space Flight Center and the Army Ballistic Missile Agency Development Operations Division in Huntsville. Reference was made to the early days of the Redstone Arsenal as well as to statistics of employment and various Shuttle launches.  (Htsvl Tms, Jun 9/91)

September 16, 1975
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented 23 awards to Marshall Space Flight Center employees and contractor personnel for contributions to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—26 July). Ellery B. May, former manager of the Saturn Program Office at MSFC, received NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal. Exceptional Service Medals were awarded to 14 MSFC employees; Public Service Awards went to six contractor employees active in the ASTP mission. The Group Achievement Award went to the ASTP Experiments Team and the Stress Corrosion Review Team. ASTP astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton, as well as NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low, Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight John F. Yard-ley, and ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee, attended the ceremony honoring MSFC workers who had provided the Saturn launch vehicle as well as 10 of the 27 onboard experiments for the mission. (MSFC Release 75 — 196; Marshall Star, 17 Sept 75, 1—2)

October 28, 1985
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched January 25, 1983, worked almost perfectly for 300 days until it depleted its liquid helium coolant and that it had achieved mission objectives, which were to produce an unbiased all-sky survey using a number of broad infrared photometry channels, to study selected galactic and extragalactic sources, and to map extended sources. For infrared astronomy, IRAS represented as great an improvement over ground-based telescopes as the Palomar 200-in. telescope had over Galileo's telescope. Because fewer than 1,000 infrared sources were cataloged before the IRAS launch, the sensitivity of IRAS produced a survey of a large unexplored area in the electromagnetic spectrum. The IRAS All-Sky Survey catalog contained about 250,000 sources, including some 20,000 new galaxies and 16,000 small extended sources. IRAS surveyed more than 96% of the sky, 16% more than was required for mission success. Information in the IRAS databased revolutionized the infrared study of the sky and provided a rich data source to observers in other wavebands. The IRAS program resulted from a cooperative effort among the U.S., The Netherlands, and the United Kingdom in the areas of operations, spacecraft design, infrared technology, and scientific collaboration. During the next four years, scientists would continue to examine and analyze the more than 200 billion data bits in the IRAS database and, by developing specialized processing techniques, possibly increase the sensitivity of the survey. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85) During October: NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSRC) awarded a 14-month $140,000 contract to Perkin-Elmer Corp. to study concepts and technologies needed fora next generation telescope with ten times the capability of the Hubble Space Telescope. This study, the first step toward preparing to launch a space telescope array in the first decade of the next century, would define a technology development plan for the array and provide NASA with cost and schedule data. Perkin-Elmer would initially examine the probable science such a telescope would perform as well as the concept of an array of telescopes working together as one. Perkin-Elmer said it would develop two telescope concepts based on the best use of the proposed space station and technology advancements needed to implement them. The first would emphasize assembly and optical alignment in orbit using the space station as an assembly base. The second concept would focus on modularization, ground assembly and checkout, and minimal on-orbit assembly. The study would also explore the possibilities of adapting, for visible light purposes, interferometer techniques used by radio astronomers to obtain high-resolution maps of deep space objects. In addition, Perkin-Elmer would define and recommend technologies needed for maximum use of the space station for assembling, testing, and servicing the next generation facility for optical astronomy. Perkin-Elmer built the Hubble Space Telescope scheduled for launch August 1986 on Space Shuttle flight 61-J. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 14)

January 17, 2008
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Braun’s program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew America’s first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.

December 16, 1965
Successful 41-sec. test firing of the Saturn V booster (s-ic-t) at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center concluded a test series underway since April. 15 tests of the booster were held, 14 of them at full thrust of 7.5-million lbs. The 14 full-power tests accumulated a running time of 862 sec. First test was of only one engine for 17 sec. (msfc Release 65-306; Marshall Star, 12/15/65, 2)

September 5, 1972
Artificial (gas-flame) fireplace logs were being produced by Martin Stamping and Stove Co. from materials developed for NASA, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Materials—manufactured by Universal Atlas Div. of U.S. Steel Corp., Foote Mineral Co., and Vulcan Materials Co.—were fibrous insulation for Skylab and lightweight, refractory concrete used in Saturn rocket test stands to deflect hot exhaust. (msfc Release 72-119)

January 6, 1982
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported testing the thermal performance of a helium cooling system to be used on the large infrared telescope experiment planned for flight on Spacelab 2 in 1984. For the MSFC-managed experiment to work, the cooling system must keep the infrared detectors at a supercold temperature. The liquid-helium coolant stored during the mission in a 250-liter container would vaporize as withdrawn to circulate through telescope channels and keep the instrument near absolute zero, coldest possible temperature, at which all molecular action stops. One objective of the tests was to see how long the system could store the cold liquid; the container would be filled one or two weeks before launch, then undergo a seven-day mission. Tests would continue until March. (MSFC Release 82-2)

January 25, 1962
nasa approved Saturn C-5 development program and authorized nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to direct its development.

July 2, 1990
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a $42.6 million contract to Rockwell International for continued Space Shuttle systems engineering and integration services. The contract called for Shuttle launch and flight support, test verification, operations integration, flight evaluation, engineering analysis, and data systems operations, as well as special studies. (NASA Release C90z)

March 28, 1985
NASA announced it had presented at a ceremony at NASA Headquarters its 1984 inventor of the year award to Dale Kornfeld, Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), and John Vanderhoff, Mohammed El-Asser, and For-tunato Micale, all of Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, for their "process for preparation of large-particle size monodisperse latexes." The monodisperse latex reactor processor, an experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle, had produced microspheres in zero gravity in sizes ranging from 5 to 30 micrometers. The maximum size particles produced on earth, with the required standards of quality and uniformity, were about 2 to 3 micrometers. Researchers used microspheres in calibrating sensitive scientific instruments such as microscopes, filters, and particle counters. Medical uses included identification of cancer and glaucoma and the study of the transport of materials inside living organisms. Industrial applications included the production of finely ground products such as paint pigments, inks, toners, explosives, and other powder materials. NASA took an important step toward making the microspheres commercially available when it presented 15 grams of 10-micrometer particles to the Commerce Department's National Bureau of Standards for certification as "standard reference material." (NASA Release 85-44)

February 28, 1977
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $634 250 contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design, build, and test a machine that would demonstrate, on earth, the automatic fabrication of beams for space construction. Ground demonstration would be needed to develop a safe and efficient facility for use in space. Beam fabrication, part of the Space Industrialization Program, would be the first step in building large space structures. (MSFC Release 77-33)

September 30, 1985
NASA researchers were continuing detailed analysis of all data, and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would produce additional documents when results were finalized for the Spacelab system, payload integration, and the Spacelab-2 experiments managed by MSFC. Principal investigators would produce separate documentation for their experiments. (NASA MOR M-977-51F-03 [postlaunch] Sept 30/85)

March 31, 1964
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center accepted the first of three new F-l rocket engine test stands at NASA’s engine test site at Edwards AFB, Calif. (M&R, 3/30/64,17)

May 22, 1972
Areas sounding rocket launched by NASA from Antigua, West Indies, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 55.8-km (34.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone in upper atmosphere in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite and to validate new parachute deployment system further [see May 4]. Payload was ejected successfully, parachute inflated properly, and good ozone data were acquired. (NASA Rpt srl)

September 16, 1998
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the craft’s fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Solar Probe Back Under Control,” 17 September 1998.)

April 30, 1973
Thomas J. Lee had been named Manager of the Marshall Space Flight Center Sortie Lab Task Force by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director, the Marshall Star announced. Lee succeeded Jack Trott, who had retired April 30. (Marshall Star, 2/5/73, 1)

October 13, 1964
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center officials announced they believed they had successfully “hit” explorer xxii satellite with laser beams fired one-per-second across more than 500 miles. Whether the hits were definitely achieved or not would await further analysis. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/14/64; Wash. Post, 10/14/64)

May 19, 1972
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. One carried Massachusetts Institute of Technology x-ray astronomy experiment. Second carried Goddard Space Flight Center cosmic ray experiment. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

May 20, 1964
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Bendix Corp. and Boeing Aerospace Div. for negotiations of separate identical nine-month $1.5 million studies of lunar exploration payloads for Apollo Logistics Support System (alss). Payload would be carried to moon by Saturn V/Apollo using modified lem (“lem truck”) to deliver from lunar orbit to lunar surface, (Marshall Star, 5/20/64,1)

April 18, 1974
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and GTE Satellite Corp. filed a proposal with the Federal Communications Commission to operate a joint domestic satellite system. The system would serve the contiguous 48 states and Hawaii and could serve Alaska and Puerto Rico through earth stations owned by other companies. A joint system would improve network efficiency and reduce the number of earth stations to 7, from the 10 required for two separate systems. Three satellites operated by comsat General Corp. and provided to AT&T would serve the joint system and could handle 28 800 simultaneous telephone conversations. The FCC had approved separate domestic satellite systems for the two companies 12 Sept. 1973, directing them to work together to integrate the systems and negotiate agreements for handling communications traffic and equitable division of revenues from jointly rendered services. (Smith, NYT, 19 April 74,49) Twenty-six individuals and four groups received awards in ceremonies at Johnson Space Center. Twenty-six individuals and five groups at Kennedy Space Center and thirty-four individuals and six groups at Marshall Space Flight Center received awards in ceremonies 19 April. (NASA Ann; NASA Release 74-90; Program)

October 2, 1972
Use of M518 multipurpose electric furnace developed by Marshall Space Flight Center for Skylab would permit increase in number of metals and metal-processing experiments to be carried on earth-orbiting station in 1973, NASA announced. New furnace would accommodate original composite casting experiments and 10 others to explore possibility of manufacturing and processing materials in zero g. Furnace would be delivered to NASA in December by principal contractor Westinghouse Corp. It would facilitate experimentation in solidification, crystal growth, composite structures, alloy structural characteristics, and other thermal processes that altered materials in weightlessness, (nasa Release 72-196)

March 15, 1963
Aerobee sounding rocket launched 248-lb. instrumented payload to 123-mi. altitude in experiment to map night sky sources which emit photons (radiant energy) in specific wavelength interval. Impact occurred 62-mi. downrange from launch site at Wallops Station. Flight was joint project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Lockheed Missile and Space Co. (Wallops Release 63-28)

August 20, 1975
Viking 1 was successfully launched at 5:22 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range’s Launch Pad 41 on a Titan Ill-Centaur launch vehicle. The launch, first scheduled for 11 Aug., had been postponed until 14 Aug. to replace a faulty thrust-vector control valve on the launch vehicle [see 11 Aug.]. A second delay had occurred when the spacecraft’s internal batteries had discharged to 9 volts, well below safe limits [see 13 Aug.]. The spacecraft, Viking A, had been removed from the launch vehicle and replaced by Viking B. The range safety officer had issued a waiver of standard procedures and permitted removal and installation of the spacecraft without detanking and depressurizing the launch vehicle, thus allowing the launch to be rescheduled for 20 Aug. Viking 1, consisting of a 2360-kg orbiter attached to an 1180-kg lander, was placed in a trajectory to Mars within the designed 3-sigma limits. Nearly 35 min after trajectory insertion, the Centaur stage separated from the spacecraft. The solar panels were deployed and oriented toward the sun, and the biocap—a container used to hermetically seal the lander while in earth’s atmosphere—was jettisoned. On 27 Aug. at 2:30 pm EDT a trajectory-correction maneuver targeted the spacecraft to its Mars orbital insertion point. By 28 Aug. all systems aboard the spacecraft were operating normally and in a cruise mode. Travel time to Mars was estimated at 10 mo, with a possible Mars landing on 4 July 1976, the height of the U.S. Bicentennial. A second spacecraft, Viking B, had been scheduled for a 1 Sept, launch to arrive at Mars in 12 mos. The Viking missions supported NASA’s planetary program goals of exploring the solar system and gaining knowledge of its origin and evolution, and of the origin and evolution of life and of the dynamic processes that shaped man’s terrestrial environment. Specific purpose of the two Viking missions was to increase knowledge of Mars by making observations from Mars orbit and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the surface, with particular emphasis on biological, chemical, and environmental data on past or present existence of life on the planet. Viking 1 was targeted to land in the Martian equatorial region, in a very low area resembling the fluvial plain of a dry river bed—an ideal site to search for organic material. Alternate sites for both Viking landers had been selected and there would be some flexibility until insertion into Mars orbit, after which the available band of landing sites would be narrowed by orbital geometry. Once in orbit, the orbiter would survey prospective landing sites; when the decision on where to land had been made, retrorockets would separate the lander from the orbiter and the lander would descend to the surface, sequentially braked by its aeroshell’s drag, by a parachute, and finally by its retrorockets. After landing, the science instrumentation would be activated and exploration would begin; data would be transmitted back to earth by the lander radio or through a radio-relay link with the orbiter. The orbiter’s main body, an octagonal ring 46 cm high with alternating 140- and 51-cm sides, consisted of 16 modular compartments. The entire structure was 10 m across the tips of the extended solar panels and 3.3 m high from the lander attachment points to the launch vehicle. Besides propulsion, navigation and control, communications, power, computer, and data-storage subsystems, the orbiter carried its science instrumentation mounted on a scan platform that could move with 2 degrees of freedom. The three science instruments were twin high-resolution, slow-scan TV cameras; an infrared atmospheric water detector; and a high-resolution infrared thermal mapper for detecting surface-temperature variations. The lander was a six-sided aluminum and titanium box 46.2 cm deep and enclosed top and bottom by cover plates; it measured 3 m wide and 2 m high from the footpads to the top of the S-band antenna. The six sides measured 109 cm and 56 cm alternately, with the three landing legs attached to the three narrower sides. The three retrorockets were mounted at 120° intervals on the lander; generating up to 2838 newtons (638 lbs) thrust, they would be ignited at an altitude of 1220 m to slow the lander’s descent from 222 kph to 9 kph at landing. Four small engines provided attitude control. In addition to subsystems for thermal control, power, and communications, the lander carried six instruments: twin scanning TV cameras, a sophisticated biology laboratory, a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer, a meteorology instrument, and a seismometer. Used with numerous temperature, pressure, and magnetic sensors, the instruments would perform entry, landed, and radio experiments. NASA’s investigation of Mars had begun in 1964 with the launch of Mariner 4. That spacecraft’s flyby on 15 July 1965 had revealed the planet to be moonlike with a dry, barren, cratered surface showing little evidence of wind or water erosion and no magnetic field. The better instrumented Mariners 6 and 7 that flew by the planet during the summer of 1969 reported a chaotic view of jumbled ridges and valleys unlike anything found on the earth or moon. The spacecraft also showed wide featureless expanses where craters had been somehow eroded, suggesting that Mars had been geologically active. Mariner 6 and 7 photographs showed a thin layer of snow—probably carbon dioxide—and instruments measured a thin atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide. High-quality photographs from Mariner 9, placed in Martian orbit on 13 Nov. 1971, provided evidence of fluid erosion, glacial action, and volcanoes. The Viking missions had continued the Mariner explorations of Mars. Viking was managed by Langley Research Center under overall direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science; LaRC also had management responsibility for the lander system designed and built by Martin Marietta Corp. Jet Propulsion Laboratory designed and built the orbiter system. The Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was the responsibility of Lewis Research Center; LaRC managed launch and flight operations executed by Martin Marietta, Kennedy Space Center, and JPL. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for tracking and data systems, and JPL managed the mission control and computing-center system. (NASA MORs S—815—75—01/02, 1 Aug 75, 28 Aug 75, 16 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—183; LaRC Launch and Mission Operations Status Bulletins Nos 9—11; Viking: Mission to Mars (NASA SP—334); W Post, 18-22 Aug 75; NYT, 18-22 Aug 75)

August 10, 1964
Orbital tanker study by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was discussed in Aviation Week & Space Technology. Tanker would be unmanned and would be used to transfer propellants to other unmanned or to manned spacecraft in earth orbit. Concepts in which orbital refueling capability was underscored were future manned planetary flights and potential reusable lunar transport ferries. (Av. Wk., 8/10/64, 55-57)

January 25, 1965
NASA announced two Radio Astronomy Explorer satellites (rae-a and rae-b) would be designed to investigate low-frequency (long wavelength) emissions from our galaxy, its planets, and the stars. These emissions are mostly intercepted by the ionosphere so that little can be learned about them from ground-based receivers. This would be the first attempt to map the galaxy for low-frequency emissions. The 280-lb. spacecraft would be launched by Thrust-Augmented Delta into circular orbits at altitudes of about 3,700 mi. and would measure the intensity of the signals, their frequency, times of emission and, within limitations, define the regions of space in which they originated. Proposed designs called for the development of two 750-ft., V-shaped antennas that would be mounted opposite each other, forming a giant X. They would be anchored to the basic spacecraft, a cylinder of about 40-by-40 in., capped by two truncated cones. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center would design, integrate, and test the two spacecraft. First launch was not expected before 1967. (nasa Release 65-20)

September 19, 1962
Third Saturn launch vehicle (SA-3) arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day trip by barge from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Flight test was scheduled for November.

March 29, 1993
Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)

January 26, 1972
NASA launched Black Brant VC sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

March 27, 1975
A meeting at Goddard Space Flight Center of U.S. and U.S.S.R. officials to discuss a cooperative meteorology program recommended that in May—July 1976 each country, within a single 27-day solar rotation, launch two series of sounding rockets—one under quiet magnetic conditions, the other under disturbed magnetic conditions. In 1977 the two countries should hold a rocket-data comparison test in the vicinity of Wallops Island, Va. Both countries should launch more meteorological rockets during atmospheric warming periods. In 1976—1978 both countries should research radiation transfer as a factor in temperature sensing from satellites. From 1975—1978 joint remote-sensing, experiments using microwave were proposed, along with exchange of information on frequencies and data format to be used with direct-broadcast equipment. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75)

October 30, 1975
NASA announced appointment of William H. Rock as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center, effective 9 Nov. Rock joined NASA in 1964 and had served at NASA Headquarters, at Goddard Space Flight Center, and since 1968 at Kennedy Space Center, where he was associated with various applications and manned flight programs. (NASA anno, 30 Oct 75)

March 5, 1973
l/c Eduard Burchard, West German Air Force medical officer, had begun two-year tour of duty with the Flight Medicine Section of Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Burchard would work with U.S. scientists on Skylab. (jsc Release 73-26) March 14:	Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, cited examples of space technology spinoff in testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1974 authorization hearings: A heat recovery system developed from an improved means for eliminating thermal gradients in spacecraft would soon be available for use as a home unit that would provide adequate warm air and hot water from a single flame source. A fast-scan infrared camera adapted from Marshall Space Flight Center research would project 60 frames per second, giving “the same flicker-free image you receive on your TV set.” An irreversible warm-up indicator adapted from NASA-sponsored low-temperature balloon battery research could warn when frozen food had been exposed to too high a temperature. A low-cost portable drug detector developed under Ames Research Center auspices would detect drugs in urine in microscopic amounts. ARC had cooperated with the NASA-sponsored Biochemical Application Team at Stanford Univ. to develop a consumable pill to telemeter body temperature to a remote display unit. The pill could determine the location of ulcers or tumors within the intestines. The need to monitor astronauts’ sleep had led to the development of a sleep analyzer—a soft electrode cap—that required no scalp preparation for good electrode contact. The NASA-sponsored Biomedical Team at Southwest Research Institute had helped make Temper Foam available for prevention of bedsores and as an impact-absorbing material for artificial limbs. The foam had been developed under arc contract. (Transcript)

February 19, 1991
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director John M. Klineberg announced that Peter T. Burr had been named Deputy Director of the center. Burr had served as Director of Flights Projects at Goddard since August 1989. (NASA Release 91-28)

August 30, 1972
Col. Robert R. Wessels (usa) had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center as Director of Shuttle Construction Office, Marshall Star reported. Col. Wessels previously had been Deputy District Engineer for NASA Support, responsible for monitoring and coordinating district’s design, engineering, and construction program at MSC and Mississippi Test Facility. (Marshall Star, 8/30/72, 1)

August 30, 1973
The Navy’s Fleet Weather Facility (fwf) had said that satellite imagery from NASA-developed weather satellites was becoming “indispensable” to Arctic and Antarctic shipping operations, NASA reported. The location of ice masses from satellite photos might ultimately lead to extension of shipping operations through the entire six-month polar night. Weather satellite imagery was provided the Navy by Goddard Space Flight Center. (nasa Release 73-174)

June 27, 1961
Eight-engine static test of Saturn SA-T2 of 29.9 seconds’ duration successful at Marshall Space Flight Center.

December 19, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiation leading to the award of a five-year contract to provide operation and maintenance of the propellants and pressurants facilities for the center. Total price for the first three contract years was approximately $8.8 million. Teledyne Brown would furnish the necessary management, personnel, equipment, and materials required to operate and maintain the gaseous pressurants equipment and distribution systems, liquid propellants storage and transfer systems, fluid transporter services, valve and component refurbishment, and retention of certification status of high-pressure systems, including test stands, wind tunnels, and Department of Transportation certification of fluid transporters. (MSFC Release 85-72) Wallops Flight Facility

July 1, 1961
First anniversary of Marshall Space Flight Center as a NASA center, and NASA Administrator Webb visited the Huntsville facility.

April 25, 1964
First industry-produced Saturn booster (S-I) arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center after nine-day barge journey from Michoud Operations. To be used on SA-8, the booster was undergoing static firings and other tests at MSFC before being sent to Cape Kennedy where it would be launched. {Marshall Star, 4/29/64,1)

June 14, 1993
NASA announced that it had selected the Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, Maryland, to negotiate a cost-plus-fee contract for the Visiting Scientists Program at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The five-year contract was expected to take effect September 1, 1993; the proposed cost for the five-year period was $31 million. (NASA Release C93-g)

October 14, 1972
Twenty-five years ago—Oct, 14, 1947—Capt. Charles E. Yeager (usaaf) flew the Bell X-l experimental jet aircraft (at top above), launched from a B-29 bomber from Muroc Flight Test Base, to the speed of 1078 kilometers (670 miles) per hoar to break the sound barrier in level flight. The X-l had been developed under an Army Air force contract with National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics cooperation. In 1972, research plans included hypersonic flight, with flights in 1973 of the X-24B lifting body in a nasa-usaf program to develop technology for future aircraft that could cruise at hypersonic speeds at the edge of space. The X-24B was delivered to the usaf and nasa by Martin Marietta Carp, in Littleton, Calif., ceremonies Oct. 11 and unloaded at Flight Research Center Oct. 22 flower photo). The B version of the X-24A, flown in 1971, had an extended nose, flattened underside, and blended wings. Primary objectives'were to place 34-5-kg (760-lb) spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with local equator-crossing time between 9:00 and 9:20 am and conduct in-orbit engineering evaluation, before turning operational control of spacecraft over to Noaa’s National Environment Satellite Service (ness). Orbit would permit regular, dependable daytime and nighttime temperature soundings of earth’s atmosphere and cloud-cover observations by both direct readout and onboard storage in support of National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). First flight to implement operational atmospheric sounding and very-high-resolution infrared cloud-cover viewing, Noaa 2 carried two new sensors: redundant very-high-resolution radiometer (vhrr) and vertical-temperature-profile radiometer (vtpr). Equipment also included scanning radiometers (srs) and single solar proton monitor (spm) as secondary sensor. Oscar 6 (Oscar C) Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio, carried pickaback on 2nd stage for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. (amsat), was successfully ejected and entered orbit with 1456-km (904.7-mi) apogee, 1451-km (901.6-mi) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 101.7° inclination. Oscar 6 was sixth in Oscar series; previous spacecraft was launched by NASA as secondary payload with Itos 1 (Tiros-M) mission Jan. 23, 1970. Satellite, to conduct experimental program of multiaccess communication techniques using low-powered earth terminals, had been developed by U.S., Australian, and German amateur groups working through amsat. The 18-kg (40-lb) satellite would receive at 145.9 mhz and transmit at 29.5 mhz. Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) program was joint effort of NASA and Dept, of Commerce under Jan. 30, 1964, agreement. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for design and development of spacecraft and ground systems, for launch, and for checkout and evaluation. ness was responsible for operating spacecraft and processing data. First series of spacecraft included nine satellites—Essa 1 through Essa 9— of which 8 and 9 were still in routine use and 2, 6, and 7 still functional and available for backup coverage. In second series—Improved tos (itos)—prototype had been Itos 1 and first NOAA-funded spacecraft, Noaa 1, had been launched Dec. 11, 1970, to observe globe twice daily. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; noaa Release 72-135; A&A 1970)

February 12, 1974
Congressmen and staff of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were briefed at Marshall Space Flight Center and Michoud Assembly Facility in preparation for hearings on NASA’s FY 1975 budget. Committee members were briefed on Skylab, space shuttle, tug, Spacelab, concept verification test, and use of space transportation systems at MSFC. On 2 Feb. they were briefed on the space shuttle external tank at Michoud. {Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 2)

October 25, 1962
An S-IV stage for the two-stage Saturn began three-week, 3,500-mi. trip via barge from Douglas Aircraft Co. in Santa Monica, Calif., to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala., for dynamic testing.

March 26, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center forecast completion by 1 April of a unique facility—one of the largest and most significant construction jobs undertaken in the past 10 yr—at the Center, an x-ray test facility costing about $4 million. The new facility included a 305-m-long stainless steel x-ray path guide tube nearly a meter in diameter, connecting the x-ray source with a 6-m-diameter instrument chamber housing the telescopes and other instruments to be tested. Work began in January 1975, and would be completed on schedule. The facility, the only one of its size and type, would be used first to test instruments for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program; later it would be used in x-ray verification testing and calibration of mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments, for rocket payloads in x-ray stellar studies and similar projects. After checkout, the facility would be turned over to MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate. (Marshall Star, 31 Mar 76, 4; MSFC Release 76-53)

May 5, 1992
Thorsten L. Gunther, 76, a retired geodesist who worked on Goddard Space Flight Center contract involving earth measurement, died April 25 at Washington Hospital Center of combinations after surgery for an aterial aneurism. A resident of Washington area since 1947, he lived in Bethesday. Gunther was an expert onsatellite geodsy and author of the NASA Directory of Station Locations. (W Post, May 5.92)

February 2, 2001
NASA opened a new command and control center that would allow researchers on Earth to participate in scientific research conducted aboard the ISS. The new facility, located at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, featured state-of-the-art communication and research technologies. Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson described the new center as a significant part of NASA’s ongoing plan to make space research more efficient and useful: “From this facility we will manage fundamental scientific research that can only be done in spaceresearch that will lead to knowledge to benefit all humanity here on Earth.” NASA planned to staff the 13,000-square-foot (1,200-square-meter) facility 24 hours per day to support research aboard ISS. In addition to its link to the ISS, the new facility was equipped to monitor payload resources, facilitate data transfer, and communicate with universities and research centers throughout the world. The new command post opened only days before Space Shuttle Atlantis’s scheduled trip into space to carry the Destiny research laboratory module to the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Opens Space Station Command Post,” news release 01-15, 2 February 2001; Shelby G. Spires, “MSFC Opens Science ‘Mission Control’ Today,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 February 2001.)

October 21, 1975
Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Energy Research and Development Administration announced selection of 16 organizations to negotiate contracts for the development of low-cost solar cells for residential and commercial use. Twenty-two contracts, totaling approximately $12 million, would be awarded as part of the Low Cost Silicon Array Project managed by JPL for ERDA. Objective of the project was to create by 1985 an industrial capability of producing silicon solar cells or arrays at a market price of less than $500/kw. Cost to date had been $20 000/kw. The demand for solar cells was expected to increase from 100 kw annually in 1975 to 500 000 kw annually by 1985. JPL negotiations included production of low-cost solar-grade silicon, economical production of silicon in large-area sheets suitable for use in solar cells, development of economical encapsulation materials and techniques for an array lifetime of 20 yr, and development of automated processes and facilities for low-cost production of arrays. Future contracts would be negotiated to procure array modules for a series of ERDA-funded tests of photovoltaic systems, in cooperation with the Department of Defense to determine the technical feasibility of using photovoltaics for military applications, and in cooperation with Lewis Research Center for a similar civilian effort. (NASA Release 75—280) The descent module of Venera 9 separated from the main spacecraft 20 Oct., 2 days before it reached the Venus atmosphere, which it entered at 11:58 pm EDT 21 Oct., landing on the surface at 1:13 am EDT Oct. 22. When the atmosphere had slowed the descent sufficiently, a parachute system had been deployed at about 50 km above the surface, and the lander studied the cloud layers and atmosphere during the rest of the descent. The lander modules had been built to withstand the hostile environment at the Venus surface, with temperatures that reach 500°C and pressures up to 100 times that of earth’s atmosphere. Before landing, the modules had been cooled to — KTC to provide a reserve of cold temperature that would permit operation for about an hour before overheating. Venera 10, launched 14 June and following the same procedure, had separated from its orbiter 23 Oct. and had landed on Venus at 1:17 am EDT 25 Oct. Venera9, launched 8 June from the Baykonur cosmodrome, was the third Soviet spacecraft to make a soft landing on Venus: Venera 7 and 8, which landed on Venus in Dec. 1970 and July 1972, respectively, had transmitted technical data for 23 and 50 min, respectively, but did not carry cameras. Pictures sent by the Venera 9 lander showed a rugged surface with sharp-angled and flat-surfaced rocks 30 to 35 cm across and some boulders. Pictures sent by the Venera 10 lander, which touched down 2200 km from the site of Venera 9, showed what seemed to be an older mountain formation with smooth rounded rocks. Soviet scientists had expressed amazement that both sites were bathed in light. The dense cloudcover that hides Venus from earth had been thought to keep the planet in perpetual shade. Dr. Arnold Selivanov, one of the TV system designers, said that they had “expected poor lighting conditions and built our instruments accordingly”; this is why they had received “good pictures. . .that can be used by newspapers without any preliminary processing.” The horizon of Venus discernible in a comer of the Venera photos did not appear concave (ends bent upward), as had been expected as a result of the theorized distortion resulting from the planet’s dense atmosphere. The apparent geological youth of the rocks on Venus “testifies to recent catastrophic processes like volcanic eruptions or earthquakes—we should say Venusquakes—which took place recently,” said Soviet mineralogist Dr. Aleksandr Basilevsky. “Venus apparently is internally active.” This conclusion had affirmed American theory that Venus resembled earth in having a liquid core, a mantle, and a rocky crust. Four Soviet scientists reviewing the Venera 9 and 10 program in an article in Pravda had summarized the descent-module findings: Temperature and pressure at the landing sites, 460°C and 90 atm, respectively; surface illumination, about 10 000 lux; local wind velocity at landing site, 0.4 to 0.7 meter per sec (Venera9) and 0.8 to 1.3 meter per sec (Venera 10); natural radioactive elements in Venus rock, 0.3% potassium, 0.0002% thorium, and 0.001% uranium. Orbiting module findings were: Temperature of Venus clouds at upper boundary, about — 35°C; cloud temperatures on nocturnal side, about 1(FC higher; atmospheric temperature decreased with altitude, but local temperature elevations were observable at the 66 to 55 km level; Venus ionosphere was thinner than the terrestrial and closer to the surface; and the electron concentration on the daytime side was significantly higher than on the nocturnal side but about 10 times smaller than in the terrestrial ionosphere. Much of the information relayed from Venus had still to be processed. Cameras in the orbiting spacecraft of Venera 9 and 10 had proceeded with photographing the dense cloudcover of Venus, their first pictures received 26 Oct. showing a panorama of more than 1500 km of the clouds circulating around the planet’s equator. Scientists at the Deep Space Communications Center in Moscow said the pictures “confirm the presence of powerful streams of circulating flows in the planet’s atmosphere, first detected on board the American probe Mariner 10 in February 1974.” There was no indication, the Baltimore Sun commented, how long the two Venus mother ships would continue in orbit. (NYT, 23 Oct 75,1; 26 Oct 75,1, sec. 4p 7; FBIS 208,210, 25 Oct 75; WStar, 23Oct 75, A3; BSun, 26 Oct 75, All; 27Oct 75, A4; Defense/Sp Bus Daily, 23 Oct 75, 272; 28 Oct 75, 289; 29 Oct 75, 301; Pravda, 21 Feb 76, 3—4) 23 October-. Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Integrated Systems Support, Inc. to negotiate a $2.8-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for computer support and facility operations at MSFC’s Slidell Computer Complex. The 1-yr contract had provisions for four additional 1-yr extensions. (MSFC Release 75—224)

August 16, 1972
NASA conducted successful trial run of airborne visible-laser opticalcommunications (avloc) flight tests to determine effects of atmosphere on vertical transmission of laser beams. Two-month series of tests using WB-57 aircraft at 18 000 m (60 000 ft), above 95% of earth’s atmosphere, would be operated by Manned Spacecraft Center over ground station at Redstone Arsenal near Marshall Space Flight Center. Tests were part of overall NASA program to develop optical communications systems for use during 1970s. Similar visible-light experiment was planned for Applications Technology Satellite ats-g, to be launched by NASA in 1975. In trial test, experiments, checking out pulsed-laser radar acquisition-and-ranging system, located aircraft flown from Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., and tracked it to 18 000 km (58 000 ft) but did not attempt laser communications, (msfc Release 72-109)

March 1, 1963
Delta Day at Cape Canaveral, the nasa Group Achievement Award presented to Delta Project Group of Goddard Space Flight Center, manager of Delta space vehicle for nasa. At Delta Day ceremony, nasa Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell remarked that the “Delta Team has had 16 times at bat, and a hitting streak of 15 in a row, for a batting average of .937. That is good hitting .... We would wish that all launch vehicles could boast of records equal to that of Delta. The scientific community would, I am sure, wish me to express its appreciation with a hearty ‘Well done!’ ” Directing additional remarks to Delta Launch Team at Cape Canaveral, Dr. Newell said: “You have turned out the most cost-effective launch vehicle in the nasa stable. It has given us the highest return on the investment of any vehicle we have, and that is of fundamental interest to us. “About 26% of all nasa attempts to place a satellite of any kind in orbit have been made with Delta, and 45% of our successful earth satellites placed in orbit have been put there by Delta. At this point in time, as new as we are in our space effort, that is an impressive record . . . .” (nasa Release 63-39; Text)

March 21, 1991
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for the contract to design, develop, and operate a science support center for the space-based Advanced x-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). AXAF was scheduled to be launched in 1998 as the third of NASA's Earth-orbiting Great Observatories. The center is to serve the international scientific community with an observation program for the x-ray telescope and the data it collects. (NASA release 91-46)

February 25, 1992
Milan J. Krasnican, 68, a retired aerospace engineer with NASA, who was a member of the Project Mercury Space Task Group and a project engineer on the orbiting geophysical observatory spacecraft program at Goddard Space Flight Center, died at Sibley Hospital. A long-term resident of the Washington area, he lived in Bethesda. (W Post, Feb 25/92)

February 5, 1994
Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)

November 12, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had selected Moog Inc. Controls Div. to negotiate a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract totaling $6 685 584 for the design, development, production, and acceptance testing of a thrust-vector control electrical-hydraulic servoactuator on the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The servoactuator would control the SRB’s exhaust nozzle. (Marshall Star, 12 Nov 75, 4)

August 7, 1994
Some 100 astronomers from around the world, including Tim Livengood from the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, traveled to the European Southern Observatory at La Silla in the mountains of northern Chile, to view the collision of the comet with Jupiter in July. (W Times, Aug 7/94)

August 26, 1974
John M. Thole had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science effective 1 Sept., NASA announced. Thole would succeed Vincent L. Johnson, who had retired. Former project manager for the Applications Technology Satellite at Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole had joined gsfc in 1960 and had held a variety of project management positions since that time, (nasa Ann, 26 Aug 74) 26 August-20 September: Thirty NASA engineers and technicians met with U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences counterparts in Moscow as joint preparations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s July 1975 flight continued. On 8 Sept, another group of 47 specialists and engineers headed by U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney arrived in Moscow for 2 weeks of meetings with the Soviet group headed by U.S.S.R. Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project directors announced plans for joint prelaunch tests at the U.S. launch site 1-8 Feb. 1975 and at the U.S.S.R. launch area 5-13 May 1975. Flight crews and technical specialists from both countries would participate. Soviet specialists also announced plans to fly a manned Soyuz mission to test ASTP-related systems. NASA would be informed of further details before the flight to permit tracking. Thirteen U.S. flight controllers were also spending two Weeks in Moscow beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for familiarization and training, including briefings on Soviet Mission Control Center operations, Soyuz spacecraft systems, and the mission flight plan, (jsc astp Press Communique, 20 Sept 74; jsc Roundup, 13 Sept 74; jsc Release 74-250) year in space. Dr. G. D. Whedon of the National Institutes of Health stated that weightlessness could threaten capable musculo-skeletal functions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could be developed to prevent significant losses of calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Continued loss of calcium could cause astronauts to break their backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. Dr. William E. Thornton, life scientist in the jsc Astronaut Office, reported that by Mission Day 3 all Skylab crewmen had lost more than 2000 cc (2 qts) of extravascular fluid from calf and thigh; at recovery, a sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators reported that such cardiovascular changes as the heart’s decreased ventricular size and the suppression of red blood cell production was the body’s accommodation to weightlessness. These physiological changes had been the expected response to a lack of exertion; they reversed after the astronauts’ return to earth, (jsc Roundup, 30 Aug 74,1-2; JSC proj off, interview, 12 Aug 75; Altman, NYT, 1 Sept 74,14)

October 5, 1976
One of the first in a group of 32 commercial solar heating and cooling systems in ERDA’s nationwide solar-energy demonstration program went into operation in Lynchburg, Va., NASA announced. Local and state government officials attended an open house at the office of Terrell E. Mosely, Inc., where the system is installed, to view the equipment together with businessmen, engineers, architects, and federal representatives. The 32 pilot projects, selected from 308 proposals submitted to ERDA, include ten office buildings, four schools, three hotels or motels, two fire stations, two factories, one hospital, one laboratory, one library, and some miscellaneous buildings. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center provided technical management for the installations in support of the ERDA program. (NASA Release 76-163; MSFC Release 76-177)

March 3, 1988
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)

May 2, 1997
NASA announced that John C. Mather, a senior astrophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, had been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, often considered the highest recognition possible for scientists and engineers. Mather’s work at NASA had begun in 1974, specifically, on the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft. He had served as a project scientist when NASA launched the spacecraft in 1989, and in 1992 he had participated in the COBE project, which effectively mapped primordial hot and cold spots in the cosmic microwave background radiation. The map demonstrated that radiation from the Big Bang conformed to theoretical predictions, providing new evidence for the long-standing Big Bang theory. Mather received his PhD in physics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1974.(NASA, “Goddard Scientist Selected for National Academy of Sciences,” news release 97-88, 2 May 1997. 245 NASA, “Heat-Resistant Material Licensed for High-Performance Pistons,” news release 97-91, 6 May 1997. 246 Associated Press, “Hubble-Look Back,” 9 May 1997.)

October 31, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Moog, Inc. for a $6 685 584 cost-plus-incentive-fee/award fee contract to design, produce, test, and maintain the Solid Rocket Booster Thrust Vector Control (TVC) electrohydraulic servoactuators. The devices move the solid rocket booster exhaust nozzle, providing directional control by gimballing the nozzle during propellant bum. (MSFC Release 75— 232)

April 9, 1990
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)

June 29, 1965
Ten firms had submitted proposals to the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for preliminary design study of the Optical Technology Satellite being considered as part of the Apollo Extension System (Aes). Two contracts would be awarded for parallel studies. Objective of the proposed Ots program was to advance NASA’s capability in space optics technology by performing several engineering and scientific experiments in space. Selected contractors would review existing conceptual designs for Ots and analyze the technical feasibility and justification for the performance in space of experiments being considered. The contractor would then create a conceptual design with onboard experiments. In Phase II, the contractor would perform a conceptual design study of the Ots subsystem to establish a sound base for overall preliminary design. The program would be under NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 65—213; msfc Release 65— 213)

October 9, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center held a final review of the Zero-Gravity Atmospheric Cloud Physics Project Phase A Definition Study. The study established the feasibility of atmospheric cloud physics research on Spacelab and recommended preparation of a Phase B study, (msfc Orbital & Space Environmental Br, interview, 6 Aug 75; msfc Release 74-181) 9— 25 October: Johnson Space Center Flight Operations Aircraft Div. completed the first mission of Project Airstream, gathering high-altitude gaseous and particulate samples from the upper atmosphere in the Western Hemisphere with the NASA high-altitude WB-57F aircraft. Sampling missions, flown for the Atomic Energy Commission and the Dept, of Transportation, allowed AEC to determine the global distribution of atmospheric nuclear weapon test debris, both gaseous and particulate. Nine NASA crewmen alternated in the 14 flights of the first mission, logging 51 500 km in all. (JSC Release 74-269) 10— 30 October: NASA launched Westar 2 (Westar-B), the second U.S. commercial domestic communications satellite, for Western Union Telegraph Co. from Eastern Test Range at 6:53 pm edt on a Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The satellite was placed in a close-to-planned transfer orbit with a 36 107-km apogee, 231-km perigee, and 24.76° inclination. The apogee kick motor, fired 13 Oct., circularized the orbit with 35 766km apogee, 35 244-km perigee, 23-hr 42-min period, and 0.5° inclination. By 25 Nov. the comsat was operating normally at its station at about 90° W longitude above the equator. The launch had been twice delayed, once for investigation of the entire Delta program and once for a last minute check of a connector pin. When launched, the vehicle performed as planned with two minor exceptions (both due to human error): the 2nd-stage cold-gas redundant altitude-control system switched from primary to backup nozzles because the guidance system had been programmed with too low a moment threshold and the umbilical end fitting was damaged because a tether had been improperly installed. Neither problem compromised the NASA mission objective: to place the satellite in an orbit of sufficient accuracy for transfer into a stationary synchronous orbit while retaining sufficient stationkeeping propulsion to meet the mission lifetime requirements. The objective was met, and the mission was adjudged successful 30 Oct. Westar 2 joined Westar 1, launched 13 April 1974 and later placed in geosynchronous orbit at 99° W longitude. The Westar Satellite Communications System—consisting of Westar 1 and 2, a third satellite for later launch, and five ground stations—had the potential for general-purpose telecommunications throughout the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Western Union planned to make the system available to all users, largely through leasing the voice, TV, and data transmitting services. NASA would be reimbursed for the launch, (nasa mors, 1, 25 Nov 74; nasa Releases 74-147, 74-265; Westar Release, 12 Sept 74; SBD, 11 Oct 74,214)

June 14, 1991
NASA announced that its Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) was maneuvered to point at its first scientific target of opportunity, the sun, on June 7. Controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, repositioned the observatory to gather data from two X-class solar flares. All four GRO instrument teams reported receiving good data on solar activity as a result. (NASA Release 91-91)

August 5, 1992
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)

April 29, 1991
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)

January 7, 1991
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)

October 18, 1993
Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)

September 20, 1976
Evaluation of data and pictures from a dendrite-remelting experiment flown in Dec. 1975 on a space processing applications rocket (SPAR 1) confirmed the belief that space processing could produce better materials than was possible on earth, NASA announced. The experiment, one of nine sent to a 225-km altitude for about 5 min of near weightlessness, included a camera to record solidification of aluminum chloride solution in a transparent vial in the absence of gravity. No fluid motion was detected in the liquid, which solidified uniformly without the formation of crystals (dendrites) that broke off and settled to the bottom of the solution in a control experiment on earth. This experiment was the first in which scientists had viewed the process of solidification under weightless conditions, said the co-investigators, Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary Helen Johnston of Marshall Space Flight Center. Controlling the crystalline structure of materials would enable scientists to make them uniformly strong to meet specific needs. (NASA Release 76-159; MSFC Release 76-167)

August 24, 1974
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)

October 6, 2000
NASA announced the selection of Sverdrup Technology Inc. to fulfill a contract providing engineering, science, and technical services at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The two- year contract, with three one-year priced options valued at US$300 million over five years, would go into effect on 15 October.(NASA, “Tennessee Technology Firm Selected for $300 Million Contract,” news release c00-n, 6 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-n.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)

February 11, 1991
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)

February 28, 1963
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station in continuing series of upper atmosphere studies, the vehicle carrying payload that ejected and detonated 12 explosive charges at intervals from 22- to 51-mi. altitude. A similar experiment was launched from Ft. Chilrchill, Canada, at about the same time to obtain high altitude wind and temperature data. Both shots were considered successful. Experiments were being conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-22; nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 3/5/63 and 3/11/63)

December 10, 1972
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)

November 12, 1972
More than 70 students from six continents would witness Apollo 17 launch and visit major U.S. science centers during Dec. 4-17 tour sponsored by NASA in cooperation with Dept, of State, NASA announced. Students 15 to 17 yrs old with top academic ratings had been selected by their governments on NASA invitation. U.S. tour would give students broad view of work in science and space. Tour would include Washington, D.C.; Tennessee Valley Authority; Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Marshall Space Flight Center; Manned Spacecraft Center; Ames Research Center; Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and facilities of National Bureau of Standards, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and United Nations. Project also was supported by U.S. Information Agency and National Science Teachers Assn, (nasa Release 72-219)

January 21, 1975
The current fleet of supersonic transports—including the 16 Anglo-French Concordes and 14 Soviet Tu—144s flying or scheduled for service—would cause minimal damage to the ozone layer, Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, Director of the Dept, of Transportation’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program, announced at a press briefing. Citing a 3-yr DOT study, “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft,” Dr. Grobecker said it would require 125 Concordes flying 4.5 hr daily to cause a minimally detectable change in the ozone layer. However, the study concluded that future expansion of stratospheric jet fleets should be carefully monitored. Recommendations made by the study included development of engines to meet specific nitrogen oxide-emission standards, development of low-sulfur aviation fuels, and establishment of stratospheric air-quality standards and engine-emission regulations. (AP, NYT, 22 Jan 75, 33; Robinson, Av Wk, 27 Jan 75, 16—17) 22 —25 January: NASA launched Landsat 2 (Landsat—B), formerly called Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS-B), from Western Test Range at 9:56 am PST on a two-stage Thor-Delta booster supplemented by nine strap-on rockets. The satellite entered a near-polar orbit with a 918.23-km apogee, 912.89-km perigee, 103.32-min period, and 99.09° inclination. Primary objective of the mission was to acquire multispectral imagery over the U.S. and foreign countries in quantity sufficient to improve remote-sensing interpretative techniques and to further demonstrate the practiced application of Landsat data. Secondary objectives were to acquire sufficient multispectral coverage over the U.S. to supply data requirements for the Applications System Verification Tests for at least 1 yr, to acquire multispectral coverage for at least 2 yr over the major agricultural areas of the world to illustrate further applications of Landsat imagery for crop inventory, and to demonstrate successful operation of the Data Collection System. A 3-day delay in the launch changed the initial orbital phasing of Landsat 2 relative to Landsat 1 (launched as Erts 1 on 23 July 1972) into a 12- to 6-day repeat cycle instead of the planned 9-day cycle. However, an orbital correction maneuver beginning 27 Jan. and ending 6 Feb. altered phasing to a 9-day repeat cycle. The payload separated from the launch vehicle 50 min 3 sec after launch, followed by solar-panel deployment and earth acquisition using the attitude-control system. The command system was turned on automatically, permitting activation of the payload by ground stations. During the night of 22—23 Jan. the mechanical integrity of the wideband video tape recorder was verified, Data-Collection System (DCS) activated, and data-collection platform experiment data transmitted. By 12:00 pm EST 23 Jan. all spacecraft systems were operating and by 25 Jan. the wideband transmitter, wideband video tape recorder, multispectral scanner (MSS), and return-beam vidicon (RBV) were turned on, and operating normally. Teaming up with Landsat 1, the 953-kg Landsat 2 would provide repetitive coverage of almost the entire earth to demonstrate the practical benefits of resources management from space for NASA in cooperation with the Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Dept, of the Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various state, local, and foreign organizations. Experiments included the cooperative NASA—DOA—NOAA Large Area Crop Inventory (LACIE), which combined crop-acreage measurements derived from Landsat data with meteorological information from ground stations and NOAA satellites to assess crop yields and make production forecasts. During the first yr of operation, LACIE would concentrate on U.S.-grown wheat, but the experiment would later be expanded to other crops and other regions. Other experiments included land-use survey and mapping; mineral resources, geological, structural, and land-form surveys; water resources studies; marine and ocean surveys; meteorological and environmental studies; and interpretative techniques development. Data were being transmitted to three NASA tracking and data-acquisition facilities at Fairbanks, Al.; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md. In addition, Canada and Brazil operated Landsat ground data-acquisition stations and Italy and Iran were constructing similar facilities. Data received from the satellite were sent to the NASA Data Processing Facility at Goddard Space Flight Center where 1300 images, covering 45 million sq km, could be processed each week. The data would then be forwarded to the Federal Data Center and made available to the public. The Landsat mission was part of a U.S. program to develop remotesensing methods for improved management of earth’s resources. In addition to Landsat 1 and 2, the program included remote-sensor instrument development; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; low-, intermediate-, and high-altitude aircraft flights; and Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP) experiments completed during the 1973 manned Skylab missions. (NASA MORs, 9, 23 Jan 75; NASA Releases 74—329, 75-31)

April 2, 1965
Landing pads that might be used on unmanned or manned vehicles in NASA’s Project Apollo were patented for NASA. Bowl-shaped, the pads would be attached to the spacecraft’s struts by ball joints and would be braced inside by collapsible ribs to absorb lateral shock. The underside of the bowl would be covered by material similar to sheet aluminum designed to shear away if the pads should slide. The inventor, Josef F. Blumrich of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said the pads would support a vertical landing on level terrain and would not dig in or transmit undue shock if they should slip against rocks; they were designed to settle on rock or dust or a combination of the two. (Jones, NYT, 4/3/65, 34)

November 16, 1962
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., under direction of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. Second stage failed to ignite, so rocket reached altitude of only about 9.5 mi.

December 13, 1963
Two sounding rockets launched at 'White Sands Missile Range in U.S.-Sweden coordinated study of ion and electron concentrations in D-region of the ionosphere. Areas sounding rocket carrying Sweden’s scientific experiment was fired to 60-mi. altitude, its 12-lbs. of instruments to obtain measurements of ion densities from peak altitude down to 25 mi. At apogee, parachute was deployed and instrumentation exposed. Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched 62 min. later, carried U.S. experiments in 100-lb. payload of instrumentation designed to measure ion and electron densities, ultraviolet radiation in the upper atmosphere, and a camera supplied by Univ. of Leicester, England, to photograph x-ray emission; payload did not achieve desired altitude (about 110 mi.) because of malfunction in the launch vehicle. Cause of malfunction was not yet known. U.S.-Sweden experiments were part of program sponsored by Swedish Committee for Space Research and nasa, whose Goddard Space Flight Center has responsibility for U.S. coordination. Both firings were conducted by Physical Science Laboratory of New Mexico State Univ. under U.S. Army contract, (nasa Release 63-277)

February 11, 1975
Dr. John F. Clark, Goddard Space Flight Center Director, and Dr. James W. Smith, president of Greenbelt Homes, Inc., signed a cooperative agreement to install experimental solar heating units in four four-family housing units in Greenbelt, Md. During the first phase of the project, all four of the units would be instrumented to measure heat loss and fuel-consumption characteristics, and two of the four would be fully insulated. Based on the cost-effectiveness of the first phase, the two insulated buildings would be equipped with solar heating units designed to augment existing hot-water radiator systems. The remaining two units would serve as control for comparison. The solar units, which would be designed at GSFC, would be installed in time for the 1975—1976 heating season. (Goddard News, March 75, 1—2; GHI manager’s ofc, interview, 5 Oct 1976)

November 4, 1986
NASA officials announced that James Kingsbury, engineering chief at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would retire at the end of November. He was one of the high ranking officials who had worked on Challenger's fatal rocket boosters. (USA Today, Nov 5/86)

March 10, 1964
NASA announced selection of Lear Siegler, Inc., Electronics Instrumentation Div. for negotiation of contract to install new electronic systems and modify present systems at East Test Area of Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Contract value was estimated to exceed $4,000,000. (nasa Release 64-59)

January 5, 1993
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)

January 30, 1975
NASA’s Office of Space Science announced assignment to Marshall Space Flight Center of overall responsibility for a definition study of the Atmospheric, Magnetospheric and Plasmas-in-Space (AMPS) Spacelab payload, to fly on the Space Shuttle. AMPS would be a manned laboratory equipped to study the dynamic process of the atmosphere and magnetosphere, using active and passive probing techniques. (NASA Release 75—28)

May 14, 1973
College student participants in a 10-week Summer Institute for Riomedical Engineering at Goddard Space Flight Center presented results of the study cosponsored by GSFC and Howard Univ. Ten students had worked to solve problems in health care by applying NASA space age technology. Experiments had included obtaining data from 40 electrocardiogram electrodes simultaneously without using bulky and time-consuming equipment, disposing of anesthetic fumes exhaled by patients during surgery, using space tools to weigh premature infants without removing them from a controlled environment, measuring stresses in human bones, and researching deafness, (nasa Release 72-152)

November 3, 1964
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Island to an altitude of 76.8, with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure measurements. Experiments were provided by Goddard Space Flight Center (csfc) scientists. Rocket performance was excellent but instrumentation performance was unsatisfactory since grenades did not eject or explode. (NASA Rpt. srl)

March 20, 1973
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center magnetospheric physics experiment to a 225.3-km (140-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)

January 28, 1965
The first major Saturn V flight component, a 33-ft.-dia., 60,000-lb. corrugated tail section which would support the booster’s five 1.5-million-lb.-thrust engines, arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center from NASA Michoud Operations, near New Orleans. The section was one of five major structural units comprising Saturn V’s first stage. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1)

July 23, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that Barbara S. Askins, a chemist in MSFC’s Astronomy Branch, had applied for patent on an improved process, autoradiographic film intensification, that would improve photographic images after films or plates had been developed. Exposing silver or other imaging material on a developed film or plate to a radioactive environment would convert the material to a radioactive compound; placing the radioactivated material in contact with a receiver emulsion on an unexposed film or plate would reproduce the original image with increased contrast and density. The hazards and complexity of handling radioactive material had limited the use of such a process, but the new process did not require special training, expensive equipment, or extraordinary safety precautions, as it used an isotopic organo-sulfur 35 compound and could be adapted easily to an ordinary photographic laboratory. Askins said the process would be used in astronomy and other scientific research where low light levels were encountered. (MSFC Release 76-13)

January 24, 1991
NASA technology developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, designed sensors to monitor potentially damaging heat build-up in electronic circuits. Such technology was to be used in connection with the huge television Jumbotron screen for the Superbowl game on January 27. NASA's Technology Utilization program is cited as an example of the applications that can be made from NASA findings. (NASA Release 91-10)

October 24, 1994
NASA created or saved an estimated 5,300 direct and indirect jobs in the U.S. economy in the preceding 18 months because of technology transfer programs at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Of these, some 1,170 were in Alabama, according to Harry Craft Jr., manager of the MSFC Technology Transfer Office, 1,078 in Pennsylvania, and 430 in Tennessee. Most of the companies helped by the Office were small businesses. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 24/94)

November 14, 1973
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)

November 15, 1974
nasa launched three satellites—Noaa 4 (itos-g) meteorological satellite for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Intasat ionospheric satellite for Spain, and Amsat Oscar 7 amateur radio communications satellite—from Western Test Range at 9:11 am pst on one Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The three spacecraft entered almost identical, near-to-planned, polar orbits. It was the first triple launch for a Thor-Delta. Noaa 4 entered orbit with a 1458-km apogee, 1444-km perigee, 115min period, and 101.7° inclination, as the fourth operational Improved Tiros Operational Satellite in the joint NASA and Dept, of Commerce program to provide global cloud-cover observations. Delayed 29 Oct. by faulty electrical connectors on the Thor-Delta and again 13 Nov. when a 2nd-stage hydraulic pump posed a problem, the launch went smoothly on 15 Nov. Noaa 4 joined Noaa 2, launched 15 Oct. 1972, and Noaa 3, launched 6 Nov. 1973. The 345-kg, three-axis-stabilized, earth-oriented satellite moved in a circular, near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit. Day and night coverage of the earth’s cloud cover was provided by two very-high-resolution radiometer instruments and by two scanning radiometer sensors. Two vertical-temperature-profile radiometers made continuous radiance measurements for determination of the atmospheric vertical temperature profile over every part of the earth’s surface at least twice daily. One secondary sensor, the solar proton monitor, studied solar activity and its effects on the earth’s environment. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for design, development, launch, and in-orbit checkout of the spacecraft. noaa’s National Environmental Satellite Service (ness) would take over operation of the satellite after checkout. NASA mission objectives—to launch the spacecraft into sun-synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy for operational mission requirements and to conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft—were accomplished and the mission was adjudged successful 24 Jan. 1976. Intasat, the first Spanish satellite, separated from the Delta 2nd stage 24 min after launch and entered orbit with a 1468-km apogee and perigee, 115-min period, and 101.7° inclination. The 20-kg, 12-sided, magnetically oriented, spin-stabilized spacecraft would measure ionospheric electron content, irregularities, and scintillations in a joint space research program of NASA and the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial. inta provided the spacecraft and would acquire experiment data. NASA provided pickaback launch and tracking. Amsat Oscar 7—the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp.’s Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio—separated from the Delta 2nd stage 77 min after liftoff and entered orbit with a 1458-km apogee, 1454-km perigee, 115-min period, and 101.7° inclination. The seventh in a series begun with Oscar 1 in 1961, the solar-powered, octahedral, 29.5-kg Oscar 7 joined Oscar 6, launched 15 Oct. 1972, to serve as a space communications relay station for radio amateurs and as a teaching aid, giving firsthand experience in space science for U.S. schools. Oscar 7 was built and prepared for launch by the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. (nasa mors, 18 Oct 74; 19, 20, 29 Nov 74; 26 Jan 76; NASA Release 7«22; Goddard News, Dec 74; SBD, 30 Oct 74, 301; 14 Nov 74, 79)

November 3, 1976
Dr. Mary Helen Johnston, metallurgist at MSFC, was principal guest speaker at the Federal Women’s Day program at Wallops Flight Center. Dr. Johnston, who said she wanted to be one of the first American women chosen for space flight, participated in 1974 as part of an all-women crew of experimenters in a 5-day tryout of the general-purpose laboratory at MSFC, a cylindrical mockup of the Spacelab being built in Europe for Space Shuttle flights. Using the neutral-buoyancy simulator, a working area for handling experiment packages in a zero-gravity environment, the crew developed techniques for use on Spacelab. As principal investigator for three scientific experiments and co-investigator on another, Dr. Johnston had planned the work in hopes of going on orbital missions in the 1980s. Also on the program was Audrey Rowe Colom, director of women’s activities for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and current president of the Natl. Women’s Political Caucus. Besides the speakers, the program included jskits by WFC employees and a costumed narration of “Two Centuries of American Women on Parade.” (WFC Release 76-15)

May 26, 1972
NASA anounced retirement of Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective July 1 when he would become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries. Dr. von Braun had joined NASA in 1960 when Army Ballistic Missile Agency development team which he headed was transferred to NASA and formed nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Born in Germany, Dr. von Braun became director of German army portion of Peenemuende Rocket Center. Near end of World War II he led group of scientists to West, surrendering to allies. In 1945 he went to U.S. under contract to U.S. Army to direct high-altitude firings of V—2 long-range ballistic missile at White Sands Missile Range. As Director of Development Operations Div. of abma, Dr. von Braun led development of Pershing Army missile and Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile, whose nosecone reentry test vehicle Jupiter-C was used to launch first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (Jan. 31, 1958). Dr. von Braun was msfc Director from July 1960 to February 1970, when he assumed his current position. He had received numerous awards and honors, including Dept, of Defense Distinguished Civilian Service Award, Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, British Interplanetary Society Gold Medal, Herman Oberth Award, NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership, Galabert International Astronautical Prize, NASA Distinguished Service Medal, American Society of Mechanical Engineers Man of the Year Award, and Associated Press Man of the Year in Science Award. Dr. von Braun said he would leave NASA “with a deep feeling of gratitude for the wonderful and unique opportunities the agency has given me during the last 12 years . . . [and] with the knowledge that NASA has enough well thought out plans to keep it moving ahead for many years to come.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said Dr. von Braun’s retirement was “a source of regret to all of us. ... For more than a quarter of a century, he has served the United States as a leader in space rocket development. His efforts first put the United States in space” with Explorer 1 and as director of msfc “he directed the development of the world’s most powerful rocket, the Saturn V. All of us at NASA will miss the daily stimulation of his presence, but we are confident that we will continue to have the benefit of his inspiration and counsel in the continuing exploration and use of space.” (nasa Release 72—113; NASA biographical data)

July 1, 1968
Eighth anniversary of NASA’s largest Center, Marshall Space Flight Center. It became operational July 1, 1960, with 4,400 employees and facilities valued at estimated $100 million. On eighth anniversary MSFC had 6,500 employees. Plant value was estimated at $400 million, with real property values accounting for $140 million and capital equipment for remaining $260 million. Achievements during first eight years included development and successful flight of Saturn I, Saturn IB, and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68-143)

November 13, 1986
Martin Marietta, in competition for a contract to build the Space Station, unveiled a fullscale model depicting its plans at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. The intended crew module has eight sleeping quarters, each with a video recorder and a computer giving crew members direct access to home and the Space Station's main computer. (C Trib, Nov

January 16, 1981
NASA announced the selection of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), a consortium of 14 universities, for final negotiation of a contract to establish, operate, and maintain a science institute for the 13.1-meters (43-foot) Space Telescope scheduled for launch on the Shuttle early in 1985. The space telescope science institute, making scientific investigations using the telescope for at least 15 years, would be located on the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The estimated contractor cost for an initial 5-year contract would be $24 million. Additional funding would be needed later for a guest-observer and archival-research program. The contract had options for three 5-year extensions. The institute would receive data sent from the telescope via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and NASA’s communications network through the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), where the institute would operate a space telescope support center. Investigations would be able to ask GSFC to point the spacecraft at any desired field-of-view. The 2.4-meter (96-inch, mirror in the telescope could image 350 times the volume of space now visible from Earth. (NASA Release 81-12; MSFC Release 81-11; Nature, Jan 29/81, 339)

July 8, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 3 different solar collectors procured from industry in an ERDA-sponsored program on technical management and support of solar-energy development were undergoing tests of efficiency versus cost. The collectors, after exposure to weathering, were put into an active situation in which the heat-transfer medium (usually water) passed through them, and measurements were made to determine their efficiency. At the same time, 4 low-cost collectors developed by MSFC were being tested to evaluate the thermal performance of black-nickel and black-chrome absorber coatings that could reduce the amount of collector area required, and thereby lower the cost of a specific application. (MSFC Release 76-121)

July 29, 1993
NASA selected Hughes STX Corporation, Lanham, Maryland, to negotiate a five-year contract, proposed at $121,7 million, to provide support of computer systems management for Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C93-m)

March 4, 1991
NASA announced its selection of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC), Fairfax, Virginia, for a contract to provide ocean color data. These data were to support research performed by the Laboratory of Hydrospheric Processes, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The contract would run for about 7.5 years, of which 2.5 years would be development time and five years of data production. The mission's scientific objective was to measure changes in ocean color that indicate where concentrations of phytoplankton and chlorophyll lie on the surface of the ocean. For global change research, measuring concentrations of phytoplankton are essential in understanding the role of oceans in the global carbon cycle. The phytoplankton's photosynthesis stores vast amounts of carbon and understanding better how oceans store and release carbon will help understand global climate.

August 22, 1973
nasa launched an Aerobee 200A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center astrophysics experiment to a 213.2-km (132.5-mi) altitude. The flight was nominal until 250 sec into the flight, when high-voltage problems developed. Final results would be determined after recovery of the payload, (nasa proj ; off) August 23-September 13: Intelsat-IV F—7 communications satellite was launched by nasa for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (intelsat). The 1379-kg (3041-lb) satellite was launched from Eastern Test Range at 6:57 pm edt by an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle into a highly accurate transfer orbit with a 35 819.5-km (22 257.2-mi) apogee, 548.1km (340.6-mi) perigee, and 27.3° inclination. NASA’s primary objectives were to conduct design, performance, and flight-readiness reviews for the Federal Communications Commission; to ensure compatibility of intelsat spacecraft with NASA launch vehicles and launch environmental conditions; and to launch Intelsat-IV F—7 into a transfer orbit that permitted the apogee-kick motor to insert the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit on the equator over the Atlantic Ocean. During a design life of seven years the spacecraft would add 12 TV channels to those available between the U.S. and other countries and would increase the telephone capacity by 3500 two-way circuits. The apogee-kick motor was fired at 8:30 am edt Aug. 25 and Intel-sat-IV F—7 entered a near-circular orbit with a 35 778-km (22 231.4-mi) apogee, 35 773-km (22 228.3-mi) perigee, 1435.6-min period, and 0.4° inclination. The spacecraft was at 327° east longitude, drifting at 0.15° per day, and was expected to reach its planned station of 330° east longitude over the Atlantic Ocean within 10 days. NASA adjudged the mission a success Sept. 13. Intelsat-IV F—7 was the fifth communications satellite in the Intelsat IV series. Intelsat-IV F—4 (launched Jan. 22, 1972) was operating satisfactorily over the Pacific. Intelsat-IV F—5 (launched June 13, 1972) was operating over the Indian Ocean. The launch of Intelsat-IV F-6, postponed in May, was tentatively planned for December, (nasa prog off; gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; ComSatCorp, Tech Ops OIF & Launch Rep) August 24: The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 581 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 282-km (175.2-mi) apogee, 171-km (106.3-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The spacecraft reentered Sept. 6. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 12/31/73; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)

August 1, 1994
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in Huntington Beach, California, to reconfigure the Delta Clipper experimental vehicle (DC-X) using advanced lightweight materials and advanced auxiliary propulsion systems. NASA was acquiring the DC-X from the Department of Defense to test new technologies needed to develop a reusable launch vehicle that could assist NASA's ultimate goal of gaining low-cost access to space. (NASA Release 94-125)

March 3, 1965
NASA, at DOD’s request, had halted syncom Il’s westward drift at 68° east longitude over the Indian Ocean. Under the direction of project managers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, the command signals had been sent from the Syncom station in Salisbury, Australia, beginning Feb. 20 and ending Feb. 24. No future major locational corrections were anticipated; SYNCOM II should remain in same general area indefinitely, (nasa Release 65-72)

May 28, 1965
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a statement to Pat Houtz of the Huntsville Times: “. . . it is extremely important that both the Legislature and the Governor fully understand the importance of the George C. Marshall Space Flight Center operation to the success of the current United States effort in space and, also, the importance of our ability to work in that state in an environment conducive to the most effective utilization of our ablest scientists, engineers, technicians, and industrial contractors.” (Text; Huntsville Times, 5/28/65)

September 24, 1974
NASA had designated Marshall Space Flight Center as lead Center for NASA activities under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act signed into law 3 Sept., msfc announced. The Center would work under the direction of the NASA Hq. Office of Energy Programs, (msfc Release 74-175)

February 6, 1975
NASA launched Sms 2 (SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite) into transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 5:04 pm EST. Launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the three-stage inertially guided Thor-Delta booster placed the satellite in an orbit with a 36 810-km apogee, 197-km perigee, 651.0-min period, and 23.9P inclination. Originally scheduled for 30 Jan., the launch had been delayed to replace the Inertial Measurement Unit of the launch vehicle’s flight-control system with a newer more reliable unit. The spacecraft performed normally during the transfer orbit, and attitude and reorientation maneuvers were performed as planned. The apogee boost motor was fired on second apogee at 9:43 am EST 7 Feb. placing Sms 2 in a synchronous orbit; orbital parameters were 36 685-km apogee,. 35 680-km perigee, 1456.4-min period, and 1.1° inclination. By 10 Feb. the spacecraft was drifting westward at 6° per day toward the final operational station of 115° west longitude. Over several days beginning 10 Feb., the onboard auxiliary propulsion system was fired to place the spacecraft into proper attitude for operational use. First photos were transmitted 11 Feb. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to enable the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft, and turn operational control over to NOAA—were met, and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. NASA turned over control of Sms 2 to NOAA 10 March. The 628-kg cylindrical spacecraft carried five instruments to provide high-quality day and night cloudcover data; take radiance temperatures of the earth’s atmosphere; measure proton, electron, and solar x-ray fluxes, and magnetic fields; transmit processed data from central facilities to regional stations; and transmit environmental information to NOAA from the thousands of manned and unmanned data-collection platforms on land, rivers, lakes, and the sea. Sms 2, together with its sister craft Sms 1 (launched 17 May 1974), provided continuous coverage of the Western Hemisphere, transmitting weather photos every 30 min. SMS photos would be made into film loops of clouds moving over oceans and land masses to help meteorologists determine what types of cloud formations and weather conditions might cause the destructive tornadoes and hurricanes that frequently occur over the eastern U.S. Sms 2 was the second in a series of two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (SMS-C, to be called Goes 1 in orbit) developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) system. Under a NASA- DOC agreement, NASA was conducting a program to develop improved sensors and techniques—based on technology developed in its Tiros, Nimbus, and Applications Technology Satellite programs—for DOC’s operational program. Follow-on GOES spacecraft were being planned. Goddard Space Flight Center, which managed the SMS program under the direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 9 Jan, 10 Feb, 23 April 75; NASA Releases 75- 6, 75- 27; GSFC Wkly SSR, 6-12 Feb 75)

June 12, 1975
A theory that the moon was actually a piece of the earth broken away early in the planet’s formation 4.5 billion yrs ago was presented in a paper by Dr. John A. O’Keefe, a Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Professor Harold C. Urey, Nobel Prize winner from the Univ. of California. The paper, presented by Dr. O’Keefe at a meeting of the Royal Society in London, stated that although the moon had little, if any, metallic core, data from Apollo lunar-landing missions and earlier unmanned lunar flights had provided chemical evidence that lunar rocks were once a part of a mass that had included a considerable portion of molten iron. The higher proportion of molten metal in the earth supported the theory that, before the split, the iron in the earth had sunk to the center, drawing with it the gold, platinum, and other rare metals found in molten rock originally mixed with the iron. According to the theory, the moon was pushed to its present distance from the earth by interaction with the tides of the body of the earth. Other theories about the formation of the moon included the possibility that the moon had been captured by the earth’s gravitational field when it passed near the earth, or that it had been formed simultaneously with the earth. Neither of those theories explained the moon’s lack of a substantial metallic core. (NASA Release 75—171)

September 13, 1965
In a Washington Evening Star article, “Costs Soar in Lagging TFX Project,” Richard Wilson wrote: “Here’s the latest word on that $8 billion miracle airplane program, the tfx. It is costing about $5 million per plane instead of the estimated $2.2 million. It is too heavy for the Navy to use. It could have been ready now but it isn’t because the Kennedy administration lagged a year while evaluating and reevaluating the aircraft so that General Dynamics Corp. could get the contract. . . . “Nobody knows for sure that the Boeing plane would have worked out any better but the top military men all thought so. . . . So far as realizing any billion dollars savings as was at first advertised, this doesn’t appear very likely if the Navy has to have a lighter version. In view of the nearly doubling of cost per plane, it does not seem likely in any case. . . .” (Wilson, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65) September 13-18: International Astronautical Federation’s 16th Congress was held in Athens. Participants were greeted by King Constantine of Greece. Introductory speeches were made by the president of the IAF, Dr. William H. Pickering; chairman of the International Academy of Astronautics, Dr. Charles S. Draper; and president of the International Institute of Space Law, Dr. I. Pepin. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/12/65; Izvestia, 9/14/65, 5, atss-t Trans.) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, reported at a plenary meeting of the Congress that the Apollo program had now passed the half-way point and was moving forward at full momentum. He listed three primary commitments: “—the first Saturn V carrying an unmanned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1967. “—the first Saturn V carrying a manned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1968. “—the manned lunar landing is scheduled to be accomplished prior to 1970.” Following his presentation, von Braun told a news conference that “many Soviet and American scientists will participate to lay the foundation for extensive cooperation on the moon.” He said there were indications that the moon’s surface was solid enough to bear the weight of the spacecraft. Soft spots had been identified and would be avoided. He estimated that a landing on Mars would occur 15 yrs. after a successful lunar landing. (Text; NYT, 9/15/65, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, outlined broad objectives of the Saturn-Apollo applications missions, earth-orbital and lunar: “(1) Evaluate and extend man’s capabilities to operate in space effectively as an astronaut and as a scientist. “(2) Conduct observations of the Earth, extra-terrestrial phenomena, and experiments dependent on the space environment. “(3) Qualify systems and crews for subsequent long-duration space missions.

March 28, 1965
Robert J. Schwinghamer, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, received American Society of Tool and Manufacturing Engineers’ Research Medal. Schwinghamer was cited for his research “leading to a better understanding of materials, facilities, principles, and operations, and their application to better manufacturing.” ( msfc Release 65—58; Marshall Star, 3/17/65, 1, 6)

December 2, 1985
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)

February 1, 1973
The Federal Aviation Administration announced award of a $735 213 contract to Collins Radio Co. to develop new area aviation techniques to increase airport and airways capacity. The two-year study would emphasize two-dimensional (positional and altitude guidance) and three-dimensional (added time element) area navigation concepts. (faa Release 73-30) February 9—19:	The U.S.S.R. ground control commanded the lunar explorer Lunokhod 2 to unfold its solar battery panel and begin its second lunar day of exploration. The moon car explored its parking area—a small deep crater with outcroppings of bedrock at its edge, formed 3 million yrs ago by a large meteorite that hit the surface of congealed lava. Lunokhod 2 made measurements of the magnetic field inside the crater by approaching it four times from different directions and making 120 precision maneuvers. The vehicle moved southeasterly to the Taurus Mountains. En route it measured physicomechanical properties of the soil and tension of the local magnetic fields, took panoramic photos of surrounding terrain, and tested riding characteristics of the lunar vehicle in various modes of operation. A monolith one meter (three feet) long of unusual lunar material was discovered Feb. 13. The plate had a strong, smooth surface unlike surrounding pockmarked stones and appeared to be much younger. During exploration of the giant crater Lunokhod 2 skidded and swerved over 2.3 km (1.4 mi) of difficult terrain with slopes up to 25° and sank in dust to the hub of its wheels as it ascended the rim of the crater. At the top of the rim, TV cameras showed a complex surface with ejecta piled on the rims of lunar holes formed when three meteorites hit the area within millions of years. Lunokhod 2 descended the slope of a 100-m (330-ft) crater, leaving deep ruts in loose rock. The difficult ascent was interrupted for 20 hrs to replenish electrical energy Feb. 19. Lunokhod 2 had covered 9.6 km (6.0 mi) since landing on the moon Jan. 16. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 2/14/73, LI; 2/15/73, L2-L3; 2/21/73, L2-L3) February 10-March 10:	Water impact and towing tests of the space shuttle’s solid-propellant booster were conducted by the Navy at the Long Beach, Calif., Naval Shipyard. Tests, under Marshall Space Flight Center direction, gathered data on retrieval of reusable solid-fueled-motor casings jettisoned from the orbiter stage at 40-km (25-mi) altitude. Test hardware, a 77%-scale model of the shuttle booster, was dropped from heights of 0.3 to 12 m (1 to 40 ft) at angles of 10°, 20°, and 30° off vertical. The model was towed at speeds of 3.7 to 14.8 km per hour (2.3 to 9.2 mph). Kennedy Space Center was responsible for development of the retrieval techniques; MSFC, for design and fabrication of solid-propellant reusable boosters, (msfc Release 73-12; icsc Release 22-73; NASA prog off) February 11:	Rising costs of the Skylab missions were discussed by Thomas O’Toole in a Washington Post article: Nearly $400 million had been added to cost estimates since the Skylab program had originated seven years ago. Postponement of the first Skylab launch from April to May had added $5 million in overtime costs and NASA had conceded another two-week delay and $5 million in additional costs was possible. Another reason for skyrocketing costs was the post-Apollo switch of emphasis from the moon and planets to the earth. Skylab’s original purpose had been to study the sun and addition of the earth studies program on Skylab had added greatly to costs. Skylab was the flagship of the U.S. manned space program. It was the “most impressive machine ever built,” weighing 90 metric tons (100 U.S. tons) and providing living quarters equal to a three-bedroom house. Scientists saw Skylab as the link between the first decade of space exploration and the 1980s, when the reusable shuttle would become operational. It would provide much information about effects on the human body of long periods in space. The last of three Skylab crews might stay in space for 70 days. “If they make it that long without any serious side effects, they will have done as much for space exploration as any of the pioneers before them.” (O’Toole, W Post, Al) February 12:	A statement by Western Union International, Inc., Vice President Thomas S. Greenish that mainland China had no plans for establishment of a domestic satellite communications system was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology. Greenish had returned from two-month stay in People’s Republic of China in connection with an earth terminal being built by WUI near Peking. (Av Wk, 2/12/12),

May 21, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a study of alternative means for generating electrical power in space and relaying the power to earth, with emphasis on problem areas and new technology, the Marshall Star reported. Previous studies had defined concepts for the use of large solar-cell panels to generate power in geosynchronous orbit and transmit it to earth via microwaves; also studied had been the transmission via an orbital microwave system of power generated at a remote location on earth and transmitted long distances to the user location. (Marshall Star, 21 May 75, 1)

October 19, 1986
NASA released studies done by Donald Heath, a scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, which reveal that the Earth's ozone layer is thinning at a much higher rate than previously thought, about 3 percent between 1978 and 1984. This data was gleaned from a satellite orbiting 570 miles above the Earth. (C Trib, Oct 20/86; B Sun; Oct 20/86)

February 19, 1968
Goddard Space Flight Center fired its 1,000th sounding rocket. Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Coi payload to 97.9-mi (160.5-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in 2- to 30-kev interval with eight proportional counter x-ray sensors, solar aspect sensors, and yo-yo despin unit. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa RptSRL; GSFC Historian)

December 17, 1965
A 160-ft.-tall Saturn I rocket had been erected in display of missiles and space vehicles at the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Orientation Center, (msfc Release 65-305)

April 13, 1994
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science told the NASA Advisory Council that NASA wanted to launch one Discovery mission every 12 to 15 months on a Delta or smaller expendable launch vehicle (ELV). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center planned to issue a competitive procurement later in the year for up to 15 ELVs, paying $25 million to $30 million per vehicle. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)

August 18, 1976
A federal judge ordered NASA to reinstate with back pay and benefits the federal employees who lost their jobs at Marshall Space Flight Center to private contractors, the Washington Star reported. In a suit filed in 1967 in the U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., by the AFL-CIO American Federation of Government Employees, the union contended that 22 MSFC contracts with private companies resulted in the layoff of about 3000 federal workers. Judge Joseph Waddy agreed that the contracts were illegal and ordered that federal employees who lost jobs as a result of work going to the private companies should be rehired, and that any similar contracts be canceled. The decision upheld Civil Service Commission standards that forbid a private contractor from assuming an employer-employee relationship over federal workers. NASA attorney Sid Masri said as many as 2000 employees could be terminated as a result of the decision, which NASA was sure to appeal. (W Star, 18 Aug 76, A-2, B-2; WSJ, 19 Aug 76, 17)

June 4, 1998
During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The program’s original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASA’s commitment to “achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost,” saying that the plan would meet a “legitimate need within the science community.”(Warren Ferster, “NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals,” Space News, 8–14 June 1998.)

October 17, 1962
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, predicted U.S. will have as many as 24 men operating a moon station within a decade.

September 11, 1991
Lennard Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator, announced that the two largest mirrors for NASA's Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility have been successfully tested in the new X-ray Calibration Facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-145)

March 31, 1963
Industry proposals to define advanced nuclear space propulsion systems for 1970’s were submitted to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The mission-oriented studies would analyze post-Nerva developmental engine systems for maximum operational use and flexibility in U.S. space program. {Av. Wk., 3/18/63, 53)

March 30, 1962
Navy Polaris missile destroyed over Cape Canaveral after launch. March 31: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Division at nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the $1,000 Galabert Prize in Paris for his studies on nonchemical booster rockets. During March: nasa completed work on its first major launching facility on the West Coast, a Thor-Agena pad at Vandenberg afb, Calif. A used gantry was shipped from msfc and installed at a $1 million saving over cost of new construction. Pad would be used for nasa polar-orbit launches, such as Echo II, Nimbus, and Pogo (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory).

May 10, 1976
NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for validating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (lUS). The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet DOD objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique requirements (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coordinating NASA’s IUS activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch operations, and JSC for lUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The Air Force was expected to award a contract for IUS development by Sept. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)

April 8, 1966
oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory was launched by nasa from etr with Atlas-Agena D booster into parking orbit and then into planned circular orbit. Orbital parameters: 505.4-mi. (813.3-km.) apogee; 493.2-mi. (793.7-km.) perigee; 101-min. period; and 35° inclination. Satellite's solar panels and instrumented booms would be deployed April 10. First of four spacecraft scheduled for nasa’s Oao program, oao i— largest, heaviest, and most electronically complex unmanned spacecraft ever developed by U.S.—weighed 3,900 lbs., carried 10 telescopes, and contained 44,000 separate parts and 30 mi. of electrical wiring. It carried four scientific experiments to provide astronomers with their first sustained look at the universe from above the earth’s atmosphere, including Univ. of Wisconsin broad-band ultraviolet telescope package and detection devices to study the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft attitude control system, oao i would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed back to earth in the form of digital data for analysis by experimenters. Oao program was managed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 66-60; NYT, 4/9/66, 7; NYT, 4/10/66, 10E)

April 27, 1961
Javelin launched 70.6-pound payload to an altitude of 475 miles in beginning of Goddard Space Flight Center program to measure the density of electrons in the ionosphere.

May 19, 1994
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)

June 18, 1963
ComSatCorp incorporator George J. Feldman said at Conference on Space Science and Space Law, Univ. of Oklahoma: “The reality of a viable [satellite] communication system remains to be accomplished with the accompaniment of hard work, hard and yet imaginative intelligence, and cooperation, nationally and internationally .... “The choice of system ... in turn is of importance to the international users. How do they participate? Do they own stations? Do they furnish personnel? What about their own research and development? And in addition to the economics there is the political national interest and national pride in participation . . . “The communication satellite has arrived of experimental age. It will be brought into being as a working system. The United States has no monopoly on its creation. There are others who are capable of doing it. There is strong worldwide interest. The corporation is beginning to tackle the formidable problems in earnest enthusiasm, and I may say in the spirit of the kind of dedication that accompanies a pioneering effort of responsibility. The expert group being assembled can make a substantial contribution of national benefit, as it researches and develops its program. It is time to give this effort the understanding required, for much is at stake for all . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/2/63, A4188-89) Jv/rue 19: tiros vn (A-52) meteorological satellite placed in orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Initial orbital data: 405-mi. apogee, 388-mi. perigee, 97-min. period, 58.2° inclination to equator. On satellite’s first orbit, Command and Data Acquisition Station at Wallops Island, Va., obtained direct pictures from Camera 2 showing cloud vortex over Newfoundland and set Camera 1 to read out pictures on next orbit. First pictures were transmitted within an hour to Cape Canaveral, Fla.; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.; and National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md. In addition to two wide-angle TV cameras, tiros vn carried infrared sensors and electron temperature probe. Orbiting marked 18th straight successful satellite-orbiting by Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (nasa Release; Wallops Release 63-59; upi, NTT, 6/20/63, 3)

November 24, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Beckman Instruments Corp. to negotiate final contract for three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (Stars) at slightly more than $1,000,000. The contractor would be responsible for manufacture, installation, and maintenance of the system as well as training of Goddard personnel. This second phase of the Goddard Stars project would provide a highly automated method of preparing large quantities of data for later analysis by the scientific community, (gsfc Release G—33-64)

July 10, 1972
Total eclipse of sun over northern Canada was studied by Marshall Space Flight Center physicists Dr. Robert J. Naumann and K. Stuart Clifton and five Johns Hopkins Univ. physicists. Observation period of 90 sec marked last opportunity in North America to observe total solar eclipse until 1979. Team recorded shadow bands on either side of totality in first attempt to use low-light-level TV to obtain actual images of bands. Bands were extremely difficult to photograph because contrast between bands and surrounding light was faint, msfc participation had been requested because of Center’s experience with low-light-level TV observations of transient phenomena during meteoroid research and study of barium clouds and aurora. Team made observations from schoolyard near Cape Chat, Quebec. In second experiment 24 scientists from Los Alamos (N. Mex.) Scientific Laboratory rendezvoused in Air Force cargo aircraft with eclipse totality at altitude of 12 000 m (39 000 ft) northwest of Churchill, Manitoba. Scientists observed solar corona using telescopes, cameras, and radiation-measuring devices. Eclipse extended from north of Japan, across Siberia and Alaska, eastward through Canada, and ended in Atlantic Ocean south of Azores. It was partial throughout U.S. (msfc Release 72-84; Rensberger, NYT, 7/10/72, 35; O’Toole, W Post, 7/10/72, A3; AP, B Sun, 7/11/72, A3; msfc pao)

January 8, 1963
Task force from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center sent to Rocketdyne, Canoga Park, Calif., where F-l engine had developed “combustion instability,” William Hines reported in Washington Evening Stan Five-engine cluster of 1.5-million-lb. thrust F-l’s would power first stage of Advanced Saturn (C-5). (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/9/63)

November 7, 1962
nasa fired two experimental rockets into upper atmosphere within a half-hour of each other, to obtain a comparison of electron density profile with wind profile measured at about the same time. First rocket, two-stage Nike-Cajun, attained 82-mi. altitude with a 55-lb. payload to obtain measurements of electron density and electron temperature in ionosphere at night. Second experiment, using two-stage Nike-Apache, involved use of sodium vapor clouds to measure atmospheric winds and diffusion; rocket reached 34-mi. altitude before ejecting its vapor cloud, which extended to peak altitude of 103 mi. Twin launchings, conducted at nasa Wallops Station, marked first time such experiments were conducted together. Experiments were conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corporation of America.

November 3, 1978
NASA announced preparations to launch its second high energy astronomy observatory HEAO-B, continuing a three-mission program to study some of the most intriguing mysteries of the universe: pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes. Launch would be from KSC on an Atlas Centaur about Nov. 13. Carrying a focusing x-ray telescope and a variety of sensitive instruments, HEAO-B would maneuver and point for long periods of time at selected x-ray sources previously identified by Heao 1. Pictures returned by HEAO-B would be the first spacecraft-generated x-ray images of objects other than the sun. HEAO-B’s images, acquired by x-ray telescope, would be converted to telemetry received and taped by ground stations and eventually reconstructed as photographs showing size, structure, and detail of objects viewed by the spacecraft. HEAO-B, with a design lyr mission lifetime, would be placed in low circular orbit far enough above the atmosphere to detect radiation normally unable to reach earth’s surface. MSFC had managed HEAO for NASA’s Office of Space Science. KSC would manage launch operations including prelaunch checkout, launch, and flight through observatory separation in orbit. Lewis Research Center managed launch-vehicle procurement and related activities for the HEAO program. MSFC would control the in-orbit HEAO observatories, in conjunction with TRW flight-control engineers operating from Goddard Space Flight Center. Cost of the three-mission HEAO program was about $248 million, HEAO-B’s approximately $87 million. (NASA Release 78-165; MOR S-382-78-02 [prelaunch] Oct 30/78)

November 16, 1962
S-IV stage for Saturn space vehicle arrived at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., after 23-day journey from Douglas Missiles and Space Systems Div., Santa Monica, Calif. First Saturn stage to be shipped by water from West Coast manufacturing site, the S-IV would be mated with other Saturn stages in dynamic test tower at Marshall, for series of bending and vibration tests. Its external configuration, weight, and other characteristics were same as S-IV flight units.

May 8, 1994
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)

March 19, 1986
East Coast winter storms in the form of cyclones were studied by scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Concentrating their efforts on costal regions of North and South Carolina, where these storms develop and move northward, NASA scientists analyzed the upper atmosphere conditions using moisture and wind sounding balloons and the Nimbus 7 satellite to collect data. Another criterion for understanding these storms was the analysis of the transfer of moisture from the ocean into the atmosphere. NASA flew its fourengine Electra aircraft, outfitted with a combined laser/telescope (Lidar), to detect salt spray and aerosols as it fired a lazar beam that allowed the telescope to measure rising moisture and convection patterns. NASA's ER2 aircraft was used in higher altitudes for the same purpose; it carried microwave radiometers able to detect water vapor and cloud liquid water content. (NASA Release 8630)

August 25, 1975
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)

November 21, 1972
Huntsville, Ala., police department was using “elapsed time speed computer,” developed by Chief Peter H. Broussard, Jr., of Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory’s Sensors Branch, to identify traffic speed violators. System consisted of low-cost electronic computer and two roadside markers. Timing switch was turned on when vehicle passed first marker and off when vehicle reached second marker. Elapsed time was measured by internal computer clock and compared with distance between markers. System would perform basic functions of radar units more economically. (NASA Release 72—223)

February 5, 1976
Thermal protection fabrics developed for use in the Apollo and Skylab programs would be the basis for research into improved clothing and equipment for firefighters, under a contract signed between NASA and the Department of Commerce’s National Fire Prevention and Control Administration. The agreement assigned management responsibility to Marshall Space Flight Center for a 3-yr program funded jointly by NASA and NFPCA at a cost of $300 000 in the first year. The program would emphasize weight reduction, performance, and cost of equipment to improve the chances of a firefighter’s surviving any fire uninjured, in a job described as the most hazardous in the U.S. (MSFC Release 76-31)

November 6, 1973
A symposium at Goddard Space Flight Center sought to define critical measurements needed to determine interrelationships of solar and meteorological activity, the mechanisms needed to explain them, and the measurements that could best be made from space. The symposium was sponsored by gsfc with the University Corp. for Atmospheric Research and the American Meteorological Society, (nasa Release 73240; gsfc pao) November 8:	Ground crews at Kennedy Space Center began replacing the damaged stabilizing fins of the Skylab Saturn IB launch vehicle [see Nov. 6], After the fuel was drained from the 1st stage, the rocket was jacked up. One fin was removed and additional corrosion was discovered where the fin had been attached. Corrosion also was found on the replacement fins shipped from NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility. Workmen cleaned the affected areas with nitric acid, buffed them, and applied a zinc chromate primer. Shims, or strips of very thin aluminum, were added to the rocket surface to ensure proper fit. Crews worked around the clock to replace the eight 215-kg (473-lb) fins to meet a Nov. 15 launch date, (jsc press briefing transcript, 11/9/73; Wilford, NYT, 11/9/73, 2)

August 25, 1961
Explorer XIII (S-55A) placed into orbit by NASA Scout from Wallops, a micrometeorite counting satellite developed by Langley Research Center and Goddard Space Flight Center.

December 13, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said he believed Soviet Union is building super-rocket that would dwarf any flown before. “We would be foolish to think they are standing still,” he remarked. Dr. von Braun was at Michoud Operations, near New Orleans, formally accepting the first Saturn S-I booster built by private industry (Chrysler Corp.). (upi, Chic. Trib., 12/15/63; Marshall Star, 12/18/63,1)

June 8, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had used aerial thermalscanning techniques to locate high heat-loss areas as part of its energy resources management program to reduce energy consumption agencywide. The Lewis Research Center had made thermal scanning flights for all NASA centers, and MSFC had been scanned twice, once in October 1975 and again in February 1976, using a C-47 aircraft with onboard scanners that recorded on digital tape the average temperature of each area covered. Fed into a computer, the digital tape produced printouts and live mosaic maps projected on a television monitor to show areas where excessive steam-line losses occurred and to identify buildings losing excessive heat through roof structures. The MSFC facilities office validated the data through visual inspection of steam lines and roof insulation, and issued work requests for repair and replacement of insulation in 88 steam-line locations. Longer range action was planned to repair and replace deteriorated roofing and replace sections of the steam lines. (MSFC Release 76-104)

October 18, 1972
Dr. Nicholas C. Costes of Marshall Space Flight Center Space Sciences Laboratory received Norman Medal, highest award of American Society of Civil Engineers, at asce annual meeting in Houston. Award was for paper “Apollo 11: Soil Mechanics Results,” published by asce in 1970. (Marshall Star, 10/18/72, 1)

October 7, 1977
ESA announced that NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, had signed at a meeting in ESA headquarters a memorandum of understanding on cooperation in NASA’s space telescope program. The European contribution would include a faint-object camera for high-resolution imagery in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared portions of the spectrum, with associated photon-counting detector, to be left in orbit as long as considered scientifically useful; the solar array to power the scope; and support of a scientific operations center to be established by NASA for managing the observatory. ESA would get 15% of the observing time for the duration of the program in return for its participation, and would share data with astronomers in its member states and the international community. NASA would develop and integrate the telescope, launch it into orbit on the Shuttle, supply tracking and data-acquisition services, and maintain the telescope throughout the program. MSFC would manage the space telescope, Goddard Space Flight Center would manage instrument development and observatory operation, and the European Space Technology Center (ESTEC) would manage the ESA effort. (ESA Release Oct 7/77; NASA Release 77-212)

July 8, 1965
NASA had awarded Brown Engineering Co. a $3,630,000 contract for building nine discrete control equipment systems for use with Saturn V	launch vehicle. Two of the systems would be installed in a Saturn V	systems development facility at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville. The other seven would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Launch Complex 39: three systems would be placed in launch control centers; four would be installed on Saturn V mobile launchers, (msfc Release 65-176)

September 20, 1993
Marshall Engineers and Scientists Association President Wesley Darbro said that it appeared that the Marshall Space Flight Center would lay off about 478 workers, all associated with the Space Station program. (Huntsville Times, Sep 20/93)

August 5, 1965
s—IC-T, 138-ft.-tall test version of Saturn V’s first stage, was static-fired for 2% min. at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in first full-duration test-firing. The five F—1 engines, each consuming liquid oxygen and kerosene at the rate of three tons a second, generated 7.5	million lbs. thrust. Ability of the engines to steer the rocket was also successfully demonstrated. The five-engine cluster was mounted so that only the one in the middle of the cross-shaped array was stationary. The others could gimbal slightly in pairs, (msfc Release 65197; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1)

April 12, 1973
The appointment of William J. Hamon, Director of Program Budget and Control in the Office of Manned Space Flight’s Sortie Lab Task Force, as NASA Resident Liaison Officer at the European Space Research Organization’s Research and Technology Center (estec) in Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was announced by NASA. He would be responsible for liaison between NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center and the ESTEC sortie lab project. (NASA Release 73—70)

April 5, 1991
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)

August 29, 1974
Communications Satellite Corp. announced it had signed a contract to provide technical and operational management for the global commercial satellite system owned by the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Under the contract, to run through 11 Feb. 1979, ComSatCorp would recommend and implement research and development programs; advise on procuring space segment facilities; negotiate, place, and administer all contracts for space segments; arrange for satellite launch services and support; prepare and coordinate system operations plans; and prepare and coordinate frequency plans for earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release 74-44) 30 Augusta-14 September: NASA launched Ans 1 Netherlands Astronomical Satellite from Western Test Range on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle at 7:08 am PDT (10:08 am edt). The satellite entered an elliptical polar orbit with a 1167-km apogee, 254-km perigee, 99.0-min period, and 98.1° inclination—significantly different from the planned circular orbit—because of a malfunction in the 1st stage of the Scout. Changes in the spacecraft program and scientific instrument operations program were made to accommodate to the actual orbit. Although the orbit hindered the observation program, the primary objective—to increase the scientific knowledge of stellar ultraviolet and x-ray sources—could be achieved. The spacecraft was pointed at the sun, the solar panels were deployed, and fine pointing in a three-axis stabilized condition was established. All three experiments—a hard x-ray experiment provided by the U.S. and a uv telescope and soft x-ray experiment provided by The Netherlands— were turned on by 8 Sept. In-orbit checkout of experiments and spacecraft was completed 13 Sept, and the operational phase of the mission began 14 Sept. Principal effect of the orbit on the scientific program was the loss of observing time. The higher apogee placed the spacecraft in the Van Allen radiation belts longer than planned, creating a more intense radiation background than anticipated. The uv telescope could operate effectively for 70% of each orbit and observe lOth-magnitude stars only when the spacecraft was below 500 km. Only 5th-magnitude or brighter stars were observable most of the time. The U.S. x-ray experiment could make effective observations about 25% of the total possible observing time; the experiment could operate below 700 km but not over the poles or the South Atlantic Anomaly. The soft x-ray experiment consisted of a large-area detector, which was operating similarly to the U.S. experiment, and a grazing-incidence telescope, which was seriously affected by the radiation background. Although much of the acquired data was not usable, most future data might be recovered through improved analysis techniques. Despite the problems, the orbit would provide nine months of full sunlight, rather than the six months expected, permitting reobservations of objects observed during the first three months. In addition, aerodynamic drag would lower the apogee over a period of time, decreasing the passage time through the Van Allen belts. Ans 1 was launched under a Memorandum of Understanding signed 5 June 1970 by NASA and the Astronomical Netherlands Satellite Program Authority (anspa) . NASA provided the x-ray experiment, spacecraft technical support, the Scout launch vehicle and services, and limited tracking and data acquisition. The Netherlands was responsible for the spacecraft design, fabrication, and testing; two experiments; and primary spacecraft command, control, and tracking and data acquisition. Ans 1 was the first satellite to be controlled completely from the European Space Research Organization’s operations center at Darmstadt, Germany. The ans program was managed for NASA by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center had responsibility for the Scout launch vehicle, (nasa mors, 21 Aug, 6 Nov 74; gsfc SSR, 31 Aug 74; gsfc proj mgr, interview, 15 July 75; esro Release, 23 Aug 74)

October 4, 1977
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Inti. Business Machines of a $1 344 950 contract for 134 site data-acquisition subsystems to monitor performance of ERDA’s solar heating and cooling demonstration program at sites throughout the U.S. The IBM machines would provide data on solar energy at each site, amounts used for heating, cooling, and hot water, and other areas of performance, efficiency, and fuel saving. Each site would feed data to a central computer in Huntsville, Ala., for compilation of reports to business, industry, and the general public on the most economical and practical systems tested. (MSFC Release 77-184)

August 15, 1985
A sophomore at Purdue University and a senior at San Francisco's Lowell High School designed experiments to be carried on two 1986 Space Shuttle Flights, the Washington Post reported. Kentucky Fried Chicken would sponsor an experiment in which eggs would fly in orbit to determine whether chicken embryos could survive the rigors of weightlessness. The Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California would sponsor an experiment to measure the effects of weightlessness on cell division in yeast. Greg Delory, 16, said he got the idea for flying baker's yeast from the first Spacelab mission where bread mold was grown in orbit. "The mold was supposed to produce spores every 22 hours, but in space it lost its circadian rhythm and produced spores all the time," he said. Delory won a competition to design a Space Shuttle experiment while attending the U.S. Space Camp under the auspices of Marshall Space Flight Center. John Vellinger, 20, who won a competition to design a NASA experiment, said, "We hope this will give us some data about the feasibility of raising chickens as a food source in space." (WPost, Aug 15/85, A19)

September 9, 1985
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility conducted today a coordinated series of rocketborne experiments to study effects of lightning in the earth's troposphere. Three rocket payloads at different altitudes simultaneously collected lightning measurement data, and a series of ground-based instruments designed to detect the location and characteristics of lightning also made coordinated measurements. Wallops researchers launched at 8:01 EDT a single-stage Orion sounding rocket, 70 seconds later a two-stage Taurus-Orion, and then 57 seconds later a Nike-Orion; all three were solid-propellant sounding rockets. The Taurus-Orion lofted its 297-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 120 statute miles, and the Nike-Orion carried its 303-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 71.5	statute miles. The Taurus-Orion experiment package contained a water recovery system using an eight-foot parachute with flotation bag, flashing strobe light, and recovery beacon. Wallops personnel, following the three rocket series, launched a meteorological data sonde on a small rocket to determine the meteorological characteristics in the upper atmosphere near the time of the other measurements. The Wallops P-3 search aircraft located the Taurus-Orion payload package at 9:45 p.m. that same day about 40 miles offshore, and the next day the Coast Guard cutter "Point Brown" recovered and returned it to the Wallops Flight Facility for refurbishment and future spaceflights. (GSFC Release 8526)

November 22, 2000
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARC’s chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASA’s astrobiology program and to establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffen’s two loves, and that “the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.”(NASA, “NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies,” news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, “Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official,” 27 November 2000.)

June 21, 1965
NASA would negotiate with the Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for 22 h-1 rocket engines with 200,000-lb. thrust for use on the 12 Saturn ib launch vehicles presently planned, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Engines, with supporting services, would cost more than $6 million, (msfc Release 65-155; Marshall Star, 6/23/65, 1)

July 13, 1965
Two Presidential citations were among 12 awards presented to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center employees recently, msfc announced. Ralph Butler of the Aero-Astrodynamics Laboratory had suggested an improved method of measuring local atmospheric conditions by using radio-controlled model airplanes. Franklin Williams of the Saturn V Program Office had made two cost-reduction proposals, one concerning x-ray radiation protection and the other recommending an inexpensive covering for clean room insulation. Butler and Williams saved the Government an estimated $306,000. (msfc Release 65-182)

May 16, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for an x-ray source system for the x-ray telescope facility being constructed at MSFC for use in the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) project, MSFC announced. The proposed contract would include design, fabrication, assembly, preliminary in-plant checkout, installation, and verification. The contractor would also have the option of building a cover for the system. Under the terms of the contract, the x-ray source system would be installed on a 40.6-cm-by-39.3-cm steel flange by 20 Feb. (MSFC Release 75—93)

August 24, 1965
First sounding rocket launching undertaken jointly by the U.S. and Brazil under a memorandum of understanding signed April 21, 1965, was conducted successfully at nasa Wallops Station. The Nike-Apache rocket carried a 60-lb. payload to peak altitude of about 101 mi. (162.6 km.) during the seven-minute flight. Instrumentation for payload and telemetry ground support equipment were constructed jointly by Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) and nasa engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa furnished the rocket and use of Wallops Station facilities. The Brazilian launch team, presently in training at Wallops Station, directed the launch operations and acquired telemetry data during the flight. (Wallops Release 65-51)

January 29, 1961
NASA announced establishment of Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) in New York City, which would be an extension of the Theoretical Division of Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. It will be headed by Dr. Robert Jastrow.

May 23, 1964
NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center held Open House with more than 4,200 visitors attending. (Goddard News, 6/1/64)

March 13, 1965
USNS Croatan, which had left Balboa, Panama Canal Zone, on Mar. 6, arrived at Fima, Peru. During the interval, ten two-stage sounding rockets had been launched from the deck of the ship, carrying upper atmosphere and ionosphere experiments for the Univ. of Michigan, the Univ. of New Hampshire, and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Three single-stage Areas meteorological rockets, two of which carried experiments to measure ozone in the atmosphere, were also launched. (NASA Release 65-13)

April 6, 1974
The backup Skylab Orbital Workshop was loaded for shipment by sea to Marshall Space Flight Center for long-term storage, (msfc Release 74-56)

May 8, 1973
An earthlike atmosphere, 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen, would be used for the first time in a U.S. manned spacecraft on the Skylab mission, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Pure oxygen had been an acceptable atmosphere for relatively short U.S. flights, but long-term breathing of pure oxygen might cause the red blood cells to become fragile. Three tons of breathing oxygen and three fourths^ ton of nitrogen would be launched aboard Skylab and combined into) atmospheric distribution, circulation, and control systems at a nominal pressure of 3.45 newtons per sq cm (5 psia). (msfc Release 73—5,7)

November 3, 1999
A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket plane’s two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheed’s VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33’s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had “placed a huge wager” on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that “delays in the prototype would harm NASA’s plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.”(Jeff Leeds, “Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheed’s X-33 Rocket Plane,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)

August 7, 1965
Operation Firefly ended as some 3,000 fireflies snared by Rockville, Md., children were turned over to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. An extract of the firefly’s lamp would be used in a life detection instrument under development at GSFC. Goddard’s “Firefly” instrument would contain a mixture of all the contents of the insect’s glow system except atp (adenosine triphosphate), a high-energy compound essential to all life as it is known on earth. Thus, when the instrument encountered a live microorganism in space, the atp contained therein would complete the circuit and a glow would be produced. (gsfc Release G-19-65; Wash. Post, 8/7/65)

February 4, 1976
First mainstage test of the Space Shuttle main engine occurred at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Hancock County, Miss., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The engine—called the Integrated Subsystem Test Bed—was fired for 3.38 sec, reaching and stabilizing at its minimum power level: 50% of its rated power level of 1 668 075 newtons at sea level, or 2 090 654 newtons at altitude. Tests were conducted by the prime contractor for the engine, Rocketdyne Div. of Rockwell International Corp., under MSFC direction. (MSFC Release 76-29; Rockwell Release RD-2)

March 13, 1963
First stage of Saturn SA-5 vehicle was static-fired in 142.-sec. test at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Eight-engine cluster was fired at full thrust of 1.5 million lbs. (Huntsville Times, 3/14/63)

April 1, 1991
The media discussed the forthcoming launch of Atlantis and the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) it will set in orbit. Gamma rays have the highest of all forms of radiation and are born deep inside atomic nuclei. GRO was to canvass the entire sky over a two-year period, scanning the whole sky during the first year and concentrating on the most intriguing objects the second year. GRO was to be controlled by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists from Germany's Max Planck Institute, which supplied GRO's imaging telescope, were to assist. GRO's Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer Experiment was to be the main instrument for examining the material enveloping supernovas to look for gamma rays. University of Washington astronomer George Lake believed GRO would find in the dark matter, strange particles called "wimps" (weakly interacting massive particles) in a Milky Way object called Geminga. The Soviet spacecraft Granat, carrying a French gamma-ray detector, found an object that accretes surrounding matter, generating antimatter that in turn creates gamma rays. (P Inq, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; UPI, Apr 1/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; UPI, Apr 2/91; CSM, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; USA Today, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; AP, Apr 3/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; P Inq, Apr 5/91)

April 23, 1991
NASA was considering repairs costing at least $50 million to the Hubble Space Telescope. In addition to the telescope proper, the question was whether to compensate for flaws in three other instruments: two spectrographs and the faint-object camera. Such repairs would involve Costar (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement) and cost $30 million to $40 million, while the telescope repair cost would be $14 million. To test the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water tank at Marshall Space Flight Center would determine whether the work could be accomplished in the estimated 16 hours required. Despite the need for such repairs, Edward Weller (Wiler?), NASA program scientist for the observatory, stressed the achievements the Hubble telescope had made in revealing the universe. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; B Sun, Apr 23/91; Birmingham News, Apr 23/91; AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91)

August 19, 1965
Environmental Science Services Administration (essa) asked that NASA temporarily assign Dr. Joachim P. Kuettner, deputy director of the Technical Staff (Saturn/Apollo Systems Office) of the Research and Development Operations, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, as Chief Space Scientist of the National Weather Satellite Center. Dr. Kuettner, expected to leave for Washington, D.C., about Sept. 1, would administer ESSA’s space program, specifically, manned and unmanned advanced systems, (mfsc Release 65-207)

July 30, 1976
A “tethered” satellite—suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle orbiter’s cargo bay—could serve to deploy and control materials used in constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80 and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles— sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites—could not remain in that region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)

August 23, 1985
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)

July 29, 1993
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, hosted six three-day sessions of Aerospace for Kids, designed to teach children about aerospace technology and Goodard this summer.  The program was to host 150 children over a six-week period this summer. (Prince George's Sentinel, Jul 29/93)

October 3, 1978
LaRC announced it had selected Mercury Co., Tustin, Calif., to negotiate a contract for a pressure systems certification/recertification and configuration management program, including engineering evaluation of ground-based pressure systems to ensure a safe environment and to facilitate operation of the center’s unique high-energy research facilities. The contractor would make in-service inspection and certification of these pressure systems in accordance with NASA guidelines and In a ceremony at KSC marking NASA's 20th anniversary Oct. 1, President Jimmy Carter awards the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts: Neil Armstrong (center), first man on the moon; Charles Conrad, Jr., commander of the second lunar landing and of the first crew to occupy the Sky lab space station, and Frank Borman, commander of the first manned spacecraft to orbit the moon (seated at left); also to Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; Virgil I. Grissom (posthumously), second American in space; and John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth. (NASA photo 78-H-610) OyRlGINAk PAGE IS, QE 0bR QUALITY would continue the existing configuration management program. LaRC would manage the approximately $1.15 million 2yr contract, which had a lyr option for extension valued at approximately $637 000. (LaRC Release 78-56) October 4\ Two U.S. payload specialists would join three Europeans at Porz-Wahn, W. Germany, Oct. 6 to begin training for Spacelab 1, first combined manned space mission of NASA and ESA, Marshall Space Flight Center reported. They would attend sessions in W. Germany and two other European countries conducted by the scientific investigators planning European-sponsored experiments to fly on Spacelab 1, the two NASA mission specialists assigned to the flight, with MSFC’s Charles Lewis and NASA training coordinator. Porz-Wahn was the site of ESA’s Spacelab payload integration and coordination in Europe (SPICE), which had coordinated European crew training. After the European trip, the group would begin a tour of U.S. scientific installations in Jan. 1979. (.Marshall Star, Oct 4/78, 1)

December 1, 1994
Possible evidence of a new planetary system only 52 light-years away arising from observation of a star named Beta Pictoris was published in Nature. Harold F. Levinson and colleagues at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio showed how a system of planets and comets could account for the phenomena seen near the star. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled some of these new discoveries. Planet hunter Charles M. Telesco at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama said of Levinson's work, "Whenever you can put a body of evidence into a coherent picture like that, everybody feels much better." (CSM, Dec 1/94; H Post, Dec 1/94)

February 13, 1963
Invitation to European scientists to participate in ground experiments using lasers to track the nasa Polar Ionosphere Beacon Satellites (S-66) was made at Third International Symposium on Quantum Electronics, Paris, by representatives of nasa Hq. and Goddard Space Flight Center. Under proposed program, nasa would provide orbital prediction data to European participants, who would attempt to track the satellite by bouncing a laser beam from ground off comer reflectors on satellite, nasa would be conducting similar experiments in the U.S. Lasers were expected to provide useful supplement to existing radio and radar tracking systems by providing extremely precise range and bearing data. (Al, Robinson)

February 8, 1993
Richard B. Hoover of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was named NASA inventor of the year for his invention of the Water-Window Imaging x-ray Microscope. This instrument should enable researchers to see in great detail high contrast x-ray images of proteins, chromosomes, and other tiny carbon structures inside living cells. (NASA Release 93-024)

July 28, 1993
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor-derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)

April 24, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced completion of largest solarcellarray system for electric power ever devised for spacecraft. Two arrays, with almost 236 sq m (2540 sq ft) of surface area, would use sunlight to power electrical systems of Orbital Workshop, Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), and other major components of Skylab cluster scheduled for launch in 1973. Each array could provide 10 500 w of power— more than twice average level needed for three-bedroom house—-‘at 328 K (130°F) during 58- to 69-min portion of each 94-min orbit. (msfc Release 72-54)

September 21, 1973
nasa launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment to a 290.8-km (180.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily. Preliminary estimates indicated the experiment was 90% successful, (gsfc proj off) September 22:	One of four U.S.S.R. spacecraft—Mars 4, 5, 6, or 7, launched toward Mars July 22 and 25 and Aug. 5 and 9—would soft-land near the Mars south polar cap to test the physical properties of Martian soil and surface rocks and check the possibilities of transmitting TV pictures of the surrounding terrain to earth, Roald Sagdeyev, Director of the Space Research Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in a Tass interview. Mars 4 and 5 were 19 515 000 km (12 126 000 mi) and 18 584 000 km (11548 000 mi) from the earth and would reach Mars in February 1974. Mars 6 and 7 were 16 664 000 km (10 354 000 mi) and 15 623 000 km (9 708 000 mi) from the earth and would reach Mars in March 1974. Radiation and magnetic measurements were being made and cosmic rays were being studied, Sagdeyev said. The stations also would investigate solar noise in the meter wave band as well as register the flux of solar plasma. United Press International reported later that Western space experts had speculated that a landing craft might carry a Marsokhod roving vehicle to explore the Martian surface. UPI also reported that it was believed that the U.S.S.R. departure from the usual practice of not announcing mission goals was to demonstrate Soviet willingness to cooperate with the U.S. in view of the plans for a 1975 joint U.S.— U.S.S.R. mission. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 9/24/73, Ul; AP, W Post, 9/24/73, A21)

March 8, 1976
Jan A. Bijvoet (pronounced byfoot) of the Netherlands arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center where he would on 1 April become the new representative of the European Space Agency (ESA) in the Spacelab program office. Most of his career had been with transatlantic cooperative programs; from 1961 to 1970, he had worked for NATO as a senior scientist in the evaluation methods section of SHAPE’S technical center. Before coming to MSFC he had spent 6 yr in ESA’s aeronautical satellite program, a joint activity of ESA and the Federal Aviation Administration. At MSFC Bijvoet would be responsible for technical and managerial liaison between NASA and ESA on the Spacelab program. He succeeded Robert Mory, who had been at MSFC since the beginning of the Spacelab program in 1973 and had been reassigned to the Paris office of ESA. (MSFC Release 76-70)

August 31, 1964
B. K. Heusinger of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center said in Astronautics & Aeronautics article about present arid future improvements in Saturn launch vehicle propulsion: “First and foremost, the Saturn-I testing program has already made possible an additional payload capability of approximately 4300 lb. without major redesign efforts. A substantial portion of this gain has come from altered operational and procedural techniques developed during the normal course of static and flight testing. The impact of major redesigns will not be felt, as a result of the lead times involved, until the first of the Satum-IB vehicles. . . .”	(A&A, 8/64,/ 20-25) During August: J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and Space Digest article on the future of aviation: “Aeronautics in the 1970s and 1980s promises to eclipse anything of the past in both scope and the performance of individual aircraft. Although missile and space systems will continue to furnish strong competition for national support, aviation activity in the decades ahead will be much more extensive and important than it is today. . . . “The revolutionary effect of the new technology on future aircraft can be best illustrated by discussing two key areas. One is propulsion. The other is materials. Light, more powerful engines, and lighter, stronger structures always have been key design objectives. This is still true. . . .” He quoted Dr. Alexander H, Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development: “‘It is possible today to begin the development of lightweight gas-turbine engines with a thrust-to-weight ratio of better than 10 to 1.’ Dr. Flax points out that installed thrust-to-weight ratios apparently can rise to higher than 20 to 1 on the second generation of future engines. “Ten years ago such a statement would have got him laughed out of most scientific and engineering meetings. A few people may still argue that the estimate is high. But the main argument now is over how best to achieve this truly stunning performance rather than over the possibility of achieving it.” He detailed some of the r&d areas with great potential for future aircraft, then said: “Technical evidence abounds to prove that an aeronautical revolution is at hand and that the first step in that revolution can have great economic importance. It clearly is time for more resolute action. Britain and France, and possibly the Soviet Union, have approximately the same opportunity as the US to capitalize on what is known now. In western Europe, at least, engine and materials technology is well advanced. . . .” (AF Mag., 8/64)

April 30, 1994
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)

April 27, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced shipment of the first production segment of a motor case for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor from the manufacturer (Ladish Co. of Cudahy, Wis.) to the Cal-Doran Metallurgical Services plant at Los Angeles, where it would undergo heat treatment and cleaning before being forwarded to Rohr Industries at Chula Vista, Calif. Rohr—subcontractor to prime contractor Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Utah—would process the cylindrical segment, with a finished weight of about 5060 kg, for delivery to Thiokol in Sept. 1976. Thiokol would load the solid propellants into 4 motor-case segments over 3 m in dia. and 45.5 m long, each holding about 500 000 kg of propellant. The 4 segments joined would stretch to more than 35 m and constitute about three fourths of the solid-fuel rocket booster. Each launch of the Shuttle would use 2 boosters, burning from ignition on the pad to burnout at an altitude of about 42 km; at that point, the SRBs would be separated and descend by parachute into the ocean for recovery, refueling, and reuse. (MSFC Release 76-76)

March 5, 1996
For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.

August 13, 1962
Dr. Eberhard Rees, Deputy Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was quoted as stating that Soviet dual-flights vostok iii and iv came “six months to a year” earlier than he had expected.

July 26, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced completion of design certification reviews on Saturn boosters to be used on Skylab missions, dcrs on Skylab payload—including Orbital Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and Apollo Telescope Mount—would be completed within three months, (msfc Release 72—96)

August 5, 1974
NASA and the Office of Naval Research launched the world’s largest unmanned balloon from Fort Churchill, Canada, carrying a 363-kg payload to 47 000-m altitude. The experiment, designed hy Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Robert C. Hartman, measured position and electron spectra between 20 and 800 mev at the 1.2-millibar level. The helium-filled balloon, constructed of half-mil polyethylene, weighed 1360 kg and had a volume of 1.4 cu m and a 0.25-km dia. Launched and tracked with facilities of the Navy’s Skyhook program, the balloon rose over Hudson Bay and moved westward 805 km. After 18 hrs, it descended to 30 km, where the payload was separated by radio command and parachuted to the ground. (Naval Research'Reviews, Nov 74, 13) .

December 6, 1985
NASA announced that, during mission 51 —L scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986, it would release from the Space Shuttle a free-flying payload called Spartan-Halley to observe Halley's Comet. Scientists believed that comet exploration was a search for the beginnings of earth, because comets were the most unaltered samples of the early solar system. Spartan-Halley was the only NASA satellite dedicated solely to observing Comet Halley. During these observations, January 24 through 31, the comet would be in its most active period as it headed towards its closest approach to the sun on February 9. The objective of the Spartan-Halley mission was to measure from earth orbit the ultraviolet spectrum of Comet Halley using twin spectrographs designed and built by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. Spartan-Halley's cameras and instruments would analyze the active comet, looking for hydrogen and oxygen atoms and carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur molecules. If the spacecraft detected these elements, it might indicate more complex compounds could be present in the ice and dust that made up the comet's nucleus. Goddard Space Flight Center developed Spartan-Halley, a modified Spartan-2 spacecraft, to be a research carrier. The spacecraft consisted of the spectrographic instrumentation, attitude control cameras (which also provided science photography), a microprocessor, associated electronics, a sunlight baffling system, and a service module. The January mission would be the first for the Spartan-2 type carrier, a completely reusable spacecraft to be reflown later on several other missions. Following completion of the January mission, the Space Shuttle's robot arm would retrieve Spartan-Halley and store it in the cargo bay. (NASA Release 85-161)

January 24, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that a December 1985 experiment, EASE or the experimental assembly of structures in EVA (extravehicular activity), aboard Space Shuttle flight 61-C would provide information about humans working in space. In the experiment, two crew members would move six aluminum beams, each 12 feet long and four inches in diameter, into space from the Space Shuttle payload bay and assemble them into a tetrahedron shape and then disassemble them. This experiment would demonstrate human ability to build strong, practical structures in space. During the experiment videotape and still photographs would record crew member movements to link beams by special connectors at the beam tips. This building approach was a technique in the Large Space Structures program called an "erectible" method, as opposed to a "deployable" method that would not be demonstrated until 1986 or 1987 when NASA would orbit a structural-assembly demonstration experiment. MSFC had conducted tests similar to EASE in its neutral buoyancy simulator, a million-gallon water tank that gave a sense of weightlessness to submerged people working in space suits. Researchers would compare assembly and disassembly times recorded in the space test with results found in the neutral buoyancy tank. However, MSFC's Ed Valentine, experiment manager, noted, "We'd like to be able to measure a human's productivity in space scientifically, and we're not really sure if time measurements are all that are needed to guage that, so we'll be examining other possible criteria to use in the future." A Langley Research Center structural assembly experiment would accompany the MSFC experiment. (MSFC Release 85-3) During April: NASA announced it awarded to Howard University's School of Engineering Large Space Structure Institute (LSSI), Washington, D.C., an ongoing grant expected to total $1.9 million to develop theoretical knowledge supporting the design and construction of very large space systems. NASA expected the knowledge to make a significant contribution to the establishment of large space stations and space settlements. The LSSI research project would help demonstrate the practical benefits of U.S. space capabilities, including construction of a solar power satellite that would convert the sun's energy into electricity for transmission back to earth and construction of large platforms that would allow scientists to observe the earth for improved understanding of the weather and the ground water table. The LSSI team would consist of Dr. Taft Broome, chief project investigator and chairman of the Department of Civil Engineering, and other Howard University faculty members; and one faculty member each from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge University, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Graduate students from the latter institutions would also participate. NASA was primarily interested in LSSI doing the concept development and the research and demonstration analysis. Once Broome and his team provided the agency with the needed data, NASA could turn the project over to private industry for implementation. (NASA Activities, Apr 85, 8) Launch Vehicles

April 24, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Ball Brothers Research Corp. for negotiation of contract to develop heavy nuclei experiment for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao—a), scheduled for launch in 1975. Experiment would measure charge-to-mass ratio, abundance, and energy of cosmic ray particles, (msfc Release 72-53)

June 7, 1994
NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)

December 12, 1996
Researchers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that tests aimed at improving the efficiency of Space Shuttle engines would likely translate into substantial savings for commercial airlines as well. Researchers had learned that locating an engine’s turbine airfoils in the “optimum position” could cut down the flow of fluttering wakes of gases. When wakes occur, an engine requires additional energy to run and generates higher temperatures. NASA researchers predicted that the findings would have special application for the Boeing 777. Improving efficiency by a half percent would save hundreds of gallons of fuel per flight. The researchers had based the new positioning of the turbines upon the simple principle evident when a bike racer drafts behind a competitor⎯because the first rider takes the full brunt of the wind, the second can travel equally as fast with less exertion. The engineers found that by aligning turbines in the most efficient positions, the engine derived a similar drafting.(NASA, “Applying NASA Shuttle Engine Test Findings May Save Airlines Millions in Fuel Costs,” news release 96-254, 12 December 1996.)

May 14, 1973
NASA launched two Areas sounding rockets from Antigua, West Indies, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. Both launches were in conjunction with a Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970) overpass. The first Areas reached a 52.7-km (32.7-mi) altitude. Ejection of the payload-parachute unit was accomplished, but the nosecone remained attached to the instrumentation section shielding the sensors from the atmosphere. No data were acquired. The second Areas, launched 80 min later, reached a 51.2-km (31.8-mi) altitude but the payload-parachute unit did not eject and no data were received, (nasa Rpts srl) August 17:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite on a ThorBurner II booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with an 853-km (530.0-mi) apogee, 808-km (502.1-mi) perigee, 101.5-min period, and 98.8° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 8/30/73; Pres Rpt 74)

August 23, 1962
Nike-Apache launch vehicle carried 63-lb. payload to approximately 80-mi.-altitude from nasa Wallops Station, in experiment to measure ion concentration and composition in the upper atmosphere. Impact occurred approximately 67 mi. from the launch site, and no attempt was made to recover the payload. Experiment was conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center in cooperation with Lockheed Missile and Space Co.

May 14, 1973
Components of a navigation system similar to that of the lunar roving vehicles launched aboard Apollo 15, 16, and 17 (July 26, 1971, and April 16 and Dec. 7, 1972) to explore the lunar surface had been turned over by Marshall Space Flight Center to the Univ. of Kentucky for possible incorporation into a remotely controlled mine-surveillance vehicle, the Marshall Star announced. (Marshall Star, 8/8/73, 2)

August 15, 1972
President Nixon informed Congress of plans for six-month International Exposition on the Environment to be held in Spokane, Wash., in 1974. {PD, 8/21/72, 1237) August 15—16:	Symposium on composite structural materials for space shuttle application, at Marshall Space Flight Center, reviewed progress and facilitated exchange of space shuttle composites information originated by NASA Centers and contractors, (msfc Release 72—107)

December 5, 1985
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)

May 8, 1963
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., carried 63-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in test to measure ion concentration and composition in upper atmosphere. Flight was joint project of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63—47)

February 13, 1964
NASA employees Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., and Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., were among the 10 outstanding young men in Government service awarded the 1963 Arthur S. Flemming Awards. Kraft was Assistant Director for Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Townsend, Assistant Director of Space Science and Satellite Applications, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Notice)

August 7, 1972
rca announced it had received NASA contracts totaling nearly $1.5 million for four Skylab color tape-recording systems. Recorders— similar to those on Erts 1 (launched July 23)—would help provide home viewers with color TV coverage of astronauts conducting experiments. Contracts had been awarded to rca Government Communications Systems by Marshall Space Flight Center, (rca Release) August 10:	International Institute for Strategic Studies in London released Reconnaissance, Surveillance and Arms Control. Study found that verification by observation satellites and electronic reconnaissance systems of adherence to terms of Strategic Arms Limitation agreements had greatly reduced possibility of one nation’s cheating on another. “Therefore the risk of the Soviet Union achieving a strategic advantage as a result of a . . . treaty is a very low one.” (upi, NY News, 8/11/72, 6)

April 15, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center had begun a 20-mo investigation of the vibration characteristics of railroad freight cars as part of an extensive study of train dynamics, with the Federal Railroad Administration and the American Association of Railroads, NASA announced. Martin Marietta Corp.—under a $329 000 contract from msfc—would make a mathematical model of truck-car dynamics for comparison with data from laboratory and operational tests of a freight car and components. (nasa Release 74-86)

August 30, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers were conducting research on laser-doppler clear-air turbulence-detection system. System, ground-tested and installed in NASA’s Convair 990 at Ames Research Center for flight tests, could detect small-scale atmospheric motions. Laser system, which might lead to first commercially available instrument for air turbulence measurements, was designed and built by Raytheon Co. for NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and U.S. Air Force’s Cambridge Research Laboratories. (NASA Release 72-182)

March 2, 1966
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)

July 9, 1991
ST Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, announced its selection by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center to provide support for the High Energy X-Ray Telescope Sounding Rocket Program. (PR Newswire, Jul 9/91)

January 14, 1985
NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-C would carry the first of two experiments to investigate effects of different diseases on red blood cell aggregation and blood viscosity. The experiment was originally scheduled for mission 51-A in November 1984 but withdrawn due to orbiter weight and center-of-gravity considerations. The Department of Defense (DOD) had agreed to add the experiment to 51-C, a dedicated DOD mission. Called aggregation of red blood cells (ARC), the experiment would determine rate of formation (kinetics) and internal structure and organization (morphology) of red cells and the thickness (viscosity) of whole blood at high- and low-flow rates. Healthy donors and donors with various medical conditions such as heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, and cancer would provide blood samples. Researchers would compare results obtained in microgravity with results from a simultaneous and identical ground-based experiment to determine what effects gravity had on the kinetics and morphology of the blood and, therefore, whether researchers could use information obtained in microgravity to formulate new diagnostic tests or improve existing tests for the benefit of clinical research and medical practice. Flight hardware, weighing about 165 lb. and installed in three mid-deck lockers in the crew cabin, would consist of a container housing a blood pump/storage subsystem, parallel plate slit capillary viscometer, photo/opti-cal subsystem, thermal control system, pressure transducer, and an electronics equipment package to provide automated control and data acquisition. A crew member would activate the experiment; the electronics package would automatically operate all other procedures. Running time would be about eight hours. Dr. Leopold Dintenfass of the Kanematsu Institute (Department of Medical Research), Sydney, Australia, had developed the experiment and experiment hardware. Marshall Space Flight Center had responsibility for the flight experiment. After landing, data from the flight experiments would be delivered to Dintenfass for analysis and comparison with ground-based experiment data. (NASA Release 85-6; NASA MOR E-420-51-C-21 [prelaunch] Jan 23/85)

July 20, 1991
AP quoted Guy Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, as stating that his research indicated the eruption of Mount Pinatubo could lead to reduced levels of protective ozone over North America and Europe in the winter of 1991-92 and the summer of 1992, possibly increasing the risk of skin cancer. Richard Stolarski, ozone researcher at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said the projections were plausible but based on ozone depletion from El Chichon, a Mexican volcano that erupted in 1982, the thought there would be less ozone depletion than predicted. (LA Times, Jul 20/91; P Inq, Jul 20/91)

October 15, 1964
Eighty-three scientists, engineers, and operating groups received medals, citations, and cash awards totaling 87,900 for outstanding contributions to U.S. civilian space program, in NASA’s 6th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony. Recipients of awards for exceptional scientific achievement: William R. Lucas, msfc; Ernst Stuhlinger, msfc; Frank B. McDonald, gsfc ; and Daniel G. Mazur, gsfc. Recipients of award for outstanding leadership: Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, ksc; Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director, gsfc; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, msfc. Group achievement awards were accepted by Dr. Debus for ksc and by Dr. von Braun for msfc. Recipients of awards for exceptional service: I. Edward Garrick, Oran W. Nicks, and Leonard Jaffe of NASA Hq.; Hans F.	Gruene of ksc; and Wesley L. Hjornevik of msc. Public service awards went to Bernie P. Miller, of rca, and Harris M. Schurmeier and Allen E. Wolfe, of JPL, for their work on ranger vii lunar-photography mission. Special award was presented to Newton W. Cunningham, Hq., for his work on ranger vn. Cash awards for inventions and contributions were presented to personnel from Ames Research Center, Lewis Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Personnel from Hq., frc, LaRc, lrc, msc, and msfc received Presidential citations for contributions to economy and efficiency in Government. (Program; NASA Release 64-263)

June 22, 1973
NASA launched three sounding rockets in a series from Wallops Station carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payloads to determine the ion composition and electron density of the ionospheric D-region. A Nike-Cajun was launched to an 86.2-km (53.6-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. An Astrobee D was launched 18 min later to a 92.5-km (57.5-mi) altitude. The rocket performance was less than planned. The instrumentation was satisfactory except for the Gerdien trap, which ceased providing data at 22 sec. A Nike-Apache was launched three minutes after the Astrobee D to a 77.4-km (48.1-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily but no useful scientific data were received from the ion mass spectrometer and the scientific objectives of this flight were not achieved, (nasa Rpts SRL)

September 2, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Space Div. of Rockwell Inti. Corp. at Palmdale, Calif., had received delivery of three dummy main engines for the Space Shuttle—known officially as flight mass simulators—for mounting on Shuttle Orbiter 101, which would be used for approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center and for ground vibration tests at MSFC. The simulator engines, resembling the real main engines in size and weight, could be adjusted in weight and center-of-gravity and gimballed to provide various positions for testing. Orbiter 101, after vibration testing, would be returned to Palmdale for replacement of the simulators with flight engines and placed in flight status. (MSFC Release 76-162)

June 14, 1963
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced series of sounding rocket tests had confirmed association of Sporadic-E disturbances with presence of wind shears in altitude regions measured Nov. 7, Nov. 30, and Dec. 5,1962. Linder nasa contract, Geophysics Corp. of America scientists measured velocity of wind movements (using Nik6-A_p&clie rockets witli sodium vapor trails) and iguo-spheric phenomena (using Nike-Cajun with Langmuir probe electrical equipment) at nearly the same time. Experiments confirmed theory of Australian scientist J. D. Whitehead that action of upper atmosphere wind pulls electrons from above and below into thin cloud-like layers, causing Sporadic-E layers that often interfere with radio signals’ being reflected off higher F layer of ionosphere, (gsfc Release)

January 17, 1977
NASA announced plans to launch NATO III-B, second in a new series of comsats to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Jan. 27 as NASA’s first launch of 1977. The three spacecraft in the Phase III series, funded entirely by NATO, were built by Ford Aerospace; the third would be launched in 1978. The Delta rocket provided by Goddard Space Flight Center that would put NATO III-B in orbit had successfully launched three previous NATO satellites: Nato II-A and -B, in March 1970 and Feb. 1971, and Nato III-A in April 1976. (NASA Release 77-5)

March 6, 1978
NASA announced plans to launch from Cape Canaveral no earlier than Mar. 23 an experimental Japanese direct-broadcast communications satellite capable of sending television programs directly into an individual’s home. The satellite, technically named Medium-Scale Broadcasting Satellite for Experiment Purposes (BSE), had been a project of Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA). As agreed by the U.S. and Japan, NASA would launch BSE on a Delta rocket; NASDA would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs. NASA’s worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) would track BSE until it achieved final orbit, when NASDA would take over tracking. Present Japanese TV, though covering 97% of the main islands, had not been economical for remote islands and mountain regions; also, tall buildings had degraded TV reception in large cities. NASDA had designed BSE to transmit high-quality color television to the Japanese islands and Okinawa at lower cost; user antennas could be as small as 1 to 1.6 meters (3.3 to 5.2ft), with production costs estimated at $200 per unit. The high power of BSE could transmit directly to individual TV sets even in bad weather, making TV available to Japanese living on the offshore islands and in inaccessible mountain areas. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage the Delta vehicle for NASA’s Office of Space Transportation Systems, and KSC would manage launch operations. General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., had built the BSE under contract to Tokyo Shibaura Electric Co. The Japanese Broadcasting Corp., the Japanese Ministry of Post and Telecommunications, and the Radio Research Laboratories of Japan would sponsor or participate in the program. (NASA Release 78-33; MOR M-492-212-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb. 28/78; Spaceport News, Mar 17/78, 1)

June 29, 1972
Federal District in Washington, D.C., issued temporary order restraining NASA from reducing staff at Marshall Space Flight Center on petition of American Federation of Government Employees, msfc reduction in force had been scheduled for June 29. Judge Joseph C. Waddy scheduled hearing for July 10 to determine if restraining order would become permanent injunction, (msfc Release 72-80)

September 12, 1996
Scientists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States’ Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.

August 9, 1965
In an address to employees at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. Wernher von Braun expressed his appreciation for their efforts in the highly successful Saturn I program: “What you have done reflects the ability of our nation to move forward quickly. The Saturn I proved that we were correct in our heavy duty launch vehicle theories. One of the most important products of our Saturn I program is that we have built up confidence—both self confidence and the trust of the American people who are depending upon us for American progress in space exploration.” (Text)

February 28, 1963
Attempt to launch series of three Hopi-Dart wind research vehicles from nasa Wallops Station was canceled when first vehicle failed to perform properly. Tests, to gather wind-flow data at altitudes approaching 60 mi. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, would be rescheduled after analysis of cause of rocket’s malfunction. (Wallops Release 63-21)

October 27, 1986
NASA engineers settled on a design for the Shuttle's new booster rockets, and beginning in early 1987, four fullscale tests were planned. John Thomas, manager of the booster design project at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, predicted that the tests would run smoothly and that Shuttle flight would resume in February 1988. (C Trib, Oct 28/86)

April 30, 1975
Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $20 000 research grant to the University of Florida to establish the feasibility of the electromagnetic wave energy-conversion (EWEC) concept. The EWEC converter used electromagnetic antennas to absorb the sun’s electromagnetic radiation into an array of insulated components and then convert it directly to electricity. The absorber operated similarly to insect antennae and the retina of the eye: Insects communicated by the reception of infrared and other electromagnetic radiation or energy, using their antennae tuned to the proper frequency by nature’s design. Once received, the energy was converted into electrical impulses. (NASA Release 75 — 102) During April—May. NASA conducted Atmospheric Variability Experiment IV and Atmospheric Variability Severe Storms Experiments I and II in cooperation with the U.S. Air Force, Army, National Weather Service, and several universities. Coordinating data collected over the eastern two-thirds of the U.S. by satellites, aircraft, radar, and weather balloons, participants hoped to develop new techniques for predicting where and when tornadoes might strike. The data collected, including information on thunderstorms, updrafts, and wind and cloud data, would be compared with ground-truth observations to determine the relationship between severe storms and their environment. Participating in the experiments were 41 radiosonde stations, 18 radar stations, 7 instrumented aircraft, and 5 meteorological satellites. (MSFC Release 75 — 102) May 1975

July 23, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two contracts for studies of Skylab results. American Science and Engineering, Inc., received $2 044 860 and the Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory received $264 684 to study j ointly results from the Apollo Telescope Mount x-ray spectrographic telescope experiment. The telescope had been used during the three Skylab missions (25 May-22 June 1973, 28 July-25 Sept. 1973, and 16 Nov. 1973-8 Feb. 1974) to photograph x-ray producing solar events, (msfc 74-132)

May 18, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center and Dryden Flight Research Center officials signed an agreement to conduct jointly a comprehensive program of tests on the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster. The program, to begin early in 1977, would consist of drogue-parachute tests and main-parachute tests, using single parachutes, and test deployment of the 3-parachute cluster (actual flight configuration) to be used in recovery of the solid rockets, largest ever flown. The parachutes, some 36.5 m in diameter, would be the largest used in the space program; Apollo spacecraft parachutes were about 24.5 m in diameter. The Dryden center would provide the B-52 aircraft for the test drops, as well as the flight and maintenance crews, and would perform the tests over the National Parachute Test Range about an hour’s flight from Edwards AFB in Calif. MSFC engineers would evaluate the test data to determine the adequacy of the system. (NASA Release 76-94; DFRC Release 6-76; MSFC Release 76-87)

January 13, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center plans for the FY 1975 reductioninforce had been revised, MSFC announced. The target date for issuance of RIF notices to MSFC employees had been delayed from mid-January to 29 Jan. with an effective date of 14 Mar. The 2-wk delay resulted from the need for an additional decrease in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling, from 4145 to 4113. This further reduction was MSFC’s share of the government-wide reduction of 40 000 employees called for by President Ford in 1974. (MSFC Release 75—6)

June 5, 1973
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 56.3-km (34.97mi) altitude. The primary objective was to measure the ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and to extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The launch would collect data for comparison with data from a flyby of an Air Force RB—57 aircraft and the overpass of the Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970). The payload was ejected near apogee and descended on a parachute. The rocket and the instrumentation performed satisfactorily and the experiment was successful. (nasa Rpt srl)

June 9, 1973
June 10-20:	NASA launched Explorer 49 (rae-b; RAE 2) Radio Astronomy Explorer by a long-tank, thrust-augmented, Thor-Delta launch vehicle from Eastern Test Range at 10:14 am edt into a transfer trajectory for the moon. The second of two approved RAE missions and the last scheduled U.S. mission to the moon, Explorer 49 was to measure galactic and solar radio noise at frequencies below ionospheric cutoffs and outside terrestrial background interference, using the moon for occul-tation, focusing, or aperture-blocking for increased resolution and discrimination. At 17 min after launch, the spacecraft separated from the launch vehicle’s 3rd stage. One midcourse correction was made at 11:28 am edt June 11; the planned second correction was not required. During the transfer trajectory, data acquisition from telemetry systems was excellent. The lunar orbit insertion motor was fired at 3:21 am edt June 15, putting the spacecraft into lunar orbit with 1334-km (828.9-mi) apolune, 1123-km (697.8-mi) perilune, 241-min period, and 61.3° inclination. On June 18 the lunar insertion motor was jettisoned and the hydrazine-fueled velocity-control propulsion system placed Explorer 49 in a lower, near-circular orbit with a 1063-km (660.5-mi) apolune, 1052-km (653.7mi) perilune, 221.2-min period, and 38.7° inclination. On June 20 a 37-m (l20-ft) dipole antenna was extended by ground control and the, dipole experiment turned on. After a two-week calibration, the dipole would be retracted and the orbit adjusted as needed. The two main V antennas, joined in an X shape, would then be deployed to 183 m (600 ft). After another week, the V antennas would be deployed to their full 229-m (750-ft) length to achieve the mission’s gravity-gradient, three-axis-stabilization mode. The 200-kg (442-lb) spacecraft was the first known to use boron filament for the inertial booms that helped stabilize it during the lunar trajectory. Explorer 38 (RAE 1)—the first successful radio astronomy satellite, launched July 4, 1968—had measured galactic radio sources and traced the movement of sporadic radio outbursts from the sun beyond the orbit of Mercury for four years. Explorer 38’s receivers, however, had been saturated 25%-40% of the observing time by interference from the earth’s radio noise. Explorer 49, in lunar orbit, would be shielded from terrestrial noise as it orbited the moon’s far side. The rae project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. GSFC designed, constructed, and tested the spacecraft and provided the scientific instrumentation. GSFC was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle and the operation of the worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn). Launch services were provided by ksc. (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-105; gsfc SSR, 6/30/73)

April 18, 1963
Data from explorer xvii indicated the earth is surrounded by belt of neutral helium atoms, scientists of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said at American Geophysical Union meeting. Based on preliminary data received one day after launch, Goddard scientists said explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite had sent back more than eight hours of scientific information on physics and chemistry of tenuous gases making up the earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 63-79)

May 21, 1992
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)

March 25, 1975
The computer aboard Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) was the most advanced of its type ever flown on an unmanned NASA satellite, NASA announced. Able to handle up to 55 ground-station commands controlling spacecraft operations for up to 24 hrs, the compact digital computer was a forerunner of the NASA Standard Space Computer that will be used in a wide variety of unmanned missions. Managed by Goddard Space Flight Center, the standard space computer program was part of an agency-wide program to develop standardized satellite components, both to reduce costs and to increase reliability. The program also covers other spacecraft hardware such as nickel-cadmium batteries, transponders, attitude-control thrusters, pyrotechnic initiators, silicon solar cells, and tape recorders. (NASA Release 75 —85)

January 24, 1994
Swales and Associates, Inc., Beltsville, Maryland, received an eight-year small-business set-aside cost-plus-award-fee contract of $275 million to support the Mechanical Systems Division of the Goddard Engineering Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). (NASA Release C94d)

May 20, 1966
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center held an "open house,” including movies, live demonstrations, and exhibits, (gsfc Release G-7-66)

July 11, 1973
The U.S. defense outlay continued to increase despite improving relations with the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China, the U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement to limit strategic arms, the Vietnam cease-fire agreements, and sharp cutbacks in U.S. military forces, the Wall Street Journal noted. FY 1974 spending was projected at $79 billion, up $4.2 billion from FY 1973, “a shade above the Vietnam-war peak and a shade below the World War II pinnacle. While the White House talks detente, the Pentagon speaks of growing Soviet military power and the likelihood, given further price and pay inflation, of $100 billion-plus military budgets by the end of the decade.” (Levine, WSJ, l/Yl/73, 1) July 17—18:	NASA launched a series of 26 meteorological experiments on rockets and balloons from Wallops Station to provide an in-depth com> parison between remote sensors on satellites and sensors on rockets and balloons from a mid-latitude site. The project—divided into a day and night series to provide data both with and without solar energy input—• was conducted in conjunction with Nimbus 5 (launched Dec. 10, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) satellites. Four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched carrying Goddard Space Flight Center acoustic grenades to measure temperature and winds. The grenades were ejected and detonated in flight, one at a time, from 30- to 95-km (19- to 59-mi) altitude. The first Nike-Cajun was launched July 17 and reached an altitude of 117.4 km (72.9 mi). The rocket performed satisfactorily. Thirty of the thirty-one grenades were successfully detonated and the sound returns were received by the ground microphone array. The second Nike-Cajun launched 79 minutes later reached an altitude of 116.2 km (72.2 mi) and detonated all of its 12 grenades successfully. The third Nike-Cajun was launched July 18 to a 114.9-km (71.4-mi) altitude. Rocket performance was satisfactory and all 31 grenades were successfully detonated. The final Nike-Cajun was launched two hours later to an altitude of 120.7 km (75 mi). The rocket performance was satisfactory and all 12 grenades were detonated successfully. In addition to the Nike-Cajuns, the launches included 4 balloonsondes, 3 Viper Darts, and 15 Super Lokis instrumented to obtain density and temperature data. Participating in the program with Wallops Station were White Sands Missile Range, the Air Force, and GSFC. (WS Release 73-7; nasa Rpts srl)

June 1, 1964
In an interview with U.S. News & World, Report, Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, defended the U.S. program to land a man on the moon by 1970 and stated that it was his belief that at the present time the chances were “better than 50%” that the project would be successful by the target date. In commenting on reports that the Russians had forsaken a race to the moon, von Braun ventured that it was possible that the Russians had “picked another focusing point besides the moon for their manned spaceflight program” such as the development of a large manned space station orbiting earth. In addition, he commented: “I don’t think the Russians have ever said they aren’t going to the moon. But, even if we are going alone, this would not hurt one bit. The purpose is not so much to race the Russians—or, for that matter, even to land on the moon—but to design a hard-hitting program to develop an American space-flying capability.” (U.S. News, 6/1/64)

February 4, 1977
NASA announced a yr-long schedule of test runs and captive-flight tests on the first-built Space Shuttle orbiter, Enterprise, that would take place at the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of flights with a modified Boeing 747 serving as a ferry aircraft and airborne launch platform would begin with several taxiing tests with the orbiter atop the carrier; following would be six inert-captive flights in which the jumbo jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to a 7620m (25 000ft) altitude. Unmanned flights would verify performance of the two vehicles in mated flight. Then would come a series of captive-active flights with the orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts. The first orbiter off the assembly line arrived at DFRC Jan. 31 from Rockwell Intl.’s Palmdale plant; upon completion of ALT, the carrier would take the prototype to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground-vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return to Palmdale to be prepared for orbital flight in the early 1980s. The orbiter now under construction (OV-102) would be the first used in actual orbital-flight tests, now scheduled to begin in mid-1979; six test flights would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start of operational flights, scheduled to begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16)

September 6, 1985
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced award of $5 million 26-month contracts to Boeing Aerospace Co., General Dynamics, Martin Marietta, and Rockwell Internatl. to perform studies on space transportation architecture—the total transportation system of flight elements, ground and orbital support systems, and their operational interactions. NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) awarded and would manage the General Dynamics and Martin Marietta contracts; the Air Force Space Division in Los Angeles, the Boeing and Rockwell contracts. The two agencies and four companies would maintain close coordination throughout the award period. Broad objectives of the studies were to determine the nation's overall space transportation system architectures, including transportation and support systems needed to simultaneously meet mission and operational requirements, while substantially reducing total life-cycle cost; to identify the technologies required for the architectures; and to refine the resulting transportation and support system concept(s) for the mid-1990s if firm requirements were identified. After the agencies first analyzed and provided projected mission/payload/ operational requirements for the mid-1990s to 2010, the companies would analyze mission requirements, develop and analyze architecture approaches, define future transportation system concepts, and identify technologies applicable to transportation system options. Transportation system architectures and concepts would include launch and upper-stage flight systems, mission control concepts, ground support systems, logistics support systems, and on-orbit operations for both manned and unmanned systems. The resulting transportation architecture and vehicle concepts should outline and define the most promising concepts for improved cost-effectiveness and mission need accommodation for the specified period. (NASA Release 85-126)

July 12, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)

June 19, 1972
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 16 astronauts presented 50 awards at Marshall Space Flight Center to Government and industry personnel who assisted successful Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27). (msfc Release 72—75)

June 22, 1973
Kenyan Director of National Parks Perez Olindo asked the East African Directorate of Civil Aviation to ban supersonic transport aircraft from flying over East Africa because of “untold hazards” to human health and to wildlife. (Agence France Presse, W Post, 6/30/73, A5) During June:	NASA retirements during the month totaled 778 agency-wide, under the law signed by President Nixon June 12 to permit early retirements and a 6.1% cost-of-living bonus for employees retiring by June 30. Of 76 in NASA Hq.—including reduction-in-force and voluntary retirements—59 were in grades GS—13 and above. Retirees at Marshall Space Flight Center peaked at 172, an all-time monthly high. An additional 18 employees applied for disability retirement. Previous monthly high for msfc retirements was 106 in June 1972. June 1973 msfc retirements, added to 24 retired Jan. 1-May 30, brought the 1973 total to 170. Retirements at other Centers during June numbered 142 for Lewis Research Center, 120 for Langley Research Center, 76 for Goddard Research Center, 56 for Kennedy Space Center, 53 for Johnson Space Center, 50 for Ames Research Center, 15 each at Flight Research Center and Wallops Station, and 3 at Space Nuclear Systems Office. Hq. retirees included Jacob E. Smart, Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs; Dr. Fred Schulman, Special Assistant to the Manager and Asst. Manager, Space Nuclear Systems Office; Leonard Carulli, Management Analyst, Office of Management and Development; Jocelyn R. Gill, Space Scientist for Physics and Astronomy Programs; Ernest W. Brackett, Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs; Ralph E. Ulmer, Program Analyst, Advanced Concepts and Mission Div.; Raymond Einhorn, Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Organization and Management; Dr. Harvey Hall, Principal Scientist, Advanced Missions; and Charles M. Hochberg, Director, Budget Operations, Budget Operations Div. (nasa Personnel Off; nasa Admin. Off; nasa Ann, 6/13/73; msfc Release 73-89; Causey, W Post, 6/15/73, D17)

January 31, 1965
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would negotiate with Radiation, Inc., of Melbourne, Florida, for a contract to develop a new weather measuring system to be tested aboard the Nimbus B meteorological satellite. The new equipment, Interrogation Recording and Location System (IRLS), would tie together weather observations made on the ground and in space as well as oceanographic measurements. (gsfc Release G-l-65)

October 9, 1964
Four consecutive full-duration F-l engine test firings at new Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif., demonstrated the operational readiness of the site, which was officially accepted by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun from the Army Corps of Engineers. In the ceremonies, Dr. von Braun assigned site operation responsibilities to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., which would use the site for qualification firings of F—1 rocket engines. {Marshall Star, 10/14/64,10; nasa Release 64-259)

December 14, 1965
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $500,000 contract to itt to develop a lower-altitude space weather camera for NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite (Ats). (ap, NYT, 12/15/65, 2)

December 6, 1964
NASA and General Electric Co. announced they had accomplished precision tracking of explorer xxii with a laser device. Tests were conducted at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center using a ruby laser mounted on a telescope. With the telescope aimed along the predicted path, the laser was flashed several times as explorer xxii, containing an array of corner reflectors, passed overhead. The reflectors, made of quartz crystal, were designed to return the beam of the laser almost exactly where it came from. The optical signals were displayed on an oscilloscope. As the laser pulse traveled from the telescope to the satellite, then back to the ground, the elapsed time measured could be converted into distance. Expected accuracy was within 10 ft. {Chic. Trib., 12/7/64)

September 2, 1964
At press conference, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials said nimbus I meteorological satellite was performing successfully and sending back cloud cover photographs of unexpectedly good quality. First nighttime pictures of cloud cover, made with the satellite’s infrared sensor, were comparable in quality and resolution to the TV pictures made by Tiros meteorological satellites. Unplanned orbit—eccentric rather than circular—reduced the satellite’s earth coverage from 100% every 24 hours to about 70%. (gsfc Press Conf. Transcript; Finney, NYT, 9/3/64,13)

January 8, 1991
The Birmingham Post-Herald expressed the concern of some NASA staff over the number of flight waivers NASA had issued. NASA issues such waivers on certain critical items rather than change the Shuttle design, which would be very costly. Statistics indicate that the number of waivers approved since the Challenger accident more than tripled. According to Frank Pizzano, head of the reliability and maintainability engineering division at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the increase results from stricter standards for waivers but many weaknesses were eliminated in the Shuttle redesign after the Challenger accident. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 8/91)

March 29, 1991
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)

January 6, 2002
167Inside Wallops, “Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement,” news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, “Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy,” news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad O’Connor, “Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader,” New York Times, 14 January 2002.)

January 3, 1990
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)

February 24, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $8,774,000 research and development contract modification to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for continued uprating of the H—1 rocket engine from 188,000 to 200,000 lbs. Uprated engines would be used in clusters of eight to provide a total thrust of 1.6 million lbs. in first stage of Saturn ib launch vehicle. Modification brought H-l contract total to $20,648,500.	(Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 6)

February 1, 1985
NASA announced that effective January 24, Dr. Dale Compton became deputy director of Ames Research Center (ARC), where he had been director for engineering and computer systems since February 1983. Compton joined NASA in June 1957, serving as deputy director of astronautics, then chief of the space science division and manager of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). Recipient of the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal, Compton earned a B.S. degree in 1957 and an M.S. degree in 1958, both in aeronautical engineering, and a Ph.D. degree in aeronautical and astronautical engineering in 1969. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/ 85) During February. Ames Research Center (ARC) announced it had formed the information sciences office to do basic and applied research in artificial intelligence (Al), automation sciences, and space-related computer science technology, with emphasis on applications to the NASA space station. NASA had designated ARC as the lead center in Al research, and the new office's research would cover Al programming languages, expert-systems development, knowledge representation and information understanding, machine vision and learning, sensor fusion, and optical processing. Space-related computer-science research would focus on symbolic-processing and data-flow architectures; network design, protocols, and simulation; and optical read/write information-storage technology. ARC would combine in-house studies, primarily on applied research and development of flight experiments to validate and demonstrate the technologies being developed, with the work of outside research organizations, such as SRI International, Symbolics Inc., Innovative Optics, Inc., Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, MIT, University of Texas, and University of Michigan, on basic research issues to accomplish project objectives. ARC would orient research toward the user community, particularly other NASA centers, focusing on both technology development for user applications and help to users during implementation. Space station automation would be the primary application, and ARC had signed agreements with Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center to work together on this implementation. ARC would also advise on space station automation through participation on NASA advisory groups such as the space station automation study team, space station automation and robotics panel, advanced-technology automation committee, and NASA headquarters space station data systems steering committee. (ARC Release 85-6)

June 18, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for parallel studies on space-processing equipment for Space Shuttle and Spacelab missions. TRW Systems Group was awarded $299 981 and General Electric Co. was awarded $284 974 to provide preliminary designs for equipment that could be used to process various materials, such as metals and crystals, in space. (MSFC Release 75 — 125)

June 14, 1985
Goddard Space Flight Center announced that a team from its Wallops Flight Facility completed studies of the atmospheric ozone profile at Natal, Brazil. The team acquired data from 9 to 40 miles above the earth at an equatorial site using the improved "A" version ROCket OZonesonde (RO-COZ-A). The team took seven profiles during ozone-measuring satellite overpasses to compare the ROCOZ-A data with other satellite data for the same time and place. Although the primary mission was to support the SAGE II ozone measurements acquired by the ERBS/SAGE II satellite, the team would also compare the data with that from the solar backscatter ultraviolet spectrometer on the Solar Mesopheric Explorer (SME) satellite. Each ROCOZ-A launch included the supporting launch of a super-loki datasonde dart (a small meteorological rocket) to collect temperature data from 9 to 43 miles in the atmosphere and an electrochemical concentration cell (ECC) balloon-launched ozonesonde to collect lower-atmospheric (below 18 miles) ozone, temperature, and pressure data. The team would use the supporting data to define the atmosphere at the site for comparison with the appropriate satellite. The team provided ROCOZ-A coverage during five dual and two single satellite overpasses. There were at least two ROCOZ-A profiles for each satellite with four profiles for the NOAA-9. (GSFC Release 85-17)

April 27, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced $40 million modification to contract held by General Electric Co. for the design of electrical equipment for Saturn vehicle launch support. Modification would cover the design portion of the work involved in providing electrical support equipment for Saturn IB and Saturn V launches, (msfc Release 65-100)

June 17, 1976
NASA studies in the year past had shown that 5 of 6 types of products considered for space processing could be expected to become profitable, Dr. William R. Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate’s Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s spaceprocessing program had deliberately pursued a policy of performing experiments on available missions and sponsoring formal experiments by members of the scientific community, Lucas said; the experiment program had been “reasonably representative” of the scientific potential that scientists foresaw for materials processing in space. Although available mission capabilities had severely restricted what could be done, the program had included demonstrations of crystal growth, solidification of homogeneous mixtures of immersible materials, processing biological materials for medical application, and other phenomena relating to physical metallurgy and fluid physics. Potentials identified with glasses and ceramics had not yet undergone experimentation. Citing the success of experiments in electrophoretic separation and crystal growth on the Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz missions, Lucas emphasized the necessity of developing novel techniques for virtually every experiment; experience so far had justified the early interest in materials processing in space, although many lines of investigation had not been completed because of the program’s operational constraints. Wide response to the program both in the U.S. and abroad was evidence of the scientific community’s interest, he said. Next steps in development would be to finalize payloads for early Shuttle missions, then proceed with design and development; “We expect to proceed with research . . . both through the SPAR [rocket] project and through an expanded program of ground-based research,” he added. “We shall need to reemphasize the ground-based program ... to replenish the fund of new ideas in space processing and build a base of technical support with the breadth that Shuttle experiment operations will need.” (MSFC Release 76-112)

August 11, 1977
NASA announced it had selected Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space and Communications Group for negotiation of a $33 million contract to build, test, and deliver three geostationary operational environmental satellites, GOES-D, -E, and -F, as follow-ons in the synchronous meteorological satellite (SMS) series providing near continuous high quality observation of the earth and its environment. The GOES spacecraft would carry a visible infrared spin-scan radiometer atmospheric sounder (VAS) to obtain day or night cloud cover photos of the portion of the earth viewed from geostationary orbit, with temperature readings at various levels of the atmosphere; the $33 million contract did not include the three VAS instruments being produced under contract by Santa Barbara Research Center. They would also carry a space environment monitoring system of three separate sensors to monitor solar emissions. Goddard Space Flight Center would be project manager for the GOES systems developed and procured by NASA on a reimbursable basis for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which would operate the spacecraft after launch and checkout by NASA. (NASA Release 77-170)

September 30, 1973
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of the Avco Electronics Operation of Avco Precision Products Div., Avco Corp., for negotiation of a $3 252 845, 23-mo contract for modifications to the MSFC Structures and Mechanics Laboratory. The work would provide a data-acquisition system for space-shuttle-hardware structural and fatigue tests, (msfc Release 73—141) October 4:	President Nixon issued a statement about NASA’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1] : “At mid-twentieth century, the United States found itself drawn by international necessity, and driven by national pride and pioneering instinct to view the heavens no longer as the stuff of romance, but as a practical environment for the extension of man’s dominion over the earth. Since then, four administrations have committed our industrial resources, our technological and scientific capacities and the national will to the proposition that America can and must play a role in outer space equal to its responsibilities as a great nation.” People of all nations stood in awe of NASA’s accomplishments. “The men of NASA have undertaken one of the greatest human adventures with such consummate skill, cool exactness in the face of untold dangers, and professional disdain for the sensational that we have come already to take for granted the legitimacy of man’s place in an environment entirely alien to him. But neither the courage, skill and devotion of the men of NASA, nor the benefits of their efforts, should be taken for granted. In every phase of our national life, new products, new techniques and new understanding have resulted from our efforts in space. And in relations between nations, the prospects for a lasting peace have been enhanced by the now absolute awareness that the primary interests of mankind are identical and shared in common. On the fifteenth anniversary of NASA, we look ahead to the same ordered progress into our space future which has characterized our first tentative steps into space.” (Text)

October 2, 1985
NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) announced that the world's fastest and most powerful supercomputer, the Cray-2, arrived at ARC to assist researchers in taking major steps toward simulating actual aircraft flight and thus making possible important advances, both in cost savings and performance, in aircraft design. The Cray-2 could perform 250 million continuous calculations per second, which was more than three times faster than the previous generation of supercomputers. The Cray-2 was the first building block in the creation of NASA's Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) program, planned to provide the world's most powerful, large-scale high-speed processor system. In addition to its advantages for aircraft design, NAS represented an important national facility in such research areas as aerothermodynamics, computational chemistry, atmospheric modeling, and other computationally intensive scientific applications. NASA planned the NAS system as an ongoing project with continuous improvements in speed and memory. Its objectives were to establish and maintain a leading-edge national computation capability to ensure leadership in computational fluid dynamics and related disciplines, provide an integrated processing system capable of a sustained 250 million floatingpoint, operations-per-second processing rate in 1986 and a one billion rate in 1987, and act as a pathfinder in advanced, large-scale computer systems capability. The Cray-2 was four feet high and four feet in diameter; its small size was made possible by microminiaturization of the electronic circuits and extremely dense packing of the circuit boards. Since the speed of light was a fundamental limit on computer speed, super fast machines had to be smaller in order to reduce distances that information traveled. Computer scientists indicated they expected to get still more speed in future machines by further reducing size and adding more parallel processors. A main feature of the Cray-2 was its large random-access memory, which was 16 times larger than previous supercomputers' memories. The Cray-2's memory provided random access from any of the machine's four main processors and any of its high-speed data channels. This meant a user could use all or part of this memory quickly, rather than taking hours to access data for large calculations. Another main feature of the machine was that its tightly-packed, heat-producing electronic components were immersed for cooling in a colorless odorless, inert fluorocarbon liquid, the first such design in computer history. (ARC Release 85-38) Goddard Space Flight Center

June 24, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced issuance of requests for proposals for design and construction of mobile ground-station receiver for visible laser communications experiment, scheduled to fly on ATS—g Applications Technology Satellite in mid-1975. Proposals were due July 17. (msfc Release 72-78)

January 31, 1963
At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Spa'ce Flight Center, Secretary of State Dean Rusk said: “We 17 nations have embarked on a cooperative effort to expand the knowledge of man to an unprecedented extent. We think we are creating a heritage for those who follow us in the coming generations in a great exploration for peaceful purposes .... “The world watches us in our success and our failures, the whole world will benefit from our discoveries. “Wc seek to publish all the knowledge we uncover.

September 30, 1973
NASA launched an Aerobee 170A-E sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center galactic astronomy experiment to a 152.4-km (94.7-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)

September 1, 1967
Need for design modifications had required shipment of a manned orbital workshop to the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Center, Huntington Beach, Calif., said Marshall Space Flight Center. Workshop, built by McDonnell Douglas, was model for the Saturn S—IVB stage and when modified would represent Saturn stage as it was to he used in Apollo Applications program as a manned space laboratory. Some 50 ft long and 21.5 ft in diameter, workshop was used at msfc as an engineering tool in designing structures, equipment, and experiments for the initial mission of 28 days, (msfc Release 67-181)

November 1, 1972
NASA announced selection of Xerox Data Systems for contract negotiations to provide central data-handling facility and remote terminals for Atmosphere Explorer (ae) C, D, and E program. Atmosphere Explorers, 450-kg (100-lb) spacecraft, were to be launched by Thor-Delta rockets into elliptical earth orbit between autumn 1973 and summer 1976 to study chemical processes and energy transfer mechanisms that controlled structure and behavior of earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. Project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of Office of Space Science, (nasa Release 72-212)

October 3, 1963
General Accounting Office (gao) released report on nasa’s Centaur booster which was sharply critical of both Government and contractor performance. Done at the request of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and submitted to them on March 29, 1963, but not released until Oct. 3, the report charged that poor management and program slippage had added $100 million to the cost of the program. The most significant charge in the report was that nasa and the contractor—General Dynamics/Astronautics—had in their possession in 1960 data from which could have been predicted the failure of the first test flight in 1962. The only immediate reply came from Julian Scheer, nasa’s Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning: “On Sept. 30, 1962, we moved the Centaur project from Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville to the Lewis Research Center because we knew we had problems. Still, we hope to fly Centaur by the end of this year.” {Wash. Post, 10/4/63; Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63, 25)

May 26, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1963 American Citizenship Award at 11th annual German-American Day festival, North Bergen, N.J. {MarshallStar, 5/29/63,7)

August 10, 1987
NASA announced that Dr. Noel Hinners would replace Dr. Frank McDonald as Chief Scientist, effective August 24, 1987. At the same time, Dr. Hinners would retain his position as NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator(Institutions). NASA also announced Dr. Frank McDonald would return to the Goddard Space Flight Center as Associate Director/Chief Scientist. (NASA Release 87121)

January 8, 1996
Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houston’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)

October 6, 1999
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the mission’s failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASA’s interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California” had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, “Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named,” news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)

December 9, 1974
A breathing system developed by Johnson Space Center using technology for solid-propellant rocket-motor cases was being evaluated in the field by Houston firemen. New air tanks were built of spiral-wound glass fiber over an aluminum liner to provide a lighter and more durable system. (NASA Release 74-320) 10 December-16 January 1975: nasa launched West German-built Helios 1 solar probe at 2:11 am Est from Eastern Test Range on a Titan IIIE— Centaur vehicle, putting it on a path that would take it closer to the sun than any spacecraft had yet traveled. The spacecraft first entered a parking orbit and then an elliptical orbit of the sun with a 0.985-au aphelion, 0.3095-au perihelion, 190.15-day period, and 0.02° inclination to the ecliptic. All vehicle systems performed normally during launch. The Titan-Centaur carried a Delta solid-fueled rocket-motor kick stage as a 4th stage and required seven interdependent ignition systems. Following separation from the 1st stage, the Centaur, with 2300 kg of propellants remaining, began maneuvers to provide data for the 1977 Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, future synchronous orbit missions, and continued development of the launch vehicle. Maneuvers included a one-hour coast and restart, three-hour coast with thermal maneuvers, boost-pump operation experiment with igniter on, and zero-g boost-pump dead-head operation. Helios 1 was to investigate the fundamental solar processes and solar-terresfrial relations by studying the solar wind, magnetic and electric fields, cosmic rays, and cosmic dust from launch to the first perihelion, 0.31 au from the sun. The 370-kg spool-shaped spacecraft carried 10 instruments—7 West German and 3 U.S.—to measure the solar wind, magnetic field, and related shock waves; study radio waves and oscillations in the electron plasma; measure the spatial gradient of solar and galactic cosmic rays; observe composition and dynamics of interplanetary dust; and monitor x-ray activity of the solar disc. By 16 Jan. orientation and spin-rate maneuvers had been conducted and the high-gain antenna despun and pointed toward the earth. Control of the spacecraft had been passed to Germany. Instruments had been turned on and were operating normally with two exceptions: One of two antennas in the U.S. plasma-wave experiment had jammed during extension and unrolled inside the drive enclosure, producing an electrical ground and degrading all low-frequency data. Rewinding the antenna had not eliminated the ground. In addition, operation of the high-gain antenna for the West German plasma experiment produced a space . charge near the spacecraft, preventing detection of electrons with energies less than 100 ev. The medium-gain antenna would be used during selected periods. To prepare for its demanding mission, Helios 1, designed to withstand the highest temperatures ever demanded of a spacecraft, had been successfully subjected to six days at 644 K (700°F), the highest heat load expected at 0.3 au, during spring 1974 tests at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The spacecraft had also withstood radiation 11 times the solar intensity at the outer edge of the earth’s atmosphere. Independent payload components, louver systems, optical surface reflectors and mirrors, and several layers of insulation dissipated spacecraft heat. In addition the spacecraft spun at one revolution per second to distribute evenly the heat coming from the sun. Temperatures within the experiment area were kept between 263 and 303 K (14° and 86°F). A second Helios spacecraft would be launched in 12 to 18 mos and information from the two spacecraft would be received simultaneously from widely differing locations, for comparison with each other and with data from Pioneer- and iMP-class spacecraft. Helios, the third cooperative U.S. and West German project, was agreed,on during 1966 talks. Following technical discussions and mission definition, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed 10 June 1969. NASA provided three scientific instruments, spacecraft technical support, launch vehicle and operations, and initial tracking and data acquisition and flight operations. The German Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) designed, built, and tested the spacecraft and provided seven scientific instruments, data acquisition and analysis, and spacecraft control. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for NASA project management; Lewis Research Center had responsibility for the launch vehicle. (NASA mors, 6 Dec 74, 16 Jan 75; NASA pao, interview, 10 Dec 74; nasa Releases 74-314,75-68; upi, NYT, 9 Dec 74,45)

January 20, 1961
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) awarded contracts to North American Aviation and Ryan Aeronautical to develop paraglider recovery system for the Saturn booster, based upon concept developed by Francis M. Rogallo of NASA’s Langley Research Center.

September 29, 1966
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded three new study contracts totaling $400,000 to investigate launch vehicle needs and best methods for sending manned spacecraft on planetary flyby trips: North American Aviation, Inc., received $100,000 to study feasibility of modifying Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) for use as an orbital injection stage; Douglas Aircraft Co., $100,000 for feasibility of using Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) as part of a planetary vehicle; and TRW Systems, Inc., $200,000 for alternate mission modes for manned Mars and Venus orbital and landing missions, (msfc Release 66-223)

December 17, 1975
NASA had awarded Bendix Field Engineering Corp. a $104-million contract to operate and maintain portions of the worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network that serves the needs of NASA’s earth-orbital space programs, manned and unmanned. The 2-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract would permit negotiation of up to three additional 1-yr extensions, and would be supervised by Goddard Space Flight Center. The contractor would provide technical support for STDN stations and facilities as well as for the Laser Tracking Subnet and for the Magnetic Tape Certification Facility and the NASCOM facilities located at GSFC. (NASA Release 75—315)

August 16, 1999
A team of astrophysicists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only “seen” the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or “the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole.” However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a “strange feature” buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an “astronomical Doppler effect,” because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretched⎯redshifted⎯moving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, “Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory,” Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)

July 17, 1964
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center awarded 29 contracts involving studies of advanced manned missions. The 29 studies, which were designed to look beyond the time when American astronauts would have landed on the moon, covered the subjects of launch vehicle development, earth orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary exploration. (NASA Release 64-175)

September 26, 1964
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with University of Pittsburgh and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center instrumented payload was launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 74.5-mi. altitude. Primary objective of flight was to obtain propulsion and environmental data on the Aerobee 150A. New severance techniques also were employed. Additional experiments included low-energy gamma-ray measurements, study of yellow radiation from sodium vapor, Dovap transmitter studies for tracking rockets, nuclear emulsions for cosmic-ray studies, and attitude control system employing new techniques for pointing. Rocket performance was good, and excellent propulsion and environmental data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)

January 30, 1979
NASA launched for the U.S. Air Force a satellite called SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 4:42 p.m. EST on Delta into a transfer orbit pending its boost into operational orbit February 2. Later orbit elements were 43,297-kilometer apogee, 27,512-kilometer perigee, 1,416.6-minute period, 6.5° inclination. SCATHA carried twelve experiments, three provided by NASA, to collect data on high-energy solar-wind particles causing false signals from satellites by building up electrical charges on their surfaces. Military and commercial satellites in geostationary orbit over the Earth at 35,900 kilometers (22,300 miles) had been the major sufferers; the charges could effectively disable vital communications by causing equipment failure, false recording of unachieved events, or initiation of unplanned events. SCATHA would meet the greatest challenge of its planned 1-year lifetime during a solar eclipse period beginning in March, when electrical charging would reach its height; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had included an electric-field detector, a pair of 50-meter antennas to be extended in opposite directions in March to form a single instrument longer than a football field. Extension of the antennas might effect the spacecraft’s dynamics. The USAF’s Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) would reimburse NASA about $9 million for the launch. (NASA Release 79-3; NASA MOR M-492-303-79-01 [prelaunch] Jan 17/79, [postlaunch] Oct 25/789; O Sen Star Jan 31/79, 1; Today, Jan 20/79, 8A; Jan 22/79, 6A; Jan 30/79, 10A; W Star Jan 23/79, A-6) During January: The ESA announced that it planned to launch one of its Intelsat V communications satellites on Europe’s Ariane booster. The first four of this series of seven would be launched from mid-1979 to late 1980 on U.S. Atlas Centaurs; ESA’s board opted for a 1981 Ariane launch of its sixth Intelsat V and for Shuttle launches for the other two. (ESA Release Jan 1979, 1)

April 1, 1975
A prototype of a flexible tunnel to connect the Space Shuttle airlock with the forward end of the Spacelab was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. The tunnel would provide a pressurized passageway for crew members and scientists to move to and from the orbiting laboratory without spacesuits. The flexible circular tunnel, built by Goodyear Rubber Corp., would accordion-fold to 0.6 m and extend to a length of more than 4.3 m. Made rigid by steel rings, the tunnel was constructed of layers of aluminum foil, Capran film, and nylon cloth covered by a spongy meteoroid shield. MSFC engineers were testing the tunnel, which would be exposed to the space environment when the Orbiter bay doors were opened, for structural strength, airtight integrity, and materials compatibility. (MSFC Release 75—63)

March 29, 1985
NASA announced that its first Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-1), after more than 18 years of service, failed to respond to commands to correct its eastward drift from geostationary position over the Gilbert Islands in the western Pacific. Robert Wales, ATS project operations director at Goddard Space Flight Center (GFSC), said that the ground control station in Hawaii could no longer keep ATS-1 at its present location and it would likely drift out of useful orbital position during the next six months. ATS-1, launched in December 1966 with an expected lifespan of three years, most recently had provided a voice and data communications capability to several information networks in the Pacific basin. The pan Pacific education and communications experiments by satellite (PEACESAT) program, the major user of ATS-1, would dissolve with the loss of the satellite. Program participants had transmitted educational, health, research, technology, and community services through ATS-1 to 23 autonomous terminals located in Hawaii, Cook Islands, the Mariana and Caroline Islands, Western and American Samoa, the Marshall Islands, Melanesia, New Zealand, and Australia. Some of ATS-1's notable achievements were the first transmission in 1967 of full-earth, cloud cover pictures from geosynchronous orbit; first transmission in 1967 of real-time TV pictures (Apollo 4 splashdown); two-way communication tests with commercial airliners to determine aircraft orientation effects on satellite communications, a cooperative venture with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the airlines in 1967 and 1968; link-up between U.S. and USSR scientists during an atmospheric, sea, and ice condition experiment in the Bering Sea in 1971; transmission of electrocardiographs from Hawaii to New Zealand and from Alaska to the University of Washington; and presentation of medical conferences over the PEACESAT network. The medical world had praised the Alaskan "doctor call" service provided by ATS-1 as the first innovative approach to rural medicine in the U.S. In the program, Public Health Service physicians could communicate daily through ATS-1 with trained health aides in the remote Alaskan bush country. Loss of ATS-1 would leave one other comparable satellite, ATS-3, launched in November 1967, in operation. Positioned in geosynchronous orbit over the Pacific Ocean south of Mexico, ATS-3 covered the U.S., most of the Atlantic Ocean, and a large part of the eastern Pacific including Hawaii. (NASA Release 85-45)

January 20, 1973
Hardware for Skylab inspace experiments proposed by U.S. high school students was shipped to Kennedy Space Center. Student winners in the Skylab Student Project national competition had worked with NASA specialists in designing the equipment, which was built and assembled at nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center. The experiments were in astronomy, biology, space medicine, and physics, (msfc Release 73-8)

May 2, 1985
NASA announced that Inorganic Coatings, Inc. was providing interior corrosion protection to the refurbished Statue of Liberty by means of a primer coating known as K-Zinc 531, an aerospace spinoff product developed at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) to protect gantries and other structures at NASA's primary launch site, Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Because KSC was located on Florida's Atlantic Coast, its launch facilities required greater corrosion protection due to constant exposure to salt spray and fog. GSFC undertook a research program to develop a coating that would not only resist salt corrosion, but also protect KSC launch structures from very hot rocket exhaust and the thermal shock created by rapid temperature changes during a space launch. The GSFC research resulted in an inorganic water-based potassium silicate binder, a compound that provided long-term protection with a single application. NASA granted in 1981 a license for the coating to Shane Associates, which signed an agreement with Inorganic Coatings to allow it to become the sole manufacturer and sales agent under the Shane license. Inorganic Coatings assigned the trade name K-Zinc 531 to the compound, which was nontoxic, nonflammable, and had no organic emissions. The high ratio silicate formulation bonded to steel in 30 minutes and created a hard ceramic finish with superior adhesion and abrasion resistance. It required no straining before application and could be mixed on site. (NASA Release 85-64)

July 31, 1962
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced first static test of p&w liquid-hydrogen engine. In first firing of series, which was run in vacuum chamber to simulate space environment, RL-10 ran nine seconds and generated a rated 15,000 pounds of thrust.

July 23, 1973
Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar announced completion of Phase I of the air-route-control-system automation program. Memphis had been the last of 20 cities to install IBM 9020 computers in a nationwide network system to transfer flight data from one facility to another. The network had 61 automated radar terminal systems (arts), (faa Release 73-32) February 14:	Selection of four firms to negotiate contracts to study systems for the space tug (space shuttle 3rd stage) was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. each would perform a 10-mo study of a cryogenic tug using liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants. Grumman Aerospace Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. would perform parallel studies of tug using storable propellants, (nasa Release 73—24)

June 26, 1985
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility had launched at 1:46 p.m. EDT June 24 and 1:46 p.m. EDT June 26 Nike-Orion sounding rockets for the University of Illinois to investigate the daytime mid-latitude ionosphere between 96 and 241 statute miles above earth. Specific mission objectives were to investigate differential absorption of radio waves; determine the electron density profile; and investigate the irregular structure of the electron density profile in terms of neutral turbulence, plasma instabilities in the mid-latitude region, and gravity wave effects. The 120-lb. payloads reached peak altitudes of 110 statute miles, and preliminary results indicated all instrumentation performed satisfactorily and obtained good data. The Nike-Orion was a two-stage, solid-propellant unguided sounding rocket about 30 feet long. Researchers would correlate scientific data from the missions with information from a similar study of the daytime equatorial ionosphere conducted March 1983 in Peru as part of Project CONDOR. Dr. L.G. Smith, University of Illinois project scientist, noted the studies were important "because turbulence is the major unsolved problem of the atmosphere and ionosphere." (GSFC Release 85-19)

February 19, 1963
Lt. Col. Robert E. Warren (U.S. Army), nasa Deputy Director of Communications Systems, reviewed launching and performance of syncom i communications satellite before Senate Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Communications. After syncom was successfully launched by Delta vehicle, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had determined apogee of syncom’s elliptical transfer orbit would occur at 21,700-mi. altitude, about 600-mi. short of synchronous altitude but well within allowable error. So that more nearly synchronous orbit could be achieved, signal was sent from usns Kingsport in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, commanding satellite’s apogee motor to fire 10 min. earlier (at 5:42 a.m.) than firing time set on onboard timer, syncom received and stored signal, and at 5:42 a.m. signal was sent from Kingsport to execute the command. 20.1 sec. later, ground reception of satellite telemetry abruptly ceased. Because apogee motor was to have fired for 21.2 sec., Colonel Warren said it was “difficult to imagine that these two events are unrelated .... “So, what can we make of all this ? First we know that synoom is in orbit. If the apogee motor did not fire, it is still in the elliptical orbit and will eventually be found, either by optics or by radar. If the apogee motor did fire, syncom is in a very high altitude orbit, and without telemetry, there is only a slim chance that it will be found. A search has been organized which will continue until such time as it is found, or until further search seems unwarranted. If it is found, we will have another chance to try out the command system, and if it works, we could again be in business. “Secondly, we know that one of the communications transponders worked well in the transfer ellipse. “Thirdly, we have shown once more that the Delta launch vehicle is a reliable booster, this being its 15th successive flight with performance well within acceptable error.” (Testimony) • Bill to create Commission on Science and Technology (S. 816) introduced in Congress by Senator John McClellan (D.-Ark.). Commission would be charged with bringing about more economy and efficiency in scientific programs carried out and funded by Federal Government. (Space Bits. Daily, 2/20/63, 224)

February 26, 1965
pegasus i satellite, launched by nasa Feb. 16, was functioning normally and recording information to ground stations on the size and frequency of meteoroid “strikes” or impacts on all three sensor panel groups. Scientists at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center said the number of penetrations of the panels was not greatly different from the expected level. PEGASUS I had a wing-like structure 96 ft. long and 14 ft. in width, offering more than 2,300 square ft. of area instrumented to detect collisions with meteoritic particles. The basic information on the penetrating power and frequency of meteoroids was needed for the design of future spacecraft. In addition, data on temperature, power levels, and the intensity of radiation were being received. The latter were also as predicted, (msfc Release 65—45)

June 30, 1975
The Skylab program was closed out at Marshall Space Flight Center and personnel assigned to the program had been reassigned, the Marshall Star announced. Responsibility for the deactivated offices, including storage of hardware and phaseout of remaining contractual and documentary activities, was assigned to the Administration and Program Support Directorate’s Logistics Office. (Marshall Star, 2 July 75, 4)

August 1, 1965
s-ib-2, the first stage of the second Saturn IB booster, left NASA Marshall Space Flight Center aboard nasa’s barge Palaemon for Michoud Assembly Facility, where it would undergo post-static-firing checkout. The 80-ft.-long launch vehicle had been fired for 30 sec. at msfc on July 8, and for 2x/> min. on July 21. (msfc Release 65195)

April 1, 1991
News editor Budd McLaughlin of the Huntsville News denied the blame placed on the media by Jack Lee, director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, for NASA's poor public image. (Huntsville News, Apr 1/91)

March 10, 1964
Search for fragments from the moon would be conducted this spring in six western Iowa counties by NASA and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe announced. Western Iowa was chosen after Dr. O’Keefe had found some “promising” specimens there on an exploratory trip last summer. Residents of select counties were requested to turn over any unusual stones found during spring plowing of loess soil areas to local usda offices. Stones seeming most likely to have nonterrestrial origins would be forwarded to GSFC for further scientific examination and study, (gsfc Release G-6-64)

March 3, 1996
NASA scientist Benjamin F. Chao explained to the New York Times the results of his research on Earth’s orbit. A geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, Chao attributed the Earth’s slightly changed orbital pattern to the increased construction of dams. As the planet’s population has grown, people had attempted to maximize use of Earth’s limited water resources by building reservoirs. Using geophysics, international data, and theoretical calculations, Chao postulated that this increase in impounded water on the Earth’s surface had actually helped speed up the Earth’s orbit. Chao first made public his findings in the Geophysical Research Papers. Some members of the scientific community challenged his conclusions.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Dams for Water Supply Are Altering Earth’s Orbit, Expert Says,” New York Times, 3 March 1996.)

April 2, 1998
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)

September 14, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for a day-long meeting 16 Sept, at MSFC to review the status of the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) that would deliver spacecraft from the Space Shuttle in low orbit to their operational synchronous orbits. The SSUS, carrying a satellite of the type now being launched by expendable Atlas-Centaur or Thor-Delta vehicles, would be launched from earth in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle. In orbit, the SSUS with its payload would be extended from the cargo bay on a cradle with a spin table that would stabilize the SSUS as it ejected from the cradle, before its own engine ignited to send it and its payload into the proper orbit. After reaching the required altitude, the payload’s propulsion system would position it in the desired orbital attitude. Industry representatives invited to the status review would hear presentations by NASA and Aerospace Corp. on concepts and current mission models for the SSUS. MSFC planned to issue requests for proposals for Phase B (preliminary design definition) about 1 Oct., with contracts being issued in Feb. Plans were to have the SSUS ready for flight in Dec. 1979. (MSFC Release 76-166; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 46)

February 5, 1975
NASA’s new Low Cost Modular Spacecraft (LCMS), a recoverable compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space Shuttle, was. demonstrated at a news conference at Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Division. The LCMS consisted of an instrument and spacecraft assembly joined by a transition ring. Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be attached to the LCMS for specific missions. Designed by Goddard Space Flight Center engineers, the LCMS would fit into the 5- by 18-m payload bay of the Orbiter and also could serve as a platform for as many as 14 satellites. The system could be placed in orbit by the Shuttle and later serviced or recovered and returned to earth for needed repairs. Dr. Robert G. Wilson, Director of Advanced Payload Analysis at NASA Headquarters', said that a recoverable modular satellite system such as LCMS could save as much as $100 million annually over the cost of nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14Feb 75, 3;GoddardNews, Feb 75, 8)

November 23, 1991
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)

July 1, 1977
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had resumed the atmospheric variability experiments (AVE) begun in 1964 to study processes associated with the onset and development of severe storms. Originally conducted to aid in scheduling Saturn rocket firings at MSFC, the experiments were designed to detect unusual weather conditions common to different localities before sever^ storms occurred, to improve short-term predictions based on data from weather balloons, weather satellites, and ground-observation posts. Sixth of the AVE series recently conducted over 24hr in an area including Texas, Alabama, Illinois, and North Dakota had monitored severe storms with hail and tornadoes in Missouri and western Tennessee, and a frontal system with low-pressure disturbances in Alabama. (MSFC Release 77-122) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NO' rr m' PAG1 llL INTENTIONALLY BLANK

November 30, 1994
A laudatory assessment was given of NASA's Technology Transfer program with specific reference to the Marshall Space Flight Center. According to Harry Craft, Jr., Technology Transfer office manager, the program had three elements: Industrial Outreach, Space Act Cooperative Agreements, and Dual Use Programs. Each was intended to increase cooperation between government and industry. In the Industrial Outreach area, industries came to NASA with problems they needed to resolve, requiring less than 40 hours work. For more complex problems, Space Act Cooperative Agreements were used. The Dual Use Program was a technology reinvestment program in which both government and industry contributed funds and technology to benefit both parties. (Huntsville News, Nov 30/94)

May 17, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $1,600,000 contract to Aero Spacelines, Inc., to transport Saturn upper stages and outsize rocket components in its modified Boeing Stratocruiser, Pregnant Guppy. The contract would run through June 1966. (msfc Release 65-123)

June 25, 1976
NASA announced selection of 8 scientists as a team to develop experiments for a proposed unmanned lunar mission in 1980, under study at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The mission would use a low-cost instrumented polar-orbiting spacecraft with a smaller companion subsatellite, launched together from Cape Canaveral on a single Delta vehicle, to orbit the moon for a yr and examine nearly the entire lunar surface from pole to pole, on both near and far sides, to expand knowledge gained from the small areas visited by previous U.S. and Soviet missions to the whole of the moon. This first U.S. lunar mission since Apollo 17 in 1972 would also be the first global survey of a body other than earth. The 8 experiment areas would provide measurements for scientists to determine the moon’s gravity, magnetism, and heat flow, and the chemical and mineral composition of the moon’s surface. Advanced remote sensing—gamma-ray, x-ray, and reflection spectroscopy—would be used in 3 of the experiments to create chemical maps of the lunar surface; a fourth experiment, spectrostereo imaging, would provide photographic data to match these maps with individual features of the lunar landscape. Magnetometer and electron reflector experiments would map electrical and magnetic properties of the lunar surface and subsurface; the remaining 2 experiments—heat flow and gravity field—would provide information on the deep interior of the moon. The gravity field would be mapped by tracking the polar-orbiting spacecraft circling at an altitude of 100 km above the lunar surface; the subsatellite, in a higher orbit up to 5000 km, would track the orbiter when it was hidden from earth by the moon. Mascons (mass concentrations) on the near side of the moon had been discovered by analyzing similar tracking data during the early lunar-orbiter flights in the l960s; the proposed experiment would determine whether such mascons existed on the far side of the moon, besides providing information on the lunar interior. Principal investigators named were: gamma-ray spectrometry, Dr. James R. Arnold, Univ. of Calif, at San Diego; spectrostereo imaging, Merton E. Davies, RAND Corp.; electron reflection, Dr. Robert P. Lin, Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley; infrared spectrometry, Dr. Thomas B. McCord, MIT; microwave radiometry, Dr. Duane 0. Muhleman, CalTech; gravity and altimetry, Dr. Roger J. Phillips, JPL; magnetometry, Dr. Christopher T. Russell, Univ. of Calif, at Los Angeles; x-ray spectrometry, Dr. Jacob L. Trombka, Goddard Space Flight Center. Each of the 8 principal investigators would be accompanied by groups of coinvestigators; the 71-member science team would be aided by JPL staff members. JPL scientist in charge of the study was Dr. T.V. Johnson. (NASA Release 76-119)

August 21, 1963
S-l stage for Saturn SA-5 launch vehicle arrived at Cape Canaveral, having left nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., by barge Aug. 10. (Av. Wk., 8/26/63, 33)

November 12, 1972
Five Soviet aviation officials toured Kennedy Space Center and were briefed on current and future NASA programs. They were among first Soviet citizens to visit ksc. Poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko had visited ksc and witnessed Apollo 16 launch as NASA guest April 16. (ksc pao) November 17:	Successful radio tracking of solar energetic particles through interplanetary space was reported in Science by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Dr. Joseph Fainberg, Larry G. Evans, and Robert G. Stone. Satellite observations by Explorer 6 (launched Aug. 7, 1959) of ejection of energetic sun particles at long radio wavelengths had provided means of investigating gross magnetic field configuration over distances of one astronomical unit. (Science, 11/17/72, 743-5)

June 30, 1962
An estimated 23,000 visitors toured Marshall Space Flight Center during the “Family Day” observance of msfc’s second birthday.

February 14, 1961
Last of second series of static firings of Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center for 110 seconds, approximately full duration.

August 1, 1974
A 6.4-cm underwater borehole TV camera to provide geologists views of the earth’s interior layers had been developed from Skylab technology, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The camera, designed for msfc by Sperry Support Services of Alabama, would permit geologists to study geological formations from the interior of a 7.6-cm-dia survey borehole drilled to a depth of 490 m. Images received by the remotely controlled camera would be transmitted along an armored cable to a standard vidicon receiving tube on the surface, (msfc Release 74—138)

March 6, 1985
NASA announced selection of the scientific investigators whose projects would be included on the proposed Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), an observatory that would operate in low-earth orbit for at least 15 years. A spacecraft carrying an array of instruments and providing power, precise pointing, and data transmission would house the observatory containing a 1.2m diameter, 10m focal length telescope. AXAF construction could begin around 1987-88 with launch approximately five years later. In orbit, AXAF would join the Hubble Space Telescope, scheduled for launch in 1986, and the Gamma-Ray Observatory, planned for a 1988 launch. The three observatories, together with the planned Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would provide simultaneous observations of cosmic sources over infrared, visable, ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma-ray wavelengths. Those selected included instrument principal investigators to design and fabricate scientific instrumentation for placement in the telescope focal plane, interdisciplinary scientists to provide expertise on X-ray astrophysics and other fields of astronomy, and a telescope scientist to guide telescope fabrication. Instrument principal investigators selected were Dr. Gordon Garmire, Pennsylvania State University (charged coupled device imaging spectroscopy); Dr. Steven Murray, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (high-resolution camera); Dr. Stephen Holt, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) (X-ray spectroscopy investigation for the AXAF); Dr. Claude Canizares, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy using AXAF); and Dr. Albert Brinkman, University of Utrecht, Netherlands (high throughput transmission grating for cosmic X-ray spectroscopy). Interdisciplinary scientists selected were Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, Space Telescope Science Institute (advanced X-ray astrophysics facility mission); Dr. Jeffrey Linsky, National Bureau of Standards (the coronal structures of selected cool stars and close binary systems); Dr. Richard Mushotzky, GSFC (a program to measure the mass of galaxies and clusters of galaxies with AXAF); Dr. Andrew Wilson, University of Maryland (studies of radio jets and the narrow line regions of active galaxies with AXAF); and Dr. Andrew Fabian, Cambridge University, United Kingdom (cooling flows in clusters and galaxies). Dr. Leon Vay Speybroeck, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, would serve as telescope scientist. The investigators, as members of the AXAF science working group, would provide scientific and technical guidance throughout the project and would receive a specified amount of time to use the telescope during its first 30 operational months. Astronomers from the U.S. and around the world would . use the majority of observing time. Marshall Space Flight Center managed the AXAF project for NASA's astrophysics division, Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release

August 7, 1962
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in an interview in General Electric Forum that the U.S. space program would be paying for itself within another 10 years. “The real payoff does not lie in mining the Moon or in bringing gold back from the Moon, but in enriching our economy and our science in new methods, new procedures, new knowledge, and advanced technology in general.”

March 13, 1964
S-I booster for Saturn I SA—9 was test-fired for 30 sec. in its initial firing at NASA JVlarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. This S-I was the last Saturn I booster built by msfc; future stages were being built by Chrysler Corp., and would be shipped to Huntsville for static firings. Since the first Saturn I booster firing March 28, 1960, msfc had conducted more than 50 firings on eight flight S-I’s and one ground-test booster, all of which were assembled at MSFC. (Marshall Star, 3/18/64, 1)

March 25, 1976
Space-related technology would serve to monitor municipal water pollution and dispose of solid wastes, NASA announced, describing systems for electronic monitoring of water quality in cooperation with the Gulf Coast Waste Disposal Authority and for sewage treatment at a plant midway between Los Angeles and San Diego. Johnson Space Center at Houston developed under contract with Boeing a trailer-mounted automated system to process data from up to 40 different water sensors for rapid indications of pollution, temperature, turbidity, and similar items. The current procedure was to sample city water at regular intervals and send the samples to a laboratory for analysis, with results available days later. JSC and the Goddard Space Flight Center developed a biosensor to give total bacteria count directly, by adding chemicals that caused bacteria to radiate light; this sensor could both detect and quantify living or dead bacteria in a continuous-flow water sample. At Langley Research Center, scientists working on Skylab environmental control had developed an electronic sensor that could detect human or nonhuman fecal coliform bacteria in a few hours, rather than a few days; the device would permit public health authorities to act quickly if large quantities of disease-producing bacteria entered a water supply. The automated monitoring system would eventually include a device to detect known carcinogenic chemicals—chloroform and carbon tetrachloride, for instance—already found in the drinking water of cities surveyed for the project. Some of the pollutants were thought to be byproducts of chlorine added to city water to guard against waterborne diseases. A gas-chromatograph technique developed at Ames Research Center to extract minute samples of organic materials from the atmospheres of other planets would be valuable to concentrate the harmful chemicals detected in city water for rapid onsite analysis. Another Ames system, attaching fluorescent dyes to bacteria so that their presence could be recorded by electronic sensors, could be applied to detection of waterborne viruses. As for sewage disposal, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used for the new million-gallon-per-day treatment plant at Huntington Beach, Cal., a process invented by Marshall Humphrey, a JPL engineer working on lightweight materials for insulating rocket motors. Using a pyrolytic converter to produce activated carbon by chemical changes induced by heat, he found that sewage solids were excellent raw material for production of carbon. The new process would convert solid sewage to activated carbon, which could then be used to remove impurities from incoming waste water and recycled and reactivated with new incoming sewage. Gases generated from sewage solids would serve as fuel for the converter. Dry black odorless powder of carbon and ash would be the only residue from the process. Even the billion-dollar secondary sewage-treatment plants in compliance with EPA standards had not solved the problem of solid-waste disposal; primary treatment of sewage had left about 40% solid waste in water leaving the plants and discharged into rivers and offshore waters. The JPL process would exceed EPA standards for ocean discharge and reduce capital costs of processing systems as much as 25%. (NASA Release 76-57; KSC News, 4 Mar 76, 2)

January 13, 1972
NASA Convair 990 aircraft was being used for scientific probe of high-altitude cloud formations up to 14 000 m (45 000 ft) in attempt to identify and measure ice and water particles with remote sensing devices, Ames Research Center announced. Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Warren A. Hovis and team of scientists from NASA, Univ. of Arizona, and Arthur D. Little Co. were conducting experiment to improve short-term weather forecasting and to transfer technology to weather satellites. (NASA Release 72-14)

December 2, 1974
Inflation would force even more extensive cuts in NASA operations if funding did not increase in the next few fiscal years, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported in a survey of nasa belt-tightening. The magazine quoted nasa Comptroller William E. Lilly as saying cost contracts for major spacecraft programs had a 9-12% inflation rate. The overall effective impact of inflation was 7—7.5% at NASA, but these averages were much lower than for many specific areas. Although materials increases were averaging 15-20%, particular increases ranged from 0-100%. The 7% inflation rate in Center supplies was being absorbed by using inventories and by decreasing the use of supplies. Utility cost increases of 20-30% at NASA Centers had been countered by lower use— a 30% cut—but Centers were still paying 10-15% more. Overall wage rates could increase 20-30% over the next three years, Lilly had said, because of a trend-setting agreement between the Boeing Co. and the International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. Support service contracts were showing a 7-9% yearly inflationary increase. NASA Centers were seeking new solutions. At Goddard Space Flight Center, more fixed-price contracts were being issued, but predicting economic changes was problematic, according to William R. Mecca, gsfc Deputy Director for Administration and Management, gsfc had begun limiting data acquisition from spacecraft and drawing up contingency plans for many unmanned programs—like the International Sun-Earth Explorer Spacecraft program and the International Ultraviolet Explorer program—to save costs if primary plans began to exceed spending limits. Marshall Space Flight Center had reduced its work force by 850— about 15%—since June 1973 and had closed 47 structures. Lewis Research Center had cut its power needs 7%, using a transient data-record-ing system to reduce operating hours. Johnson Space Center, along with others, had been hiring young persons rather than high-salaried experienced persons. JSC electric costs were still increasing even though the Center had reduced its exterior lighting by 75% and its interior lighting by 33%. Kennedy Space Center was phasing construction for shuttle and other programs, outfitting facilities to meet minimum initial operational requirements rather than for long-range mission models. Consideration was being given to advance procurement for lower costs and for preventing slowdowns from shortages. (Covault, Av Wk, 2 Dec 74, 38-42; Lilly, interview, 19 Sept 75)

January 20, 1975
An interagency agreement between NASA and Department of Interior to use NASA technology for mineral extraction was announced by Secretary of the Interior Rogers C. B. Morton. Funded and directed by Ddl and combining efforts of NASA and contractor scientists, the project Would apply NASA experience in developing of systems for manned and automated operations in hostile environments to demonstrate new coal-mining technology. NASA has designated Marshall Space Flight Center as the lead NASA Center. (NASA Release 75-H) _ _

April 10, 1965
One of the five F-l engines on the Saturn V booster was successfully static fired at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for 16% sec. (.Marshall Star, 4/14/65, 1)

October 2, 1972
Gerhard B. Heller, Director of Space Science Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center, died in Nashville, Tenn., at age 58 of injuries received in automobile accident. Heller had begun career in 1940 at Peenemuende Rocket Center in Germany. He had come to U.S. with Dr. Wernher von Braun’s rocket group after World War II and worked with Army Ordnance Corps until transfer of group to msfc in 1960. During nasa career Heller had pioneered in thermal control of earth satellites. He had served as director of Space Sciences Laboratory’s Thermophysics Div. before becoming Laboratory director in 1969. (msfc Release 72-128)

August 19, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $1.9-million firm-fixed-price contract to the Martin Marietta Corp. for fabrication, acceptance testing, and delivery of 322 pyrotechnic-initiator controllers (PIC) for the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 75—182)

June 30, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans to implement Center reorganization, pending NASA Hq. concurrence. Reorganization, necessitated by changing msfc roles and missions, included elimination of Program Management (pm) with major program offices reporting to Office of msfc Director; creation of Space Science Projects Office to ' furnish management and technical direction to High Energy Astronomy Observatory and Large Space Telescope projects; reassignment of Michoud Assembly Facility to Saturn Program Office; redesignation of Administration and Technical Services Directorate as Administration and Program Support; and consolidation of Contracts Office with Purchasing Office to become Procurement Office, (msfc Release 72-82)

May 14, 1973
Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Johnson Space Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., died in Houston at age 43. He had contracted a fatal illness in 1971. Dr. Gast had been on leave from Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and, since 1970, had directed the lunar science team studying lunar samples at JSC. He had received the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service in 1970 and the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1972. He had been awarded the first Victor Goldschmidt Award of the Geochemical Society in 1972 and had been named to receive the James Furman Kemp Medal of Columbia Univ. in 1973 for directing the lunar rock study. (NYT, 5/18/73, 34; SF, 10/73, 389) May 18:	Newspapers commented on the Skylab 1 mission as engineers at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center prepared sunshades to cool down the overheated space station: New York Times: The “partial recovery from earlier disaster has set the stage for an unprecedented improvisation in space. Present plans are for the Skylab crew to blast off a week from today and install a sunshade or awning to replace the missing thermal shield. If that can be done, the temperature problem will be solved and the astronauts will be able to begin living in the space station and to carry out at least some of the projected experiments. All these plans transcend past space feats, and if successful, will mark a major advance in the nation’s space capabilities. But the task will not be easy and a happy ending is by no means guaranteed.” (NYT, 5/18/73, 32) Chicago Daily News: “The space station experiments not only look outward toward the sun and stars, but also down at the Earth. From 270 miles [435 kilometers] up, men can learn much about the planet, its resources and its weather that they can’t see on the ground. Much of the knowledge gained from Skylab can be expected to have practical application toward improving the quality of life on Earth.” (C Daily News, 5/18/73)

May 21, 1964
First two-way telephone call between U.S. and Japan via a communications satellite was conducted by personnel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., and Radio Research Laboratory Station, Ka-shima, Japan, using relay II satellite in orbit about 4,000 mi. above the Pacific Ocean. (NASA Release 64-122)

September 11, 1974
A declassified feasibility study by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. had indicated that reflector satellites 200-900 m in diameter could illuminate ground areas continuously at night, the Huntsville Times reported. Pointing out commercial uses, an official from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had managed the Project Able study, told the Times that potential applications included reflecting microwaves from space for conversion to electrical power, beaming rays on Florida’s orange groves should frost threaten the fruit crop, and lighting Alaska during its extended darkness. Launched on a Saturn V booster or on the space shuttle, a 640-m-dia, 20 000-kg reflector satellite could provide twice the light of the full moon and raise the temperature of the area covered by several degrees, (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 11 Sept 74)

October 16, 1975
Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of PM Facilities Management Corp. for a 2-yr $3 500 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide processing, preparation, retrieval, reproduction, and distribution of space-science data for the National Space Science Data Center. PMI would also maintain, upgrade, develop, and implement plans for improved data-handling information systems, and would provide scientific analyses and programming, prepare reports, maintain files, order supplies and equipment, and operate photographic and microfilm equipment. The Data Center served as a NASA-wide depository for space-science data and a means of analyzing and disseminating this information beyond that provided by principal investigators. (GSFC Release G—24-75)

September 6, 2000
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) selected Space Systems and Applications Inc. of Lanham, Maryland, to provide engineering, science, and technology support for NASA’s Space and Earth Science Directorates. The value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract was US$204.5 million over a period of five years. Under the contract, NASA required Space Systems and Applications to provide research and information technology services including scientific data analysis, modeling and simulation of physical processes, development of flight-project data systems and large-scale data management, archival and delivery systems, and systems analysis and programming. These services would support a broad range of scientific disciplines⎯astronomy and astrophysics, climatology and atmospheric science, geodynamics, land processes, oceanography, planetary studies, solar and space plasma physics, and solid earth geographics.(NASA, “Contract for Goddard Space Center Support Awarded,” news release C00-j, 6 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-j.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)

December 12, 1962
nasa Agena B vehicle program would be transferred from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to nasa Lewis Research Center, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced. Transfer included Atlas and Thor boosters used with Agena B upper stage. Dr. Seamans said the transfer, which would be completed within three months, would allow “Marshall to wholly concentrate its work on the vital Saturn vehicle development for the manned lunar landing program and for the large unmanned scientific payloads of the future. ... In addition, it concentrates at Lewis the two Atlas-based vehicles, Agena and Centaur, which are essential to nasa’s program of space sciences.” Centaur was transferred to Lewis in September.

February 7, 1991
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)

June 30, 1964
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded an honorary degree by Iowa Wesleyan College. (MarshaU Star, 6/17/64,1)

August 10, 1993
NASA announced that during the third week in July  it had delivered the first data sets from the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to the National Space Science Data Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. As a result, researchers from around the world now have access to the COBE data that provided the scientific community with an unprecedented look at how the universe began. (NASA Release 93-145)

May 15, 1972
NASA launched four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska. First rocket carried Goddard Space Flight Center grenade payload to 110.2-km (68.5-mi) altitude to provide temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in support of closely coordinated ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All 31 grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded on ground. Second rocket carried gsfc payload to 84.6-km (52.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in mesosphere and stratosphere in Arctic after spring wind reversal and in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite. Payload deployed properly and on time and descended by parachute. Excellent ozone data were acquired. Third rocket carried experiment developed by Univ. of Michigan and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to 127-km (78.9-mi) altitude. Objective was to measure atomic oxygen distribution in mesosphere in proximity to ozone and grenade flights. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good atomic oxygen data were acquired. Fourth rocket carried 31-grenade gsfc payload to collect atmospheric data in support of ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound returns were recorded on ground. (NASA proj off)

June 30, 1972
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 122km (75.7-mi) altitude to study ion composition in D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Launch was fifth of six launches to study ionosphere under July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigation del Espacio (conie). (nasa Rpt SRL)

March 5, 1973
U.S.S.R. sounding rocket launchings, first step in joint Soviet-French meteorological studies, had begun from French Kerguelen Island, Tass reported. The first rocket had studied a vertical cross-section of the atmosphere over the island and reported temperature, pressure, and wind velocity in the upper atmosphere. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/9/73, LI) March 7:	Elements of the space shuttle preliminary bioresearch laboratory simulator had been delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. Equipment would be installed aboard the payload carrier simulator for testing. The bioresearch laboratory model, the first shuttle-era payload to be delivered for testing and integration at msfc, included a mass-measurement and microscopy unit, preparation unit, centrifuge, cryogenic freezer for storage of tissue, and an instrument for freeze-drying tissue, (msfc Release 73-31)

February 29, 1972
About 150 engineering students from universities in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, and Mississippi attended special Fluid and Thermal Engineering Seminar at Marshall Space Flight Center, held to acquaint them with hardware and system developments in fluid and thermal engineering related to their studies. Group included 22 foreign students representing 6 foreign countries, who were students at Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute, (msfc Release 72-21)

September 27, 1974
Facilities at Marshall Space Flight Center were being modified to consolidate Concept Verification Test (ctv) simulation in a central location. The CTV project would determine by testing in simulators whether concepts generated during definition studies for space activities, especially Spacelab experiments, were valid, before* commitments to proceed with final design and hardware fabrication, (msfc Release 74-178)

January 26, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Aerojet-General Corp., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Co., and United Technology Center to receive separate, two-month, $150 000 study contracts to analyze possible use of solid-fuel motors with 305- and 396-cm (120- and 156-in) diameters to power space shuttle booster. (msfc Release 72-4)

November 2, 1977
Marshall Space Flight Center director William R. Lucas announced that the teleoperator retrieval system project assigned by NASA to the center would be headed by John H. Harlow, who had been deputy manager of the Space Shuttle main engine project since 1976 and served previously as assistant manager in the Shuttle Projects Office. (MSFC Release 77-206)

February 22, 1978
Most important uses of Landsat data would correspond to three of the world’s major problems: energy supplies, food production, and global large-scale environment monitoring. Innovations in the multispectral scanner system (MSS) would permit detection of day and night temperature differences in vegetation, bodies of water, and urban areas. The return beam vidicon (RBV) sensor improvements would increase recorded image resolution by 50%. Areas as small as half an acre would be identified and studied. Landsat-C also carried a data-collection system (DCS) that would collect data radioed directly from as many as 1000 remote ground platforms and relay them to a Landsat data-acquisition station. The DCS would collect data on volcano activity, stream flow, water and snow depth, water temperature, and sediment density. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for project management of the Landsat spacecraft, Delta launch vehicle, NASA image-processing facility, and worldwide tracking network. KSC would supervise launch. General Electric Co.’s Space Division was Landsat spacecraft prime contractor. (NASA Release 78-22)

May 30, 1985
NASA announced it had selected Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Western Development Laboratories, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) that would include three spacecraft (GOES-1, J, and K) and a two spacecraft option (GOES-L and M). The contract had a proposed cost of $221 million and would provide for a series of GOES satellite systems, each with a five-year design life, that would contribute to continuation of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) GOES program in the 1990 to 2000 era. NASA had scheduled a late 1989 launch for the first GOES satellite in this new series. The contract statement of work covered the satellite bus; imaging, sounding, and space-environment monitor instruments; and flight-support equipment and services to accomplish deployment of the spacecraft into geosynchronous orbit from the Space Shuttle. The contract also included operations ground equipment and support to ensure compatibility of the spacecraft systems with established ground systems operated by NOAA. NASA assigned Goddard Space Flight Center responsibility for project management. (NASA Release 85-80)

January 28, 1964
Aerobee 300A vehicle launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 95-lb. instrumented payload to 192-mi. altitude in experiment to measure simultaneously electron and neutral particle temperatures in the upper atmosphere. Secondary objectives were to obtain data on ion and neutral particle densities. After 10%-min. flight, payload impacted 156 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Experiment was fourth in series of ionosphere studies, joint project of Univ. of Michigan and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-10)

May 8, 2007
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced the successful completion of subscale-main-injector hardware, an early step in the development of the RS-68 engine that would power the core stage of NASA’s Ares 5. Under the Constellation Program, Ares 5 would serve as NASA’s cargo launch vehicle, delivering large-scale hardware and systems to space, in support of NASA’s exploration missions to the Moon. MSFC engineers had conducted multiple hot-fire tests on the inject hardware, a major component of the engine. The hardware would inject and mix liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants in the engine’s combustion chamber, where they would ignite and burn to produce thrust. Because injector hardware for the RS-68 and the J-2X engine systems shared design features, engineers planned to use data collected during the tests to develop the J-2X engine systems for the upper stages of Ares 5 and for Ares 1, the crew launch vehicle (CLV) that would carry the Orion spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Completes Engine Hardware Tests for Ares V,” MSFC news release 07-053, 8 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/marshall/news/news/releases/2007/07-053.html (accessed 1 April 2010).)

August 28, 1975
A red-tide detection program had been approved by Goddard Space Flight Center and the Florida Department of Natural Resources (FDNR). Caused by an ocean-borne phytoplankton, Gymnodinium breve, “red tide” had left thousands of dead fish rotting on beaches in coastal estuaries. Ocean-color scanners—mounted on Landsat 1 and 2 (launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975) and on NASA’s U-2 research aircraft—could detect subtle color variations in coastal waters, to warn of changes in concentration and species of marine phytoplankton populations and indicate possible red-tide invasions. Research vessels would verify the findings by on-site sampling. Program managers hoped the data would lead to the development of an early warning system that would allow crews to combat effects of the red tide. (NASA Release 75— 242)

December 29, 1978
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)

August 27, 1962
Subcommittee on construction of President Kennedy’s Missile Sites Labor Commission conducted closed hearing on recent 10-day work stoppage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Although electricians and other construction workers had returned to work, the basic labor dispute—union members’ stopping work on vital U.S. missile and space projects because of employment of nonunion members—remained to be settled.

November 26, 1974
NASA and the National Science Foundation announced the award of two contracts of about $500 000 each to General Electric Co. Space Div. and Kaman Aerospace Corp. for preliminary design of very large wind systerns for generating electricity. Windmills from 100 to 3000 kw would be examined by each company in a project managed by Lewis Research Center for nsf as part of the program for Research Applied to National Needs (rann). A 100-kw system with vanes more than 37 m in dia, already under design and construction, would be erected at LeRc’s Plum Brook test area. (LeRC Release 74-73) During November: Marshall Space Flight Center awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $299 454 contract for the Spacelab Payload Utilization and Planning Study for the space transportation system, (msfc Release 74-243) December 1974

January 3, 1979
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that the five “payload specialists” selected last July to operate experiments on the first Spacelab mission in 1981 would begin training January 9 at seven cities in the United States and two in Canada. Selection and training of non-NASA scientists to fly in space was a “famous first” for NASA; the scientists chosen by their colleagues having experiments aboard the Spacelab would be the first noncareer astronauts and would include the first Western Europeans and the first non-U.S. citizens to fly on a U.S. space mission. Three payload specialists were Europeans: Ulf Merbold of West Germany, representing Max-Planck Institute of Stuttgart; Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, representing Europe’s Space Technology Center (ESTEC); and Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, representing Groenigen University. U.S. selectees were Michael L.	Lampton of the University of California at Berkeley and Byron K. Lichtenberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Since October 1978, the five had been in Europe learning to operate experiments designed by European scientists. Two of the selectees would actually fly on Spacelab 1, and the other three would operate the experiment equipment on earth. Spacelab 1 would carry 40 instruments, about equally divided between NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) experiments in terms of weight, volume, and power requirements; fields of investigation would include solar physics, space plasma physics, stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, earth observation, materials processing, and technology areas, such as thermodynamics and lubrication. After leaving MSFC, the trainees would visit Redondo Beach (Calif.), the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Philadelphia, Boston, and Montreal (Quebec) and Toronto (Ontario) in Canada; return to JSC in Houston; visit Palo Alto, Calif; and be back at MSFC in Huntsville on March 22. (MSFC Releases 79-1, 79-4)

December 16, 1962
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Michael E.	Lipschutz discovered diamonds in meteorite that fell in India 90 years ago, the findings published in Science. Dr. Lipschutz, an astrochemist, is first lieutenant in U.S. Army on active duty with nasa. His research was made with minute portion of the Dvalpur meteorite, which fell to earth May 8, 1872. Dr. Lip-scnutz observed two sizes of diamond crystallites in the meteorite—a few large crystals and many small ciystals. He concluded that diamonds in Dyalpur meteorite were formed by shock when meteorite’s parent body collided with another body in space. December 17: Although relay power supply remained low, Nutlev, N.J., ground station was able to obtain about 10 min. of usable telemetry data from the nasa satellite. Engineers were conducting intensive analysis of telemetry data in effort to diagnose cause of relay’s low battery voltage.

August 7, 1972
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission, to be U.S. representative at 16th session of General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency. Among alternates nominated was Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator. (PD, 8/14/72, 1225) August 8-9:	Skylab program managers reviewed design of mission’s experimental hardware with 11 high school student winners of NASA and National Science Teachers Assn, competition to propose experiments for 1973 Skylab mission [see July 20]. Students attending critical design reviews at Marshall Space Flight Center were those whose experiments required new scientific equipment, (nasa Release 72-161) August 9:	Army announced cancellation of controversial Lockheed AH-56A Cheyenne helicopter program and plans, subject to congressional approval, to develop new attack helicopter. Production contract for Cheyenne had been canceled in May 1969, after Lockheed failed to solve rotor problem. Since then firm had claimed progress in combating problem, Wall Street Journal later reported. (WSJ, 8/10/72, 3; Army pio)

March 28, 1963
nasa launched Saturn SA-4 in successful flight test from Cape Canaveral, the 1.3-million-lb.-thrust rocket reaching 77-mi. altitude in last of four successful tests of first stage alone. After 100 sec. of flight, one of the booster’s clustered eight engines was cut off by pre-set timer, and that engine’s propellants were rerouted to the other seven, which continued to burn. Experiment confirmed engine-out capability designed into the Saturn I vehicle system by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center engineers, (nasa Release 63-61)

April 25, 1968
Addressing Women’s National Democratic Club in Washington, D.C., Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “. . . we must not seriously impair or hamper our progress in space because we cannot foresee immediate payoffs to offset the investment we are making.” He urged that U.S. “come to grasp the unlimited opportunities and the promise of space exploration.” (Text; SBD, 4/26/68, 321; W Post, 4/26/68, C3)

March 17, 1965
First Saturn IB booster, the S-ib-1, was placed into a static test stand at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for scheduled static firings. Built by Chrysler Corp., the 1.6 million-lb.-thrust, 90,000-lb. booster contained eight engines, was 21 ft. in dia. and 80 ft. long. The stage would be shipped to NASA Michoud Operations for post-firing checks. (Marshall Star, 3/17/65, 1, 2)

August 11, 1965
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced it had selected four companies for feasibility studies for experiments in applications satellite technology. Contracts awarded were: Control Data Corp., $45,000 to examine a technique for determining a satellite’s orbit by using only spacecraft observation; Philco Corp., $50,000 to study a device capable of determining attitude of a spin-stabilized spacecraft from star measurements; Bell Aerospace Corp., $47,000 to study an electrostatic accelerometer which could provide information about the relative motion of a gravity gradient stabilized spacecraft; and Electro Optical Systems, Inc., $37,000 to study measuring of degradation of optical characteristics of materials in space. Studies should be completed in eight weeks, (csfc Release G-20-65)

December 18, 1964
NASA selected 14 firms for negotiation of contracts to provide engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of the Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would be in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program with cost estimated at $68 million for one year, (nasa Release 64-322)

August 4, 1993
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Jackson and Tull Chartered Engineers of Washington, D.C. for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for multidisciplinary research and development. (NASA Release C93-p)

April 3, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center began crafts apprentice program in which 20 persons would work at msfc and study at Calhoun Technical College in Decatur, Ala., during alternate periods, msfc would pay for books and tuition during college period and would pay wages for work done at Center. Participants in program would be predominantly veterans, with many from minority groups. They would be trained to become machinists, sheet metal workers, or electrical technicians. (Marshall Star, 3/29/72, 1; msfc pao)

June 8, 1965
Selection of Radiation, Inc., to negotiate a fixed-price contract for Pulse Code Modulation (Pern) Data Handling Equipment Systems was announced by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The proposed $1,700,000 contract would call for design, manufacture, and spare parts for 11 PCM systems, ( gsfc Release 6/14/65)

August 19, 1964
NASA GSFC-launched 201-ft.-diameter balloon carrying 160-lb. experiment package from Moberly, Mo., at sunrise. The balloon flew at altitude of about 24 mi. over 300-mi. course, ejecting its payload on signal about 12 hours after launch. The experiment package contained instruments to record and store data on cosmic rays in the earth’s magnetic field, data which would be used to help map radiation fields around the earth and in space. Experiment payload was designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center; the balloon was launched Under onr’s “Skyhook” balloon flight program, (gsfc Release G—22-64; AP, NYT, 8/19/64; K.C. Times, 8/20/64)

June 21, 1993
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)

March 22, 1973
NASA launched two sounding rockets, one from Alaska and one from White Sands Missile Range. A Nike-Tomahawk from Poker Flats, Alaska, carried a Goddard Space Flight Center magnetospheric physics experiment to a 233.2-km (144.9-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. An Aerobee 170A from White Sands carried a Massachusetts Institute of Technology x-ray astronomy experiment to a 184.3-km (114.5mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (gsfc proj off)

January 27, 1992
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)

December 23, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a two-phase planning study contract for the space transportation system (sts) to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Phase 1, funded at $116 214 for six months, would define a master scheduling concept for effective use of the space shuttle, interim upper stage, space tug, and Spacelab. Phase 2, funded at $183 240 for an additional nine months, would validate a master planning technique and establish specifications for scheduling. (msfc Release 74-242)

May 4, 1965
Aerobee sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station, Va. carried 317-lb. payload to 90-mi. altitude and impacted about 54 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the stellar spectroscopy experiment measured special radiation of two stars, Spica and Alkaid, utilizing an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer and an input telescope with a 13-in. aperture. Performance of a gimbaled star tracker and modified attitude control (Strap) was also tested. Data were telemetered to ground station during flight. (Wallops Release 65-26)

April 23, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he doubted that Russia has developed any new booster capability despite rumors that the Soviets are about ready to launch another “space spectacular.” (Dallas Morning News, 4/24/63)

January 9, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers John R. Rasquin and M. F. Estes had received copies of patent issued to NASA for Rasquin-Estes invention—adaptation of magnetomotive hammer to diamond-making process —MSFC announced. Hammer, developed for Saturn V program, had been used to remove distortions from rocket tank sections misshapen by welding. In process developed by Rasquin and Estes, hammer was mounted on copper plate atop hardened steel horn. Hammer created shock wave in horn with sufficient energy to produce pressure and temperature necessary to change graphite to diamonds. (MSFC Release 72-1)

July 16, 1987
NASA announced that it had chosen the final design for the Space Shuttle's new rockets. Also, the Agency declared it had resolved the problem of Challenger's leaking seals. Hot gasses escaped during launch and the seals failed to close properly because of cold weather. John Thomas, Manager of the rockets design team at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, stated that henceforth the oring seals would be heated in cold weather rather than constructed of new materials. He also said that the new design would contain three oring seals instead of two. Thomas emphasized that up to eight more test firings of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motor were planned before flights resume. (NY Times, July 17/87; W Post, July 17/87; W Times, July

October 23, 1964
Rep. Hale Boggs (D.-La.) asserted that top management personnel would be moved from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., to Michoud Operations, Louisiana, quoting NASA Administrator James E. Webb as saying that NASA was analyzing the situation. Mr. Webb told Huntsville Times of difficulties in hiring and keeping top executives for 766-598 0-65—24 the Alabama installation, added: “There’s nothing in this situation that can’t be corrected, but it has to be worked out.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/25/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/26/64)

December 18, 1985
measure the response of the GAS Bridge to the Space Shuttle environment during liftoff, orbit, and landing (GSFC). RCA developed the IR-IE infrared camera, and during the mission payload specialist Rober Cenker would supervise its operation to acquire radiometric information that appeared within the field of view of the self-contained optical system. RCA hoped it might photograph storms, volcanic activity, or other natural occurrences. Middeck payloads would include the Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP) [see Astronomy, Dec. 17], Initial Blood Storage Experiment (IBSE), Protein Crystal Growth (PC 6), and three student experiments. IBSE, funded by Johnson Space Center and led by the Center for Blood Research, would study blood storage and sedimentation characteristics in microgravity. Rep. Bill Nelson would assist with an experiment sponsored by the University of Alabama, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Comprehensive Cancer Center to try to grow crystal proteins in space for cancer research. There would be three Shuttle Student Involvement Project (SSIP) experiments on board Columbia. In the Measurement of Auxin Level and Starch Grains in Plant Roots experiment, bean plants would be grown and frozen in space. Researchers would analyze the plant roots after the flight for auxin location and concentration and correlation with statolith in the cells. The Air Injection as an Alternative To Honeycombing experiment would investigate the feasibility of producing a high stiffness, density ratio, low-weight casting with an internal framework. And the Study of Paper Fiber Formation in Microgravity experiment would further increase basic papermaking knowledge through a drainage study of paper fiber formation in microgravity and later comparison to this same formation on earth. NASA scheduled Columbia to land on the sixth day of the flight at KSC, the first landing there since mission 51-D on April 19, 1985. (NASA Release 85107; NASA FOR M-989-61-C [prelaunch] Dec 16/85; Spaceport News, Dec 6/85, 4; Goddard News, Dec 85, 1) Shuttle Orbiter

April 25, 1993
NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)

July 23, 1973
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Willie J. Usery, Jr., to be Federal Mediation and Conciliation Director. Before joining the Dept, of Labor, Usery had been special representative of the International Assn, of Machinists at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Test Facility, iam representative on the President’s Missile Sites Labor Committee at Kennedy Space Center and at Marshall Space Flight Center, and coordinator for union activities at Manned Spacecraft Center. He had helped to form the Cape Kennedy Labor-Management Relations Council in 1967 and had become its first Chairman in 1968. The nomination was confirmed March 29. (PD, 2/19/73, 154, 156; Usery Off) February 16:	Scientists at the State Univ. of New York had concluded the orange soil found on moon by Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Harrison H. Schmitt was billions of years older than first thought, the New York Times reported. The discovery had originally led the scientific community to believe the moon might have been volcanically active into geologically recent times, but Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer, Professor of Earth and Space Sciences at State Univ., had said, “It can now be reasonably stated that volcanism . . . ended about three billion years ago.” The team had tested the orange soil sample by potassium-argon dating. By measuring atomic properties, the soil had been found to be 3.71 billion yrs old. It was not known whether soil was of volcanic origin. (Rensberger, NYT, 2/16/73, 46)

December 8, 1964
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2 million contract to Motorola’s Western Military Electronics Div., to develop the Airborne Ranging Orbital Determination (arod) system. (M&R, 12/14/64, 21)

April 5, 1977
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $918 523 contract to T.H. Taylor Construction Co., Montgomery, Ala., for construction of permanent and semipermanent steel working platforms on the modified dynamic test stand. The stand would hold an entire Space Shuttle assembly during mated vertical ground-vibration tests scheduled for 1978. (MSFC Release 77-54)

November 21, 1973
NASA launched two sounding rockets. An Areas from Antigua, West Indies, carried a Goddard Space Flight Center meteorological experiment to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The launch was in conjunction with an overpass of the Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970), hut the mission was unsuccessful because of the rapid fall rate, caused by abnormal parachute performance, and because of the lack of radar track. (NASA Rpt SRL) An Aerobee 200A from White Sands Missile Range carried a Univ. of Hawaii solar physics experiment to a 228.4-km (141,9-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily but, because of failure of the solarpointing-attitude reaction control system, the experiment was unsuccessful. (gsfc proj off) November 24:	A Washington Post editorial criticized NASA’s dismissal of Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris [see Oct. 26]: “nasa has compiled a dismal record with respect to female and minority employment. Dr. Fletcher himself admits as much. The question is, what to do about it? Dr. Fletcher says that every effort is being made to correct the problem. By now NASA should have learned that institutionalized sexism and racism give way to neither simple pieties nor eloquent declarations of principle. Achieving equitable employment opportunities for women and minorities in large American institutions requires skill, determination and sustained effort, just as a successful space program does. That is a lesson for the 1970s that all major American institutions must learn if the tragedies of the 1960s are to be avoided in this country’s future.” (W Post, 11/24/73, A14)

August 1, 1974
A digital computing cardiotachometer developed for monitoring beattobeat heart rates of astronauts training underwater was being used in two Birmingham, Ala., hospitals, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The device, designed to operate with a standard electrocardiographic unit, employed an electronic digital system to use the time between two consecutive heart beats to calculate the patient’s pulse rate. A numerical display showed the subject’s pulse rate 0.3 sec after detecting his second heart beat, (msfc Release 74-140)

February 1, 1965
Sealed brushless DC motor, originally developed to power instrumentation on unmanned spacecraft, was selected for use in the Apollo two-man Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and the Gemini two-man spacecraft. The new motor utilized photo-optical detectors and transistorized switching elements which duplicated the functions of conventional brushes and commutator without physical contact of the rotating parts. Environmental tests had shown the brushless motor had a predicted operational life of one year. A barrier to DC motors had been the short life of conventional brushes in the space vacuum because of the lack of lubricating moisture necessary to prevent excessive friction. Motor was developed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center under contract with Sperry Farragut. (gsfc Release G—2—65)

June 12, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $5 986 930 contract modification to Chrysler Corp.’s Space Div. for stage and system engineering for the 1st stage of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Saturn IB launch vehicle. The modification, effective 1 May 1974 through 31 July 1975, brought the existing cost-plus-award-fee contract total to $64 455 696. (msfc Release 74-104)

June 30, 1975
NASA’s permanent employment level decreased by 521, or 2.1% during FY1975, NASA’s Office of Personnel reported in “The In-House Work Force.” Average age of NASA employees had risen 0.3 yr to age 43 and the average executive age fell 1.3 yr to age 49.6. Average grade of permanent employees remained at GS —11, constant since FY 1973. New hires and separations were down by 4.4 and 6.5%, respectively. Marshall Space Flight Center had had the only NASA reduction-in-force, resulting in 76 separations. The 62 intercenter professional transfers were down from 72 in FY 1974, and the 789 retirements were 30% below the FY 1974 level, although disability retirements continued to rise, totaling 220 in FY 1975—a 147% increase over FY 1970. (Off of Personnel Rpt, “The In-House Work Force,” 30 June 75)

February 25, 1994
NASA announced the selection of Raytheon Service Company, Burlington, Massachusetts, to provide logistics support to the Mission Operation and Data Systems Directorate at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-h)

September 2, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $4 409 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to Bendix Corp. for design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of integrated electronic assemblies (1EA) for Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters on the first six Shuttle developmental flights. Each booster would require two IEAs: The forward IEA would initiate release of the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket-motor nozzle, detach the parachute, and turn on recovery aids. The aft IEA would interface with the Orbiter, the forward IEA, and other avionic systems. Delivery of the IEAs would begin in 1976 and continue through 1 Apr. 1979. (MSFC Release 75 — 190)

April 26, 1974
Data from Pioneer 10, launched 2 March 1972 toward a 3 Dec. 1973 encounter with Jupiter, had indicated that sulfur was one possible element in the surface composition of Jupiter’s moon Io, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Scientists at msfc had studied the reflective properties of Io and concluded that sulfur was one of the few materials that could have the high reflectivity and strong absorption features observed. The theory would be tested by measuring the changes in reflectivity of sulfur at different wavelengths and temperatures and observing the reflectivity change of Io in the fall when Jupiter would be in the evening sky. (msfc Release 74-72)

October 19, 1994
The Analytic Sciences Corporation (TASC) signed a three-year cooperative agreement with NASA to make NASA's space and Earth science data available to elementary school students and their teachers over the Internet. TASC was scheduled to work with the staff at Franconia Elementary School in Fairfax County, Virginia, to design and develop software allowing kindergarten through 6th grade students to access NASA's vast remote sensing weather data. Fritz Hasler, manager of the project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said that the project should not only help students learn about the weather but also improve their knowledge of the information highway. (PR Newswire, Oct 19/94)

May 6, 1972
NASA officials met with 25 national winners in Skylab student project competition at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss design of students’ space experiments and demonstrations. During visit students toured msfc laboratories and Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (nasa Release 72-94; msfc pao) May 9:	Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) said in Washington, D.C., that arguments for space shuttle development had become “classic case of bureaucratic deception and waste.” He would offer amendment to cut off all shuttle funds. (NYT, 5/11/72)

July 2, 1975
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived at its new operating station at 35° east longitude over equatorial East Africa where it would relay communications from the docked Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft during the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Upon completion of ASTP, Ats 6 would be used by India to transmit educational TV programs to several thousand remote villages. The satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one of the three momentum wheels used to control spacecraft attitude. A group of hydrazine gas thrusters was being used as a backup system for stabilization while ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center were analyzing the problem and developing remedies. (NASA Release 75 — 194)

August 29, 1985
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)

July 3, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it awarded a three-year, $35,181,700 contract to the Space Transportation Systems Division of Rockwell International for Space Shuttle systems integration work at MSFC, Kennedy Space Center, and Vandenberg Air Force Base. The contract called for provision of management, personnel, equipment, materials, and resources from July 1, 1985 to June 30, 1988. (MSFC Release 85-34)

November 12, 1972
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)

May 13, 1974
An experimental scanning laser doppler system, originally developed at Marshall Space Flight Center to measure atmospheric winds and turbulence, was being tested at msfc to determine the system’s reliability in detecting and monitoring aircraft wake vortices. Flyby tests had been conducted by msfc and the Federal Aviation Administration at Redstone Arsenal using a Boeing Co. 720 aircraft and two laser doppler units. Early results indicated that, in addition to detecting the vortices, the laser doppler system provided data on the air speeds within them. Two experimental systems would be used in field tests at Kennedy International Airport in New York after checkout of the units was completed. (nasa Release 74-127)

July 15, 1965
The first close-up picture of Mars transmitted by NASA’s mariner IV in an eight-hour broadcast over a distance of 134 million mi. clearly showed the edge of the planet. Transmitted to earth as a series of 5 million radio signals representing zeroes and ones, the picture was received at the Madrid and Johannesburg tracking stations and relayed to jpl. A jpl computer reconstructed the digits to produce images consisting of a series of dots of varying darkness. With transmission at 8.3 dots a second, 8/4 hrs. were required to receive the photograph. The photo sequence began when the bright edge, or limb, of Mars was seen by a light sensor which triggered MARINER iv’s magnetic tape recorder. Initial information came from an experimental device called a “cluge” which built up a rough pattern of the photo on a monitor screen as it was relayed from the tracking stations to jpl. Taken at a low angle with an oblique view, the first photograph did not show the detail expected in later photographs. At a news conference at jpl, Dr. J. A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa, said that during its Mars flyby, mariner iv had discovered with a variety of detectors that Mars had little or no magnetic field and, therefore, no radiation belts. This would indicate that the planet lacks a liquid core and thus differs basically from earth. Lack of a metallic core, liquid or solid, would be evidence that the planet never went through the churning internal processes that gave the earth its layered structure. Mars would not have continents formed of lightweight rocks and ocean basins underlain with basaltic rock as found on earth. W. M. Alexander, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explained that there was no evidence of a belt or unusual concentration of cosmic dust around the planet, nor, pointed out Dr. H. S. Bridge, mit, was there any evidence of a shock wave caused by solar wind flowing across the planet. The solar wind was the steady outflow of thin, hot, high-velocity gas from the sun. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, when questioned by newsmen on the possibility of higher life existing on Mars, pointed out that the absence of a magnetic field indicated the planet’s atmosphere was hit with all types of radiation and the existence of life would depend on how deep the atmosphere was and the extent of radiation that reached the surface. Asked if he were discouraged about the possibility of finding life on the planet, Dr. Pickering replied: “No, I have always felt we will find some sort of life on Mars.” Dr. Pickering pointed out that one explanation for the reddish hue of Mars might be the presence of limonite, an iron oxide. This would suggest that iron was uniformly spread through the planet rather than being largely concentrated in the core, as on earth. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 1/16/65, 1, 10; Miles, Wash. Post, 7/16/65, A1,A3; Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/65,1, 6)

March 15, 1975
Helios 1, the U.S.—West German solar probe launched 10 Dec. 1974, passed within 0.309 AU (46 million km) of the sun at 5:13 am EDT, closer than any previous spacecraft had come to the sun. During the perihelion, while traveling at 238 000 km per hr, Helios 1 measured the solar wind, magnetic fields, solar and galactic cosmic rays, electromagnetic waves, micrometeoroids, and zodiacal light. Although the spacecraft encountered a heat load from the sun 10.5 times that encountered on earth, good data were obtained and the spacecraft continued to operate well. Helios 1 was in a solar elliptical orbit with a 0.985—AU aphelion, 0.3095—AU perihelion, 190.15-day period, and 0.02° inclination. It would reach a second perihelion 21 Sept. Helios 1, built by West Germany in cooperation with the U.S., carried 10 experiments, 7 of them West German. Spacecraft operations were controlled from the space operations center near Munich. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for U.S. participation. A second spacecraft, Helios—B, was scheduled for launch in early 1976. (NASAMORs 16 Jan 76,11 April 76; Powers, GSFC Helios thermal control mgr, interview, 21 Sept 76)

January 14, 1994
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)

April 17, 1961
Construction of dynamic test stand for Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center.

November 14, 1988
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)

July 26, 1973
Skylab science and medical briefings were held by NASA at Johnson Space Center. Results from the first Orbital Workshop mission, Skylab 1—2 (launched May 14 and May 25), were discussed and science plans for the Skylab 3 mission, scheduled for launch July 28, were announced. At an Apollo Telescope Mount briefing Dr. Robert A. MacQueen, a Skylab principal investigator and High Altitude Observatory scientist, said that a first look at available data indicated that the objectives—■ to examine the solar corona on a regular basis, deduce the threedimensional structure and geometry of the corona, understand the evolution of the corona and its relationship to the solar disk, and understand the outflow of the solar wind from the corona—would be met. The most important conclusion drawn was that “in appearance the corona is now a less dynamic subject than other solar phenomena.” Dr. Edward M. Reeves, Harvard College Observatory scientist, said that an ATM scanner had observed “velocity changes in whole large areas of the Sun in lines of the transition region and the corona which have never before been seen in this part of the spectrum.” At the medical science briefing, Dr. Michael W. Whittle, Principal Coordinating Scientist, said that the weight losses of the three Skylab 2 astronauts—1.8 kg (4 lbs) for Charles Conrad, Jr., 2.7 kg (6 lbs) for Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and 3.6 kg (8 lbs) for Paul J. Weitz—were “pure and simple adaptation to weightlessness. . . . Increased nitrogen, calcium, and phosphorus, the major constituents of muscle tissue, had appeared in the urine and indicated the muscle loss. Dr. Stephen L. Kimsey, a Skylab principal investigator, said that experiments had shown “no abnormal changes in red cell metabolism” in amount of energy stored, change in the integrity of the cell membrane, or change in the red cells’ ability to transfer oxygen from the lungs to the tissue. Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, earth resources experiment package project scientist, said during an erep briefing that the objective of mapping the depression of the sea surface of the Puerto Rican trench using altimeter data had been met. At a briefing on the corollary experiments Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Associate Director for Science at Marshall Space Flight Center, said that the materials processing and welding experiments would help verify methods of construction and assembly in weightless conditions. Among the first things built in space might be a reflector for microwavq energy, to transmit large amounts of energy from one point of the earth to another. A reflector of the size needed could not be launched in one piece but would have to be assembled in space. Dr. Robert A. Parker, astronaut and Skylab program scientist, said new experiments that would be flown on Skylab 3 included a vehicle disturbance experiment; a survey of celestial sources of x-rays; two circadian rhythm experiments, one with vinegar gnats and the other with desert mice; movement tests of astronauts with two different extravehicular activity backpacks; a gallium arsenide crystal growth experiment; observation of cellular mechanisms and metabolism in zero g; observations of the earth’s ozone and airglow in the upper atmosphere; the collection of micrometeoroids; and an evaluation of the spectral capability of the human eye while observing earth resources from space. (Transcripts)

March 1, 1993
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)

October 7, 1975
Dr. William R. Lucas, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, announced the establishment of an advanced mineral-extraction task team within the Program Development Directorate. Working with the Dept, of Interior’s Bureau of Mines, the team would use NASA expertise and technology to increase the nation’s ability to extract energy and minerals at acceptable cost and with minimum effect on the environment. One of NASA’s first tasks would be to improve the efficiency of the long-wall shearer—a coal-removing machine used by miners that could leave a foot or more of unrecoverable coal along the edges of a vein—by using sensors, remote controls, and TV monitors to guide the machine. (MSFC Release 75—215)

April 26, 1974
Wallops Station, Wallops Island, Va., was renamed Wallops Flight Center to describe its mission and operations more accurately. The Center had responsibility for development and launch of scientific payloads, using boosters ranging from the small Areas to the four-stage, solid-propellant Scout. The installation had been established in 1945 as the Pilotless Aircraft Research Station of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and had served as a base for launching small rockets. After NASA had been established in 1958, it became known as Wallops Station and assumed an expanded mission in support of space flight programs. (nasa Ann, 25 April 74)

April 18, 1963
nasa launched 85-lb. scientific payload to 208-mi. altitude at exact moment explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite passed over the Wallops Island, Va., launch site, an unusual “first” in nasa sounding rocket program. Launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket, experiment obtained temperature data on electron and neutral particles and measured ion and neutral particle densities. Data from this experiment would be compared with similar data obtained from explorer xvn as it passed over Wallops Island at 198-mi. altitude during its 236th orbit of earth. Miss distance was 35,000 yards. Preliminary evaluation by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientists indicated data were of excellent quality. (Wallops Release 63-40; Av. Wk., 5/6/63, 21)

July 6, 1972
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 85-km (52.8-mi) altitude to study ion composition of D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily except for short tone-ranging data dropout which was not expected to affect scientific results. Good data were obtained. Launch was made under April 21, 1972, modification of July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) for cooperative sounding rocket project to study ionosphere, (nasa Rpt srl)

April 6, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a contract to Ivey’s Plumbing and Electrical Co. of Kosciusko, Miss., for construction of a test facility at MSFC for the solar heating and cooling development program MSFC is directing for the Energy Research and Development Administration. The $647,243 contract was awarded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which would monitor construction activities; completion date set by the contract was 1 Nov. 1976. The facility would be located in an area formerly used as a swing-arm test facility for Saturn; data-acquisition equipment—instrument terminals and cabling from pad to blockhouse—used for Saturn would be available for the heating and cooling tests. The facility would consist of 4 test areas, 2 designed for complete system or subsystem tests; a third would be used to test liquid energy storage subsystems, and the fourth for passively testing solar collectors. A solar simulator constructed in a nearby building would be linked to the test facility for data collection. Subsystems and components to be tested would include solar collectors, thermal-energy storage equipment, and solar heating and cooling devices. Testing the hardware against predetermined performance standards would produce data for input to analytical programs; the analyses in turn would be used to evaluate total systems performance under environmental conditions other than those simulated during tests. Components of the facility—heat exchangers, cooling towers, chillers, fans, pumps, and control valves—would be arranged to permit maximum flexibility for future modifications and use of other test positions or procedures. (MSFC Release 76-59)

March 16, 2000
NASA dedicated a new aerospace laboratory at Anne Beers Elementary School in Washington, DC, featuring a simulated Shuttle cockpit and Mission Control Center. NASA had named the facility, designed to encourage student interest in space exploration, for U.S. Representative Louis Stokes (D-OH), who had proposed legislation to fund the endeavor in 1998. NASA’s GRC and Goddard Space Flight Center had worked with the Orchard Glenn School of Cleveland, Ohio, and the University of the District of Columbia to construct the innovative facility.(NASA, “Aerospace Laboratory Encourages Students To Reach for the Stars with NASA Help,” news release m00-051, 15 March 2000.)

January 7, 1994
Intermetrics, Inc., of McLean, VA, was awarded an $81 million, 10-year contract as part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. It provide Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of the Earth-Observing system (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), for the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland. EOS was projected to generate about 1 trillion bytes of new data per day, offering access to data on the Earth's ecosystem, permitting scientists to distinguish natural from human-made changes. (NASA Release C94-b)

February 3, 1972
Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) flight unit was being readied for threemonth, post-manufacturing checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center. ATM would be moved in May from Quality and Reliability Assurance Laboratory to Astronautics Laboratory for vibration tests and would be delivered to Manned Spacecraft Center June 1 for thermal and vacuum tests, atm would be launched on first Skylab mission in 1973. Series of preliminary Skylab experiment planning simulations was being conducted by flight controllers, flight planners, and other experts at MSC. Purpose of simulations was to exercise basic plans and procedures necessary before detailed simulations with Skylab team could begin, (msfc Release 72-8; MSC Release 72-32)

January 13, 1963
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced sodium-vapor cloud experiments by Goddard during past two years had shown wind behavior 44—50 mi. above earth becomes erratic and unpredictable. Below that altitude, winds generally follow global pattern, regularly reversing with the seasons. Region between 56- and 68-mi. altitudes is characterized by “remarkable wind sheers”—within altitude span of less than three miles, wind speed was observed to increase swiftly by more than 250 mph and even to reverse direction. Immediately above this band of maximum wind velocity, wind diminishes almost to zero. Above 70 mi., research indicated region of “strong but more uniform winds” with velocities of about 200 mph. Goddard experiments, launched on sounding rockets from nasa Wallops Station, did not extend beyond 105-mi. altitude. (Goddard Release; AP, Wash. Post, 1/13/63, A16)

December 8, 1986
Because the ocean surface mirrors the ocean floor as gravity pulls water down into depressions and forces it up around the mountains (looking north from Puerto Rico, for example, the ocean surface drops nearly 60 feet), scientists at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, employed satellites to map the ocean's floor. Data taken from altimeters on the Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and the Sea Satellite were used to generate a computer image of the ocean surface, reflecting the Earth's structure underneath the water. The data, said Dr. James Marsh, also increased knowledge of circulation and current systems. (NASA Release 86172) 'H0*December 9: Fortynine research proposals from 45 small, high technology U.S. firms, totaling about $23 million, were selected for immediate negotiation of Phase II contract awards. These proposals were chosen from 100 submitted to the Small Business Innovation Research program, a program designed to strengthen the role of small business participation in Federal research and development and contribute to the growth and strength of the private sector. (NASA Release 86174)

May 20, 1965
Ground test version of the Saturn V booster (s-IC-t) was fired by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for 41 sec., msfc announced. It was the third and longest firing of the five engines, which developed 7.5 million lbs. thrust. The firing seemed entirely satisfactory, based on preliminary evaluation of data, (msfc Release 65-131)

July 4, 1963
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced study contract award to Sjlace Technology Laboratories, with objective of identifying and defining essential design requirements for an operational nuclear space propulsion system in the 1970’s. Study would be based on Saturn V or Nova-class first-stage booster, msfc also let conceptual design studies to Douglas Aircraft Co. and General Dynamics/Astronautics for parallel studies of launch vehicles having chemical-propulsion first stages and nuclear-propulsion upper stages, to be used in mid-1970’s. Chemical-nuclear rocket configuration would have one-million-lb. orbital capability. (Huntsville Times, 7/4/63; S-pace Bus. Dally, 7/8/63, 33)

March 7, 1961
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Chance Vought Corp. to build 42 fuel and liquid oxygen tanks for the Saturn booster program.

June 18, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $69 316 six-month contract to International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. ITT Gilfillan Div. to analyze a two-way optical data link, using laser beams and operating between the ground and payloads in low earth orbit. The study, which could lead to a laser communications system for the space shuttle, was expected to provide information on the most effective lasers and frequencies and the effects of orbital dynamics, (msfc Release 74-105)

November 5, 1976
NASA Hq announced that Robert S. Kraemer, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, would become special assistant to Dr. Robert S. Cooper, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, working on the applications missions of the center. Kraemer had been at NASA Hq for 9 yr, 6 of them in his current position. (NASA Hq. special anno., 5 Nov 76)

June 3, 1985
A fire of unknown cause today destroyed one of the four buildings used to mix rocket solid fuels for the Space Shuttle at Morton Thiokol's rocket motor assembly plant outside Brigham City, Utah, the Washington Post reported. No one was injured in the fire that leveled a 400-sq.-ft. building operated largely by robots at a remote part of the Thiokol plant. Because three of the four fuel mixing plants at Thiokol were needed at all times to maintain solid-fuel rocket motor production schedules, NASA said it was concerned enough to send an accident review board team from Marshall Space flight Center to investigate. (IV Post, June 5/85, A5)

March 1, 1990
Telescopes for NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft were delivered to the Goddard Space Flight Center for integration into a payload module scheduled for launch in August0*1991. The science payload was designed, built, and tested at the University of California, Berkeley, to focus on the study of an unexplored portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called the extreme ultraviolet, between the Xray and ultraviolet wavelengths. (NASA Release 9034)

January 7, 1991
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)

September 26, 1972
NASA launched Astrobee F sounding rocket from Wallops Station, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

January 16, 1973
Appointment of Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.) as Program Director of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was announced by NASA. Lee, Apollo Mission Director for Apollo 12 through 17, would be responsible for direction of the U.S. astp effort, including management of the spacecraft and docking module, flight and crew operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, launch vehicle operations at Marshall Space Flight Center, and launch operations at Kennedy Space Center, (nasa Release 73-5)

December 4, 1962
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, one from Wallops Island, Va., and one from Ft. Churchill, Canada, for purpose of comparing data on wind and temperatures in upper atmosphere. Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 69-mi. altitude and ejected 12 high-explosive grenades which detonated on schedule; ground instrumentation measured sound energy from exploding grenades and recorded rocket position during flight. Nike-Cajun from Wallops Island performed unsatisfactorily, reaching altitude of only 31.8 mi. instead of 69 mi. predicted; only two grenade explosions were observed.

August 12, 1963
Goddard Space Flight Center engineers directed radio signal sent from Lakehurst, N.J., to stncom ii communications satellite 22,000 mi. in space, signaling hydrogen peroxide jets onboard to fire and slow satellite’s drift westward from rate of about 7° to about 2° per day. With aid of additional maneuvers signaled from ground, syncom ii was expected to attain synchronous orbit within three days, appearing to hover over 55° west position and prescribing figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator. (AP, AFT7, 8/12/63)

July 23, 1973
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket—first in a series of two—from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 58.1-km (36.1-mi) altitude. The objectives were to measure the ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption for the evaluation of the Nimbus 4 (meteorological satellite launched April 8, 1970) backscatter uv experiment, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The rocket was launched during a Nimbus 4 overpass. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl)

February 28, 1963
nasa Director of Meteorological Systems Morris Tepper told House Committee on Scieiice and Astronautics that tiros v and tiros vi (launched in June and Sept. 1962 respectively) were still providing good data. Tiros data “continue to be used by the Weather Bureau for weather analysis and forecasting, storm tracking, hurricane reconnaissance, etc. The Weather Bureau disseminates its analyses and warnings widely .... “The Meteorological Soundings project has continued throughout the year as planned. The project at Goddard Space Flight Center which utilizes the larger meteorological sounding rockets continues as it has in past years with excellent results. In addition, we have initiated at the Langley Research Center a project which will develop and utilize the smaller meteorological sounding rockets. We expect to have this well underway by the end of this Fiscal Year . . . .” (Testimony)

March 5, 1973
President Nixon congratulated recipients of the 1973 Federal Women’s Award at the White House. Among the recipients was Marjorie R. Townsend, Project Manager, Small Astronomy Satellite, Goddard Space Flight Center [see Feb. 22], (PD, 3/12/73, 233)

August 5, 1972
Reorganization of Marshall Space Flight Center, announced June 30, was implemented, (msfc Release 72-98)

February 3, 1972
Ultrasonic wrench developed by NASA to connect tubing in Saturn boosters was available to private industry for possible commercial use, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Wrench induced flexuous vibrations in nut being tightened and guaranteed calibrated tension. It could be used by industry on conventional nuts and bolts, which could replace expensive lock nuts and bolts that changed color as tension increased. Ultrasonic tightening also could remove normal friction forces and ensure proper tension by preselected torque dial, (msfc Release 72-10)

March 15, 1991
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)

December 7, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists would evaluate two H—10 atomic hydrogen maser clocks for possible use in high-precision satellite tracking as well as experiments testing Einstein’s prediction of the effect of gravity on time. The clocks were developed by the Quantum Electronic Devices activity of Varian Associates and would use the natural oscillation resulting from the interaction of the proton and the electron in the hydrogen atom. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)

March 17, 1975
NASA announced the award of a $334 100 contract for the design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of an optical bench and alignment system for an x-ray telescope test facility at Marshall Space Flight Center. The facility would be used to test x-ray verification and to calibrate x-ray mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program. The HEAO program was to launch between 1977 and 1979 three unmanned scientific satellites into low circular earth orbit to study black holes, neutron stars, quasars, and supernovae. (MSFC Release 75— 50)

March 31, 1963
Army Transportation Corps loaned 20 sea-going barges to nasa for use in space vehicle development program. Barges would be used initially for transporting supplies from Marshall Space Flight Center to Mississippi Test Operations; later, they would be fitted with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen tanks to store the propellants for fueling Saturn S-IC static-test boosters. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)

February 24, 1976
Pure carbon materials originally developed as ablative heatshields on the Apollo spacecraft were being used at medical centers across the U.S. in research on artificial limbs and implants in human tissue. The inert tendencies and high degree of purity exhibited by the carbon materials made them suitable for implantation without causing infection or rejection. Northwestern Univ. in 111. and the Rancho Los Amigos hospital center run by the Univ. of Southern Calif, at Los Angeles had studied the materials in skeletal fixation devices that used carbon-button implants to connect the devices to nerves. Other projects included carbon implants to control pain (especially in the lower back) and neuroelectric stimulators to relax contracted muscles in paralyzed patients. Much of the technology used in purifying the carbon materials originated at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. (MSFC Release 76-45)

November 30, 1964
The House Science and Astronautics Committee Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development made recommendations to equalize the national distribution of Federal research and development funds: that additional funds be budgeted to the National Science Foundation to ensure at least one major center of excellence in research and technology in each appropriate region of the nation; that dod and NASA emphasize building new centers of science and technology when existing facilities in research-concentrated areas become obsolescent. The Subcommittee also called for the White House to convene a Government-industry conference to study such problems. (M&R, 11/16/64,11) During November: A team from Lockheed Propulsion Co. visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to brief scientists there on possible use of 156-in. solid motor as a strap-on for the first stage of both Saturn IB and Saturn V. (M&R, 11/23/64, 7)

April 27, 1978
NASA announced successful launch Apr. 26 from Vandenberg AFB on a Scout of the first spacecraft built to measure variations in the earth’s temperature, the heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM). The experimental satellite had assumed a circular sun-synchronous 620km (385mi) orbit to measure areas of the earth’s surface for maximum temperatures, then to measure minimum temperatures of those same areas about llhr later. A 2-channel scanning radiometer would acquire images in the visible and near-infrared spectrum during the day, and in the thermal-infrared spectrum both day and night. Data resolution of the 2 channels would be about 0.5 X 0.5km (1800ft) as the spacecraft covered a 700km (435mi)-wide swath. Project officials said the position of the 3001b satellite in orbit was “almost perfect. If all goes well, we could take a picture of the earth in the visible spectrum as early as tomorrow.” HCMM was first in a series of low-cost modular spacecraft built for the Applications Explorer Missions (AEM) — small, experimental spacecraft in special orbits to satisfy mission-unique experimental data-acquisition requirements. Scientists designed the mission to determine the feasibility of using day-night thermal-infrared remote sensor-derived data to detect various rock types and mineral resources; monitor surface soil-moisture changes; measure plant-canopy temperatures at frequent intervals to detect transpiration of water and plant stress; measure urban heat islands; map surface-temperature changes on land and water bodies; and analyze snow fields to predict water runoff. HCMM data, correlated with data from other satellites (especially Landsat) and from ground observations, could aid in detecting time variations of temperatures on the earth’s surface. Goddard Space Flight Center had been responsible for design, integration, and testing of the satellite and for data processing. Boeing Aerospace Co. had built the base module, International Telephone and Telegraph the instrument. (NASA Release 78-60; MOR E-651-78-01 [prelaunch] Apr 19/78; NYT, Apr 27/78)

September 19, 1967
Fabrication of five S—IIs (Saturn V’s 2nd stage) would be accomplished under a contract modification awarded by NASA to North American Aviation, Inc. Purchase of the five stages would complete the S-II requirement for the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles currently approved for development as a part of the Apollo program. The first of the stages would be delivered to nasa in Feb. 1969. The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., managed the Saturn program, (nasa Release 67-244)

December 27, 1985
NASA announced that its Administrator selected Dr. Charles Chappell of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Dr. Dirk Frimout of the European Space Agency (ESA) to serve as alternate payload specialists for the first Earth Observation Mission (EOM), which would use the Spacelab scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis in the latter half of 1986. Chappell and Frimout would serve as backups to flight payload specialists Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and his alternate, Dr. Michael Lampton. Chappell was chief of the Solar Terrestrial Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC and was responsible for directing a research group that studied the physics of the sun-earth environment. He served as mission scientist for the 10-day Spacelab 1 mission, during which 70 investigations were carried out. Frimout was the senior engineer supporting European researchers who would have experiments on the mission, and he had served as ESA crew coordinator and operations manager for Spacelab 1. Chappell and Frimout would train with the flight crew and serve as members of the mission management team in the Payload Operations Control Center during the flight. They would communicate directly with the crew on orbit, assist the payload operations team during normal operations, and aid in trouble shooting problems and in changing crew procedures when necessary. They would also advise the mission scientist, Dr. Marsha Torr, of the possible impact of problems and timeline changes. The EOM flight was the first in a series of Space Shuttle missions primarily dedicated to measuring solar irradiance and the chemical composition of the earth's stratosphere and mesosphere during an 11-year solar cycle. NASA would refly several instruments originally carried on the Spacelab 1 and 3 missions to accomplish these measurements. The mission would use the short version of the Spacelab module, in which a single Spacelab pallet and special support structure would hold instruments that required exposure to the space environment. The mission would consist of 15 experiments conducted in six disciplines—atmospheric science, solar physics, plasma physics, earth resources, astronomy, and life sciences. The international mission included experiments sponsored by Belgium, France, Japan, Federal Republic of Germany, and the U.S. ESA would provide operations support for the European investigations. The Investigators Working Group (IWG), which consisted of the principal investigator for each of the mission experiments, recommended alternate payload specialist candidates for selection by NASA's administrator. (NASA Release 85-179) External Tank November 27r The U.S. Senate awarded Martin Marietta Corp. the United States Senate Productivity Award for the state of Louisiana for manufacturing improvements and costs savings in production of the Space Shuttle's external tank, Defense Daily reported. The Senate cited the company for its innovative across-the-board productivity program that included plant modernization, installation of automated production processes, and development of an employee participation program that led to a number of improvements in the manufacturing process. "Estimates are that this increased productivity will save NASA and ultimately the American taxpayer more than a billion dollars over the long run," said Louisiana Senators J. Bennett lohnston (D) and Russell Long (D) in a joint statement. The two also cited the "flawless performance" of the tanks in Space Shuttle missions to date. (D/D, Nov 27/85, 142) Launch and Landing Facilities

July 9, 1991
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)

February 14, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a 10-mo $149 325 contract to Econ, Inc., to study the technical and economic feasibility of two different solar power plants, both in space and on the ground, and compare them with conventional terrestrial plants expected to exist ift the future. The first system was an orbiting system which would generate electrical power from the sun and transmit it to industries and cities on earth. A second kind of solar-power generating system, located on a remote area of the earth, could transfer power via an earth-orbiting satellite to users thousands of kilometers away. Econ, Inc., would use results from earlier concept studies to define requirements for payload packaging, development and checkout, and resupply for launch on the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—37)

June 24, 1998
Controllers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), “activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun.” Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHO’s mission was to track “major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space.” The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Sun’s atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted,” news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears It’s Lost,” USA Today, 29 June 1998.)

April 12, 1994
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)

March 8, 1965
In first Pacific Ocean sounding rocket experiment from nasa’s Mobile Range Facility, two two-stage Nike-Apaches were launched from USNS Croatan about one mile north of the equator at 84° west longitude. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the mission of first tocket was to measure ionospheric currents and magnetic fields in “equatorial electrojet,” a system of electrical current circulating in ionosphere in the region of magnetic equator which could be responsible for intensifying equatorial magnetic field at about local noon. Second Nike-Apache, conducting an experiment for Univ. of Michigan, was launched about 2 hrs. later carrying Pitot-static probe to measure pressure, temperature, and density in the region of 20 to 75 mi. altitude. (NASA Release 65-82; Wallops Release 65-12; NASA Rpts. srl)

October 14, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced scheduling of further tests in October for prototype cloud-physics experiment hardware to be flown on the Space Shuttle to help researchers understand microphysical processes occurring in the atmosphere. The experiments would develop techniques for accurate prediction and control of weather (increase of snowfall or rain, dissipation of fog, suppression of lightning) to improve man’s environment. The Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) being developed by MSFC would use the low or zero gravity during Shuttle/Spacelab flights to perform experiments without contamination by supporting devices—wires, spider webs, blasts of air or electrical fields—used for test objects in earth laboratories. The prototype equipment was being tested in weightless periods provided by parabolic flights in the Johnson Space Center’s zero-gravity test aircraft. 0. H. Vaughn of the Aerospace Environment Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC, had been monitoring performance of the equipment during flights that began in September. (MSFC Release 76-186)

March 31, 1974
NASA submitted its report NASA Energy-Related Research and Development to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, at the request of its chairman, Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah), nasa’s FY 1974 budget had included a $2-million authorization for energy r&d for projects in solar energy utilization; energy conversion, transmission, and storage; transportation and propulsion systems; and energy and environmental conservation. Long-range research included studies of satellite systems to collect solar energy, convert it to electricity, and transmit it to the earth by microwave beams. In one study the use of solar cells would be considered, while in another the possibility of a turbogenerator in space would be explored. Near-term projects included demonstration of residential solar heating and cooling at Marshall Space Flight Center, office building tests at Langley Research Center, and component studies at Lewis Research Center. LeRC was also sponsoring a study of crops that could be converted into clean fuels, and a NASA-National Science Foundation study was testing wind-electric generating devices. Projects at Jet Propulsion Laboratory and LeRC sought to design low-polluting but higher efficiency automobile engines, and Flight Research Center was testing configuration changes to reduce aerodynamic drag for trucks. Energy conversion research included an LeRC study, in cooperation with the Dept, of Interior, of technical and economic advantages of a potassium topping cycle to permit higher peak cycle temperatures and produce 40% more electrical power for a given quantity of fuel than could conventional steam systems. (Com Print)

April 16, 1963
Saturn I ground test booster arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day trip from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. It would be used with S-IV stage in series of tests to check out the launch complex. (Huntsville Times, 4/16/63)

June 17, 1985
NASA launched today from KSC Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-G with a crew of seven, including Saudi Prince Sultan Salman A1-Saud and Patrick Baudry from France, for the 18th Space Shuttle flight, the Washington Post reported. Earlier NASA had announced that mission 51-G would carry the automated directional solidification furnace (ADSF), Spartan 1, and the French echocardiograph (FEE) and posture (FPE) experiments. The objective of the ADSF was to provide a technology demonstration of the capability of the equipment to perform directional solidification of a magnetic composite material and to study the role of gravity-driven phenomena in such processing. The apparatus used for the directional solidification experiments was a specially designed furnace that melted a sample contained in a quartz tube one cm in diameter and 35 cm long. A furnace module (a heater with an integral quench block) moved along the four tubes in the experiment so that the manganese-bismuth alloy samples melted and solidified at a controlled rate. Electric resistance provided the heat; the quench block was liquid cooled. In that first flight, all four samples were the same alloy with only the solidification rate changed to allow a better understanding of that aspect of the process. Spartan 1 was the first of a continuing series of low-cost free flyers designed to extend sounding rocket experiment capabilities. The Spartan 1 objective was to map the X-ray emissions from the Perseus Cluster, the nuclear region of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Scorpius X-2 (SCO-X-2). NASA had flown the Spartan 1 instrument several times on sounding rockets; the resulting information led to the need to obtain greater viewing time of the selected targets, thus permitting more detailed studies with greater resolutions. The crew would deploy the Spartan 1 from the Space Shuttle and retrieve it using the Canadian-built remote manipulator system. After deployment, the Spartan 1 would perform scientific observations for up to 40 hours via an onboard microcomputer controller that commanded all pointing sequences and satellite control. There was no command or telemetry link; when observing sequences were complete, the satellite "safed" all systems and placed itself in a stable attitude for retrieval. The objectives of the FEE and FPE, a part of a cooperative program with France, was to obtain on-orbit data regarding the response of the cardiovascular and sensorimotor systems to weightlessness. French payload specialist Patrick Baudry would perform the experiments with participation from other crew members including the Arabsat payload specialist. The USSR's July 1982 Salyut mission had also flown the FEE system. By 4:30 p.m. June 17, Discovery's crew had successfully deployed a Mexican satellite, Morelos-1, the first of two identical satellites, which headed for a position 22,300 miles above the equator west of the Galapagos Islands. It would beam TV programs to the most remote regions of Mexico. (NASA Flight Operation Report M-980-51-G [prelaunch] June 5/85, NASA MOR E-420-51-G-16 [prelaunch] June 7/85, MOR E-420-51-G-17 [prelaunch] June 5/85, MOR E-420-51-G-18 [prelaunch] June 13/85, MOR-989-51-G [postflight] July 3/85; W Post, June 18/85, A3) During June: NASA announced that the Space Shuttle mission 51-G would carry three communications satellites, a deployable/retrievable Spartan 1 spacecraft, and six Get Away Special canisters. The orbiter Discovery would fly several mid-deck experiments including one for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) organization and a materials processing furnace. The Mexican spacecraft, Morelos-A, was a version of the Hughes HS 376 satellite, a number of which had already been deployed from the Space Shuttle. Morelos-A was the first of two domestic communications satellites that would provide advanced telecommunications to the more remote parts of Mexico. Arabsat-A, owned by the Arab Satellite Communications Organization and built by Aerospatiale, would provide telecommunications links between the member nations. A U.S. domestic communications satellite owned by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Telestar 3-D would provide telecommunications services to the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. All three spacecraft would first spring-eject from the orbiter's cargo bay, then on each a small attached payload assist module would ignite about 45 minutes after deployment to propel the satellites to transfer orbits out as far as 22,300	miles above earth. A second small rocket motor would then fire on each spacecraft to circularize the orbits, placing the spacecraft in geosynchronous orbits. Three of the six Get Away Special canisters contained West German payloads for study of materials processing in space and behavior of liquid propellants. A fourth canister contained a U.S. Air Force/U.S. Naval Research Laboratory investigation of the ultraviolet radiation environment in space. A fifth canister had a package of nine student experiments in biological and physical sciences. A Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) investigation of a developmental heat transfer system was in the sixth canister. A capillary pumped loop (CPL) experiment, it was the first flight of a CPL two-phase thermal control system. The advanced development and flight experiments section of the thermal engineering branch at GSFC developed the CPL (NASA Release 85-83)

March 24, 1964
Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, where she toured the facilities, witnessed a Saturn I and an F-l static firing, presented awards to msfc employees, and was honored at luncheon and tea with her Alabama relatives. At awards ceremony, Mrs. Johnson presented 30-year service pin to Michael J. Rahatin, program coordination officer, and a 20-year pin to Mrs. Mary Derryberry, engineering designer. She presented five invention awards: $300 to Robert J. Carmody for invention of highly flexible cellular structure; $400 to Klaus Juergensen for invention of bilateral energy transfer system; $400 to Lester Katz and Jack J. Nichols for force measuring instrument; and $300 to Benjamin M. Saunders for self-latching handle. Group achievement award of $500 went to Walter F.	Gillespie and Alonza J. Davis for contributions to recoverable motion picture camera system developed for the Saturn ISA—5, SA-6, and SA-7 launch vehicles. Mrs. Johnson also presented a $250 Sustained Superior Performance award to Mrs. Hazel T. Atchley, contracts assistant. In letter to msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, the First Lady described her visit as “stimulating, exhilarating, informative. . . . The significance of the Saturn has come home to me.” (Marshall Star, 3/25/64, 1, 4; Robertson, NYT, 3/25/64; Marshall Star, 4/1/64, 1)

April 8, 1965
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center awarded rca a $4.6-million contract to provide a real-time deep space tracking and data acquisition system for support of Project Apollo missions. Contract called for installation, checkout, and documentation of rca’s long-range (32,000 mi.) FPQ radar on land made available near a NASA site on Cooper’s Island, Bermuda, through a land-lease agreement with dod. The “Q—6” radar would have a flexible capability to support NASA programs other than manned flight, (gsfc Release G-9-65; gsfc Release G-10-65)

December 3, 1965
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said previous Russian efforts to land a vehicle on the moon had failed because they could not slow it up enough at the point of contact. Dr. O’Keefe also advanced the view that the moon originally broke off from the earth and eventually assumed its present position in the universe. He spoke at the monthly meeting of the Catholic Laymen’s First Friday Club in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/65, A3)

June 3, 1999
NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASA’s new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the “development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year.” Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASA’s purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of “low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry,” to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a “remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award,” news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home,” Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)

November 13, 1964
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that two barnacle-encrusted capsules, each containing 100 ft. of color motion-picture film in good condition, were found, one on a beach at Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas, the other near a beach in San Salvador in Central America. The capsules had been ejected from Saturn I SA—7 booster rocket launched Sept.'18, 1964, from Cape Kennedy, (upi, NYT, 11/14/64, 24)

January 16, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced completion of a study done by McDonnell Douglas under a 1983 contract that showed undeniable need for both humans and machines in space. MSFC was continuing to refine and validate the data. In the human role in space (THURIS) study, engineers identified 37 generic tasks requiring human involvement ranging from removing and replacing protective coverings around spacecraft to surgically acquiring tissue samples. The study then established three criteria for allocation of tasks (performance time, relative cost, and technological risk), which became the basis for an objective method to allocate tasks and determine how much of each of the generic tasks would benefit from human involvement. For each task, researchers rated man's participation from essential to not significant. For example, in a task entitled "compute data," man's role rated not significant. However, for the task "surgical manipulations", man's participation rated essential. A second THURIS product was an analytical method to define how man should participate in space systems. The method objectively compared humans, machines, and systems requiring both humans and machines and consisted of a short, logical sequence of questions and a set of highly condensed supporting data covering performance times, relative costs for each man/machine combination, and technology availability data for the 37 generic activities. "The study provided a set of fundamental data for planners that can be used as a guide for many future activities," MSFC's Stephen Hall said. "To me . . . machines and automation allow man to proceed to greater challenges and achievements. . . The THURIS study found that there are tasks for which man is best, and tasks for which machines are best. For most activities, a mixture of both is the best guarantee of success." (MSFC Release 85-1)

December 13, 1972
Dr. Robert C. Cameron—first director of NASA’s Johannesburg, South Africa, tracking station from 1958 to 1959—died in Washington, D.C., at age 47. He had resigned earlier in year as astronomer at Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Cameron had made first successful photos of U.S. satellite (Explorer 1, launched Jan. 31, 1958) and had received special award from gsfc in 1966 for writings on astronomy. Before joining NASA, he had worked for Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. In 1952 he had discovered asteroid Winifred, named after his wife. (W Post, 12/17/72, D12)

April 22, 1993
Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)

June 23, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $209 368 contract to a small business firm, Northern Research and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., for designing, assembling, and demonstrating a portable self-contained firefighting module conceived as a joint effort of NASA’s Technology Utilization Office and the U.S. Coast Guard. The module would be a lightweight unit complete with pump, hose, firefighter suits, and other equipment that could be transported by helicopter to the deck of any medium-sized boat in the area of a shipboard or dock fire; it would be able to pump about 5700 liters of sea water per min for an uninterrupted 3 hr. (MSFC Release 76-116)

April 8, 1972
Space in the Age of Aquarius,” hour-long special on space program, was shown on nationwide Columbia Broadcasting System TV. Program, produced and emceed by actor Hugh O’Brian, included interviews with NASA scientists on benefits of space exploration. Comedian Jonathan Winters played part of numerous skeptics opposed to space program and new technology. In Baltimore Sun Judy Bachrach later commented that “gist of program could be found in Mr. O’Brian’s very last rhetorical question, ‘Do we go or do we stop?’ We go on, we go on.” By end of program “you could have just about died of shame for ever having dared to think anything perverse about our space program. NASA couldn’t have got better propaganda if it had produced the show itself.” (upi, C Trib, 4/10/72; B Sun, 4/14/72) April 10—11:	NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reviewed all aspects of Skylab program during meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center. Skylab program managers and key personnel briefed panel. Panel would later advise NASA Administrator on any hazards in program’s operation or facilities, (msfc Release 72^10; msfc pao) April 11:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 485 from Plesetsk into orbit with 462-km (287.1-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 30. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; 8/31/72; Sov Aero, 5/17/72, 120)

October 5, 1991
The Baltimore Sun published an article quoting Richard Stolarski, research scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, concerning ozone depletion. He stated that the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic failed to shrink as was hoped. He wondered whether the same might occur over the North Pole and indicated the need to understand the limits under which ozone depletion occurred. Subsequently, NASA announced the findings of its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, which indicated the ozone depletion in Antarctica was almost as severe as the record year of 1987. (B Sun, Oct 5/91; NASA Release 91-165; AP, Oct 9/91; UPI, Oct 9/91; NY Times, Oct 10/91; USA Today, Oct 10/91; CSM, Oct 10/91; W Post, Oct 11/91)

January 29, 1988
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*

October 19, 1992
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)

September 21, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar concentrator-collector that would use a large plastic Fresnel lens to focus sunlight on a tube containing heat-transport fluid, for use in constructing or converting cooling systems in large buildings or in manufacturing processes requiring heat in the 200-370°C range. A Fresnel lens, consisting of a thin transparent material grooved on one surface, would serve the function of a heavier ordinary curved lens in focusing incoming light in the desired direction. MSFC’s lens, thought to be the largest tried in a solar-energy application, was assembled from multiple lens panels and measured 1.8 by 3.6 meters; it had been undergoing tests at Wyle Laboratories in Huntsville since July 1976. It would be moved to MSFC and integrated into a solar test bed for further analysis of performance. Primary advantage of the Fresnel lens would be its adaptability to mass-production techniques, permitting low cost; besides the light weight and space saving of the acrylic plastic, MSFC cited durability and mechanical strength, as well as ease of cleaning, of lenses exposed to weather. The test article, to minimize technology requirements and to interface with existing systems, used off-the-shelf materials and hardware as fully as possible. MSFC findings would be made available to industry after further testing and evaluation. (MSFC Release 76-169)

September 5, 1962
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $4,673,327-contract to Ets-Hokin and Galvin, Inc., of San Francisco, for construction of main structural portion of Advanced Saturn test stand at msfc, Huntsville, Ala. When completed, the 405-ft.-high test tower would be used for static-firing the 7.5-million-lb.-thrust first stage of Advanced Saturn.

March 1, 1978
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers reported completion of tests simulating checkout of a solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) using flight-type hardware interfaced with the launch-processing system (LPS) and tests run by computer. The tests would verify compatibility of SRB hardware and demonstrate use of the LPS to checkout the SRB system. Flight equipment removed from simulated SRB hardware had been relocated in equipment racks to simulate a left-hand SRB configuration; next use of the LPS would be to checkout the left-hand SRB. United Space Boosters, Inc., would perform the checkouts, then move the equipment to Kennedy Space Center for use in future SRB checkouts. (Marshall Star, Mar 1/78, 2)

November 21, 1977
NASA announced that on Nov. 29 it would present first results of the scientific experiments on high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1 launched Aug. 12. Dr. Noel Hinners, associate administrator for space science; Dr. Frank B. McDonald of Goddard Space Flight Center, project scientist; and principal investigators for the experiments would report findings on pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes. Scientific instruments on the observatory offered highly sensitive detection and resolution of x-rays emitted by stellar sources throughout the universe; the spacecraft, rotating end over end, could survey the entire sky within 6mo. (NASA Release 77-242)

November 2, 1964
Soviet members of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space visited NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. They were Prof. 0. G. Gazenko, Prof. Yu. D. Kalimin, and Mr. I. V. Milovidov. (Goddard News, 12/14/64, 2)

May 15, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced agreement with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Huntsville Div. to provide facility design and construction support as needed by msfc for space shuttle program, (msfc Release 72-61)

August 1, 1986
NASA announced that James R. Thompson would be appointed Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, in late September. He had been Deputy Director of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory since 1983 and previous to that had spent 23 years at Marshall, where he managed development of the Space Shuttle's main engines, worked in the Skylab Program, and was Associate Director of Engineering for the Center. He was also NASA's manager for the Challenger investigation (NASA Release 86106; NY Times, Aug 6/86)

June 29, 1964
Studies of two-stage recoverable lifting body space vehicle, by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center were reported in Aviation Week. Envisioned primarily as a passenger/supply space ferry, the system could be launched by track-mounted rocket sled or take off horizontally similar to conventional aircraft. Both stages would be manned, the first with only a flight crew and the pickaback second stage with 10-14 men and supplies. In this concept, both delta-shape stages would be recoverable. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 38)

June 7, 1974
U.S. District Court Judge Joseph C. Waddy denied a request by the American Federation of Government Employees for a preliminary injunction that would have blocked NASA plans to lay off or reduce in grade 657 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. The denial followed a 30 May temporary restraining order issued by Judge Waddy in response to an amendment to a 1967 suit filed by the AFGE against NASA and the Civil Service Commission. The suit challenged NASA’s alleged hiring of private contractors for vacated civil service jobs. In a November 1973 decision, the Federal District Court judge had ordered esc to review contract jobs at msfc to determine whether they met standards set forth in the Pellerzi rule, which guided CSC in evaluating contracts for personal services, (nasa Off Gen Counsel, interview, 23 Jan 76; Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 31 May 74; Cramer, W Star-News, 1 June 74) .

November 1, 1976
NASA would appeal a decision of the U.S. District Court ordering the agency to rehire all Marshall Space Flight Center civil service employees laid off since 1967 as the result of awarding support-services contracts to private business, Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported. The court had ruled that all such contracts awarded at MSFC since 1967 were illegal. NASA spokesmen estimated that up to 1500 contractor employees now at MSFC could be fired as a result of the ruling, and that 17 000 contractor employees throughout the agency might be affected by the decision, which ordered NASA to rehire the civil service personnel with back pay in amounts depending on the period of unemployment. Had all the employees affected been unemployed for the full 10 yr (the “worst-case situation”), necessary back pay might go as high as $ 150 million, NASA said, although the actual funds required would be less. An appeals court had already granted NASA a stay until 1 Feb. 1977 before the district court’s ruling became effective, so that the agency could ask Congress for supplemental funds to cover the back-pay requirements. (Av Wk, 1 Nov 77, 22)

November 9, 1962
S-I stage of Saturn C-l space vehicle was static-fired for full duration at full thrust (1.5 mlliion lbs.) for first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Previous full-duration firings had attained 1.3 mlliion-lb. thrust.

May 5, 1961
Saturn static firing of 44.17 seconds’ duration to test-fire detection system at engine position No. 2 was successful, the second SA-1 flight qualification test at Marshall Space Flight Center.

June 6, 1966
nasa’s ogo iii (Ogo-B) Orbiting Geophysical Observatory was successfully launched from etb with Atlas-Agena B booster into orbit with 75,874-mi. (122,157-km.) apogee; 183-mi. (295-km.) perigee; 48.6-hr. period; and 31° inclination. Third of seven spacecraft in NASA’s Ogo program and first to successfully operate three-axis stabilized in highly elliptical orbit, ogo iii weighed 1,135 lbs.; it carried 21 experiments—largest number ever carried by U.S. scientific spacecraft—to study solar wind, solar flares, magnetic field disturbances, radiation belt particles, aurora events, ionization, and variations in atmospheric density. Ogo program was managed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-132; AP, NYT, 6/8/66, 15; AP, Wash. Post, 6/7/66, A7)

April 12, 1965
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., carried instrumented payload to 125 mi. (200 km.) altitude. Payload was a spectroheliograph to obtain a monochromatic picture of the sun. Experiment was conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. srl)

January 30, 1968
Engineering mockup of Saturn l orbital workshop readied for crew station review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Space-sidled astronaut leaves full-size model of Saturn S—IVB rocket stage which will contain individual sleeping rooms, kitchen-dining area, laboratory work spaces, and waste-management area. hope that the conquest of space can contribute to the establishment of peace.” (Text)

May 9, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in interview that plans for 360-ton, four-man spacecraft to fly from earth to Mars were in “quite an advanced stage.” Emphasizing that execution of such plans was not yet approved and funded by nasa, he described nuclear-electric powered spacecraft and said it was “projected for beyond the 1970V’

September 5, 1978
NASA announced plans to launch TIROS-N from WTR Sept. 15 as part of a third generation of new meteorological satellites. First of a series of eight polar-orbiting environmental spacecraft, TIROS-N would carry new environmental monitors representing significant technological advances over those on the current NOAA-series spacecraft. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Services (NESS) would operate TIROS-N, intended to improve weather analysis for more accurate weather forecasts; to locate ocean currents and areas of upwell-ing, important to fishing and shipping interests; and to acquire more precise data on snow cover, snowmelt, and rainfall, essential to water-resource management and flood forecasting. Also possible would be more accurate alerts of high-energy solar-radiation levels above the atmosphere, important to space missions, high-altitude commercial airEAGE At l INTENTION ALLY BLANK craft flights, long-range communications, and electrical power-distribution networks. Its advanced data-collection and platform-location system meant that TIROS-N would have for the first time an operational capability to collect and transmit environmental data from platforms on land, at sea, and in the air; and to determine the geographic locations of those platforms in motion on the surface of the sea, land, or aloft. TIROS-N’s scanning radiometer, most versatile to be carried aboard an environmental satellite, could gather and store for later playback visible and infrared measurements and images in 4 channels for more precise evaluation of land, ice, surface-water, and cloud conditions, and sea-surface temperatures, transmitting them in real time to both automatic picture-transmission (APT) and high-resolution picture-transmission (HRPT) users in more than 100 countries around the world. The vertical-sounder subsystem, containing three instruments, could register temperatures to within 1°C and moisture data from earth’s surface up through the stratosphere. Even under obscuring cloud cover, TIROS-N could obtain some data because one of the three instruments would be able to record microwave radiation regardless of clouds. TIROS-N would be a primary data source for the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s first global experiment, an international cooperative project of 140 countries scheduled to begin Dec. 1, 1978. Its instruments would meet FGE requirements for collecting quantitative data on earth’s atmosphere and sea surface to construct numerical atmospheric models for improved long-range weather forecasts. Sensors were multinational: the stratospheric-sounding units were from Great Britain, the data-collection platform-location system from France, and other sensors from the U.S. Ground-support systems were also multinational: the U.S. would acquire and process most data through NOAA’s command and data-acquisition (CDA) stations near Fairbanks, Alaska; Wallops Island, Va.; and a central processing system at Suitland, Md. France’s Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales (CNES) would process and distribute data associated with collection and the platform-location system. TIROS-N instruments had drawn heavily on technology from NASA’s Nimbus-spacecraft program: TIROS-N’s bus was a modified USAF Block 5D spacecraft bus with a 25% growth allowance in payload-carrying capability. NASA had designed and funded TIROS-N; Goddard Space Flight Center would manage it during checkout (about 2mo) before turning it over to NOAA. Launch vehicle would be a standard reconditioned Atlas E/F. (NASA Release 78-132; NASA press conf. Sept 8/78; Spaceport News, Sept 15/78, 2)

July 30, 1993
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)

February 1, 1973
The National Science Foundation published Federal Funds for Research, Development and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1971, 1972, and 1973 (nsf 72-317). The FY 1973 budget had indicated an upward trend since 1970 in Federal research and development support. The Federal r&d obligation total was expected to rise from $15.5 billion in FY 1971 to an estimated $16.8 billion in FY 1972 and to an all-time high of $17.8 billion in FY 1973. Of the $970-million increase in R&D obligations scheduled for FY 1973, the Dept, of Defense accounted for $400 million and NASA and the Atomic Energy Commission $67 million each. The three agencies made up more than 50% of the 1973 growth. (Text) February 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced establishment of the Large Space Telescope Task Force to direct planning and preliminary design of the lst to be launched by the space shuttle in the 1980s. The lst—to be capable of looking at galaxies 100 times farther than those seen by the most powerful ground-based telescope—would study energy processes that occurred in galactic nuclei, study early stellar and solar system stages, and observe supernova remnants and white dwarfs. The lst Task Force would be managed by James A. Downey III, Associate Director for Science in the Program Development Directorate, (msfc Release 73-15)

March 3, 1973
The People’s Republic of China was reportedly developing an intercontinental ballistic missile 20% larger than the largest one in the U.S.S.R., the New York Times said. Administration officials had said the missile was a three-stage, liquid-fueled icbm expected to have a range of 8000 to 11000 km (5000 to 7000 mi). Underground silos were being built at a missile test center west of Peking, a location which would permit the missile to reach major cities and military targets in the U.S. and U.S.S.R. Following the first successful tests, it would take three years before a force of 10 to 30 missiles could be deployed. (Beecher, NYT, 3/4/73, 17) March 4:	Laser beams, computers, and satellites were being used by NASA to gather data over a five-year span for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Geological Survey to help predict earthquakes along California’s 965-km (600-mi) San Andreas fault. Lasers at precise locations on either side of the fault were beamed to satellites Explorer 27 (launched April 29, 1965), Explorer 29 {Geos 1, launched Nov. 6, 1965), and Explorer 36 {Geos 2, launched Jan. 11, 1968) and bounced off tiny mirrors. Reflections were recorded by computers and sent to Goddard Space Flight Center, where analysis gave measurements of the slightest variation at a laser’s base. A mathematical model would eventually be constructed to assist in predicting quake behavior, (gsfc proj off; gsfc pao; LA Her-Exam, 3/4/73)

March 31, 1963
Canadian government authorized four additional satellites for ionospheric research in joint U.S.-Canadian space program. {M&R, 3/11/63, 9) During March: Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the soldier and statesman for whom nasa Marshall Space Flight Center was named, donated to the center the Executive Order naming nasa's Huntsville, Ala., facility and the fountain pen used by President Dwight D. Eisenhower for signing it. (Chattanooga Times, 3/10/63)

July 7, 1961
The second static firing of the Saturn SA-T2 test booster was successfully completed at Marshall Space Flight Center in an eight engine test of 119 seconds’ duration.

January 29, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $9.8-million contract modification to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for work on backup Skylab Workshop. Modification included production completion and post-manufacturing verification of backup hardware and launch site support operations through completion of second manned mission, (msfc Release 72-5)

June 14, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded $11165 375 contract extension to Boeing Co. for design changes on final five Saturn V 1st stages (S-IC-11 through S—IC-15), Marshall Star reported. Work would be completed by Boeing Aerospace Group at Michoud Assembly Facility by Feb. 28, 1973. (Marshall Star, 6/14/72, 4)

August 31, 1963
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wemher von Braun announced reorganization of msfc, designed to strengthen the Center’s dual function of performing in-house r&d and monitoring industrial contracts. In Office of the Director, Deputy Director Dr. Eberhard Rees was designated Deputy Director-Technical, and Deputy Director H. H. Gorman, Deputy Director-Administrative. Hans Maus was designated Director of newly formed executive staff replacing msfc Central Planning Office. In second major group, msfc’s nine technical divisions were formed in new Research and Development Operations, with Hermann Weidner as Director. Third major group was new Industrial Operations, comprised of msfc elements concerned with work performed bv industrial contractors, and headed by Robert Young. (Marshall Star, 9/4/63,1, 3; N.O. Times-Pic., 9/1/63)

June 25, 1991
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced its selection of Fairchild Space, Germantown, Maryland, for a contract to provide engineering support services for the Space Technology Division. (NASA Release C91-w)

September 15, 1967
Ats I (Advanced Technical Satellite) was used experimentally to relay weather photographs of current storms to the U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Hurricane Center in Miami and other hurricane watchers in the Caribbean. The satellite was launched by NASA into its synchronous orbit on Dec. 7, 1966, and was positioned over Christmas Island in the Pacific at an altitude of 22,000 miles. The satellite had been used as a testbed for advanced meteorological, communications, and satellite control systems, and also had made scientific measurements of its orbital environment. Photographs were recorded and radioed to earth by the Essa V weather satellite while passing over the storm area. The collected photographic data were then compiled as a mosaic and gridded by computers at essa before delivery to the Goddard Space Flight Center ground station at Mojave, Calif., for radio transmission to the Ats 1. The satellite then retransmitted the gridded data to earth by means of its weather fascimile (weafax) experiment. Any ground station equipped with the relatively inexpensive Automatic Picture Transmission receivers could read out the pictures. Mosaics would be transmitted daily on an experimental basis in this manner between 9 and 10 pm, edt. weafax was a joint NASA—essa experiment, (nasa Release 67-243)

June 14, 1993
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation of Germantown, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract. The seven-year, $91 million contract would provide instrument support services to the Engineering Directorate at Goddard. (NASA Release C93-h; W Post, June 15/93)

February 28, 1966
Commenting on national space goals in the post-Apollo period, Henry Simmons said in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "NASA over the past year quietly shifted its emphasis from an aap exploiting already financed Apollo hardware for alternate missions to a much vaster aap involving outlays on the scale of the Apollo lunar effort itself to support an intensive follow-on effort extending perhaps to 1975. Some NASA Centers engaged in the Apollo program, and particularly the Marshall Space Flight Center, are already confronted with the prospect of unemployment among their most skilled and valuable design personnel. 'We are right now in the position where over the next six months the engineers who did the original design on the Saturn and probably a year from now those who did it on the Apollo will be out of work,’ NASA Administrator James Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during its hearings last August on post-Apollo goals. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 5)	...

December 31, 1964
NASA reported, that a magnetometer hammer developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to remove distortions from rocket fuel tank “gore segments” had salvaged rocket hardware valued in the millions of dollars. (nasa Release 64-328)

April 6, 1961
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 1,640,000 pounds thrust was achieved in test of F-l rocket engine thrust chamber static firing at Edwards, Calif., a record thrust for a single chamber.

August 8, 1962
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced Contract award to Pratt and Whitney, to investigate the feasibility of variable thrust in RL-10 rocket engine. The study was not directed toward any specific mission but would have wide application in future space flights.

August 12, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of GE Command Systems Div. to negotiate contract for additional spacecraft tracking system for Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station at Fairbanks, Alaska. The new system, known as Goddard Range and Range Rate System because it was originally developed by gsfc engineers, was designed to provide improved tracking data for space probes, satellites, and launch vehicles traveling in elliptical or synchronous orbits. Two previously completed systems installed at Rosman, N.C., and Carnarvon, Australia, had proved highly successful in tracking EXPLORER XVIII (imp) . (gsfc Release G-21-64)

August 5, 1972
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload, was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instrumentation performance was not satisfactory. Radar beam malfunctioned at liftoff, telemetry signal was lost after 128 sec, 2nd stage apparently failed to ignite, and payload was not recovered. Launch was second of two; first had been Aug. 4. (nasa Rpt srl) August 6:	Erts 1 return-beam-vidicon (rbv) camera system was shut down after unexpected power surge, rbv system was second experiment to be shut down because of power surge; first had been No. 2 tape recorder Aug. 3. Although both systems could be operated, shutdowns were necessary to determine whether operation would damage experiments and to identify exact cause of problem. Erts 1 (launched July 23) was providing excellent images from multispectral scanner (mss) system and No. 1 tape recorder was being used as required, (gsfc Release 16-72)

June 24, 1972
Air Force unveiled F—15 air superiority fighter aircraft in ceremonies at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis, Mo. F-15 was fixed-wing, single-place aircraft in 18 000-kg (40 000-lb) class, with maximum mach 2 speed, (afsc Release 080.72) Organization’s Research and Technology Center, estec had been asked by esro to determine resources required by Europe if European Space Conference decided to develop space shuttle sortie lab [see June 14]. NASA told estec officials Europe should view sortie lab as nearly uniquely European as possible, with dependence on U.S. held to minimum. If U.S. agreed to let Europe build system to U.S. design, U.S. would insist on completely new qualification program to qualify source and system. NASA found esro and estec representatives “eager” to undertake sortie lab program. (NASA omsf, Memo for Record, 9/7/72) June 27:	Eole transponder—radio receiver/transmitter developed for French-built weather satellite Eole (launched by NASA for France Aug. 16, 1971)—had sailed on American yawl Foolscap during Newport Bermuda race, Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Objective was to test its potential for locating lifeboats by satellite. Transponder had sent position data to Eole as satellite passed 800 km (500 mi) over Foolscap. Information, transmitted to tracking station operated by French Center for Space Studies (cnes), was processed and tele-typed to gsfc. Foolscap’s up-to-date location was then plotted and sent on to U.S. Coast Guard in Miami, Florida, and race committee in Bermuda. Test, sponsored by gsfc engineers, had proved highly successful and indicated that small inexpensive transponders might become standard equipment on ship and aircraft lifeboats, (gsfc Release G—10-72; gsfc proj off)

November 29, 1993
NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)

October 28, 1975
Eight Soviet scientists would attend a meeting at the Earth Resources Orbiting Satellite (EROS) Data Center in S. Dak. this week to review previous U.S.-U.S.S.R. remote-sensing projects [see 20 Oct.] and to discuss future cooperation on remote sensing of geology and agriculture. The meeting was part of a joint effort by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences to advance studies of the earth from space; the Soviets might set up a ground station to receive remote-sensing data directly from U.S. Landsats. (SBD, 28 Oct 75, 295) 28 —29 October: Principal investigators and other scientists meeting at the Marshall Space Flight Center had presented preliminary findings on the space-processing experiments conducted during the U.S.—Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. First day’s discussions would be on the U.S. and West German experiments on electrophoresis—separation of biological materials by means of an electrical field—considered a key to the development of drugs to fight strokes, heart attacks, clots, and blood diseases. Six of the seven materials-processing experiments using a multipurpose electric furnace would be discussed the second day; a Soviet experiment using the furnace would not be discussed. The furnace experiments had demonstrated use of a weightless environment to investigate crystal growth, convection, and solidification processes for future use in space as well as for applications to present earth technology. (MSFC Release 75— 226)

October 4, 1994
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)

January 24, 1972
Tenth anniversary of start of Saturn V project at Marshall Space Flight Center. Since inauguration of Advanced Saturn development Jan. 25, 1962, Saturn V launch vehicles had been used successfully to launch eight manned space flights. Apollo 16 Saturn V booster would be 26th Saturn launch vehicle flown from Kennedy Space Center since firing of first Saturn I Oct. 27, 1961. (msfc Release 72-3)

January 23, 1962
nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the selection of Motorola, Inc., Military Electronics Division, of Scottsdale, Ariz., as contractor for research and development on the Goddard range and range-rate tracking system. Intended for tracking satellites in near-space and cislunar space, the system will measure spacecraft position to within a few feet and velocity to within fractions of a foot per second by measurements of carrier and side-tone modulations.

September 29, 1964
NASA announced it would negotiate with Sanders Associates, Inc., for purchase of seven display systems to be used with computers for checkout and launch of Saturn V launch vehicles. Three of the systems would be used at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and four at Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Cost of the cost-plus-incentive-fee type contract may exceed $5 million. (NASA Release 64-249)

December 18, 1985
NASA announced that H. William Wood, deputy associate administrator (Networks), Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems (OSTDS), was retiring effective early in January after more than 30 years of government service. Wood had served in his present post since April 1984. Before that he managed the Network Systems program as the division director since 1981. Wood was a research engineer at Langley Research Center when NASA was formed in 1958; and in 1959 he became the group leader with the Tracking and Ground Instrumentation unit for the Mercury Network. His other NASA assignments included associate director, Network Systems Division; NASA senior scientific representative in Australia; and associate director, Operations, in the Network Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center. Earlier, Wbod had served several years in the U.S. Air Force. Wbod received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal and two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, and he is a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society. In 1955 Wbod received a BSEE degree from North Carolina State University. (NASA anno., Dec 18/85) December23: NASA announced that Dr. Charles Kupperman was appointed effective immediately as executive assistant to the deputy administrator. Kupperman came to NASA after serving as executive director of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. From 1978 to 1981 he was the research associate and defense analyst for the Committee on the Present Danger, and he also served as a member of President Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign and defense transition team. Kupperman was a consultant to R&D Associates and taught at the School of International Relations, University of Southern California. Kupperman graduated Phi Beta Kappa with a B.A. degree in political science from Purdue University, received an M.A. degree in political science from the University of British Columbia, and a Ph.D. in international relations from the University of Southern California. He was the author of articles on defense, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), and national security policy for academic and public journals. (NASA Release anno., Dec 23/85)

November 12, 1962
Tave (Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment), flown with Thor-Agena launching alouette satellite on Sept. 29, measured low-frequency vibrations to Agena stage and spacecraft interfaces during Thor boost phase, it was reported. Tave provided “. . . data verifying the techniques used by Goddard and Lockheed in predicting the launch vibration environment of the Thor-Agena B rocket. Demonstration that these techniques were sound is most important in designing future experiments and structures for the Thor Agena vehicles,” Goddard project experimenter James Nagy said. Goddard Space Flight Center had designed, built, tested, and shipped 200-lb. Tave in only 20 days.

June 20, 1961
Nuclear Vehicles Project Office established at Marshall Space Flight Center, Col. Scott Fellows, U.S. Air Force, named as Chief.

November 20, 1973
Marshall Space Flight Center was drop-testing the space shuttle solidfueled rocket booster (srb) scale model and a three-parachute recovery system to determine the feasibility of keeping parachutes attached to the SRB rather than releasing them on impact with the water, (msfc Release 73—172)

December 6, 1962
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Project Div. of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1962 Hermann Oberth Award of the Alabama section, American Rocket Society.

June 4, 1985
NASA announced that an eight-member review team at Goddard Space Flight Center concluded that the failure of the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) to deploy from its canister during the April 1985 Space Shuttle 51-B mission was due to the failure of two switches designed to activate bolt cutters on the canister. On June 7 the team would issue a final report along with recommendations for a solution to the problem. The Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) along with GLOMR would be the first satellites successfully deployed from canisters aboard the Space Shuttle. The door of the GLOMR canister opened, indicating normal battery operation, but the bolt cutters would not activate. After a second deployment attempt, NASA decided to return GLOMR to earth for evaluation. (NASA Release 8585)

January 28, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of three contracts, part of a program to design, fabricate, test, and demonstrate a low-cost aesthetically appealing solar collector for residential heating and cooling. Chamberlain Manufacturing Corp. was awarded $72 621 and Honeywell, Inc., was awarded $104 255 to deliver a low-cost collector based on existing technology and the requirements of the solar heating and cooling demonstration. A third contract was awarded to PPG Industries which would furnish collector panels from off-the-shelf hardware at essentially no cost. (MSFC Release 75—22)

May 24, 1991
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)

January 8, 1982
NASA said that it was relocating the Applications Technology Satellite (ATS) ATS 1 from its station at 149 °W to a new position about 50 farther west, at 162 °E. Maintaining orbit position in its present location required maximum use of its thrusters; moving to the new station would put ATS 1 into a more stable position and substantially reduce the stationkeeping power requirement. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had considered several options to conserve on-board fuel supplies, which had been estimated adequate until mid-1982 .The new location should prolong stationkeeping through 1983 and reduce the need for center contract from biweekly to quarterly. (NASA Release 82-4)

May 14, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a 10-mo study of a space-based power-conversion and power-relay system, MSFC announced. The proposed study would examine alternate means for generating electrical power in space, with emphasis on identification and delineation of problem areas and new technology required for these power systems. (MSFC Release 75—90)

February 18, 1972
Portable, high-intensity light to illuminate Skylab workshop interior for motion picture photography during long space missions was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. Developed by iota Engineering, 8-kg (17-lb) light produced concentrated illumination of proper color balance for use with fast daylight film scheduled for Skylab. (msfc Release 72-15)

March 5, 1974
Major reorganizations were announced at NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director. Dr. Fletcher said the Headquarters reorganization and key personnel appointments would consolidate planning and direction of research and development programs under the Associate Administrator and overall planning and direction of the field center operations under the newly created position of Associate Administrator for Center Operations. Dr. Petrone was named Associate Administrator. He would remain as msfc Director until early summer when he would be replaced by Dr. William R. Lucas, msfc Deputy Director. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. He would also continue as Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science until a successor was named. Dr. George M. Low, in addition to his duties as Deputy Administrator, would serve as Acting Associate Administrator for Center Operations until the new position was filled. He would be assisted by Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), who would also continue as the Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, was named Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. Bernard Moritz was appointed Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The reorganization, effective 15 March, followed completion of the Apollo and Skylab programs and would provide mechanisms for the phaseover from conventional launch vehicles to the space shuttle and new programs, Dr. Fletcher said. At msfc, Dr. Petrone said that the reorganization, effective 30 May, would enable the Center to fulfill requirements of its varied assigned programs and improve its competitive position to obtain new assignments. The major changes were in the Science and Engineering Directorate. A Deputy for Operations and a Deputy for Systems had been established. Business operations and control of all resources had been consolidated into a centralized office at the directorate level. Elements under the s&E Directorate included two associate directors, an Associate Director of Engineering and an Associate Director of Management; two offices, Reliability and Quality Assurance and Research and Technology; and eight laboratories. The laboratories were being restructured to emphasize system engineering and integration, analysis, design, and testing. The in-house capability to manufacture, inspect, and check out major hardware projects had been eliminated, with the associated supply, warehousing, and procurement capability. Reorganization in msfc’s Administration and Program Support Directorate included consolidation of Center-wide automatic data-process-ing functions within A&PS. Offices under a&PS would include Technology Utilization, Manpower, Financial Management, Facilities, Procurement, Management, Services, Logistics, and Computer Services. (NASA Ann, 5 March 74; NASA Release 74-76; msfc Release 74-31)

August 30, 1987
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)

December 10, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it would distribute the first NASA Standard Parts List (NSPL) to all NASA centers and contractors in Jan. The NSPL was to include electronic parts selected from experience in flights, tests, failure analyses, and recent plant surveys, to ensure reliability. The standardization had been undertaken to solve problems of small-quantity buying, high cost, long delivery schedules, market fluctuations, 'part failures, and extensive rework. The cost of correcting problems resulting from failure of parts had been estimated as 100 times the cost of preventing the use of poor-quality parts to begin with. The NASA Standard Parts Lead Office, located at MSFC because of its experience in parts management developed during the Saturn program, would establish requirements for parts, coordinate the effort with all NASA Centers, and issue and maintain the list. (NASA Release 75— 303; MSFC Release 75—259)

December 6, 1968
In major organizational changes at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. W. R. Lucas, Director of Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, was named Director for Program Development, effective Dec. 16; Dave Newby was named Director of Center Operations; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Space Sciences Laboratory, was named Associate Director for Science. All were new positions, msfc Research and Development Operations would become Science and Engineering, with Hermann K. Weidner remaining Director; Industrial Operations would become Program Management under same director, E. F. O’Connor. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, said major function of new Program Development organization would be to “harden” complete package plans for new programs, such as space station. Director for Program Development would “help chart the course for this Center in the post-Apollo period, keeping in mind our Apollo program requirements and aap obligations.” (msfc Release 68—276; Marshall Star, 12/11/68,1)

December 7, 1994
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, were observing rare gamma ray flashes above thunderstorms at a rate six times that of previous observations. Steve Goodman of Marshall's Space Sciences Laboratory said the observations were being made by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment aboard NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which was recently modified by ground commands to be more sensitive to such events. NASA planned to bring together investigators from the fields of space and atmospheric physics to study the newly discovered events. (NASA Release 94-204; AP, Dec 7/94)

September 30, 1974
NASA’s Explorer 45 (sss-a Small Scientific Satellite launched 15 Nov. 1971) was turned off. The spacecraft had been investigating the causes of worldwide magnetic disturbances associated with large solar flares. Major accomplishments of Explorer 45 included the first measurement by satellite of man-made stimulated electromagnetic emissions in the magnetosphere; first measurements of alpha particles in the equatorial region of the magnetosphere, where they were 100 times more numerous than expected; first detailed analysis of the interaction of electromagnetic waves with charged particles; measurement of the earth’s ring current, which produced the magnetic storm main phase; and measurement of the closest approach to the earth of the boundary of the magnetosphere at about 25 000-km altitude. (Goddard News, Nov 74) 30 September-4 October: The fourth simulated Spacelab mission of the airborne science-shuttle experiment system simulation (assess) program was conducted at Marshall Space Flight Center using an Ames Research Center Learj et. The Lear 4 mission was the first in which substitute experiment operators were trained as crewmen. Their performance would be compared with that of the principal investigator and his team during previous missions. During 10 nighttime flights into the base of the stratosphere, the crew measured infrared radiation at selected wavelengths from targets believed to be forming new stars, (msfc Release 74-185) 30 September-5 October: A seminar to predict the probable state of the world in the year 2000 was held by the Smithsonian Institution for nasa as part of nasa’s “Outlook for Space” study begun during June. Experts from various fields discussed a new age-oriented global culture, the probability of widespread famine, the prolonged disruption of technological economies by high oil prices, and the spread of nuclear power beyond control of the great powers. Seminar participants concluded that the intensification of nationalism would continue, particularly in response to economic stresses. Speakers from the high-technology sector, however, stressed that the U.S. would not have to suffer from scarcity of resources, although resource extraction would be more expensive and would require new technology. Satellite reconnaissance to find mineral resources and to monitor threats to the global environment would still be necessary. The group also proposed surveillance to track all asteroids crossing the earth’s orbit so that the impact of an asteroid might not be mistaken for a nuclear attack. Communications satellites were considered both useful for uniting countries and dangerous in their potential to increase threats of demagoguery. Many participants agreed that the time for uncontrolled free enterprise was passing and that we would require independent agencies for both planning and technology assessment, exempt from the special interests of particular government departments. Specialists also proposed that NASA’s planning and analytical abilities be applied to national concerns in their full complexity, taking into account world economic, political, and social problems. (Sullivan, NYT, 8 Oct 74, 16; GSFC proj off, interview, 13 Aug 75)

July 24, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced researchers had developed first known high-temperature-resistant ceramic potting compound in which space electronics could be imbedded for protection against extreme heat. The ceramic potting compound can be cured at temperatures as low as 150° F, permitting it to be cured in place around the electronics without subjecting the delicate equipment to damaging heat. The ceramic potting compound combined protection against heat up to 2,500° F with protection against vibration, (gsfc Release G—18-64)

June 3, 1964
A $700,000 contract was awarded to the Defense and Space Operations Division of the Westinghouse Corp., Baltimore, Md., Operations Center by the Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract called for the complete integration, checkout, and testing of the ground communications system for NASA’s Rosman, N.C., Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would support the new Advanced Technological Satellite (ats) . (gsfc Release G-16-64)

October 16, 1985
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center announced the launch at 6:01 a.m. DST today of a single-stage Orion sounding rocket from its Wallops Flight Facility to evaluate electrical fields and charged particles in earth's middle atmosphere. The Orion, about 16 feet long and 14 inches in diameter, carried the 90-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 52 statute miles, after which a Wallops Skyvan aircraft recovered the payload in mid-air. NASA launched the experiment from the Poker Flat Research Range (PFRR) in Alaska on April 12, 1985; however, snow cover hindered payload recovery. On August 26 a sheep hunting party found the payload and its parachute floating on Beaver Creek in the White Mountains, Alaska and returned it to the PFRR. Range officials on September 23 sent the payload to Wallops for refurbishment for today's launch. NASA tentatively scheduled for July 1986 another launch of the experiment in Sweden. (GSFC Release 85-29)

May 15, 1972
Termination notices effective June 29 were sent to 198 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center; 115 were downgraded or reassigned in manpower reduction that would bring msfc employment level to 5317 by June 30. Further reduction of 103 was planned for June 1973. (Huntsville Times, 5/11/72)

August 7, 1987
Five aerospace firms were awarded contracts by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, to develop preliminary advanced solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the awards were Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, Sacramento, California; Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., Brigham City, Utah; and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San Jose, California. The results of the preliminary studies would determine whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of an advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASA Release 87120)

May 5, 1978
NASA announced appointment of Samuel Keller as deputy associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications (OSTA), succeeding Leonard Jaffe, who had been appointed special assistant to NASA’s chief engineer. In his new position, Keller would be responsible for general management and direction of OSTA programs. He had held numerous management positions at Goddard Space Flight Center before coming to NASA Hq as assistant administrator for personnel programs; had worked in industry and government; and had been a pilot in the U.S. Air Force from 1956 to 1959. (NASA anno May 5/78)

January 25, 1992
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)

June 19, 1972
Apollo Telescope Mount was shipped from Marshall Space Flight Center to Manned Spacecraft Center, where it would undergo alignment tests. The 11800-kg (24 000-lb) spacecraft, housing telescopes and other instruments for studying sun, would be launched on Skylab Orbital Workshop in April 1973. (msfc Release 72-77)

April 23, 1992
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)

October 30, 1975
The Saturn V dynamic test stand at Marshall Space Flight Center was being modified under a $1 923 400 contract between the Army Corps of Engineers and the Universal Construction Co., to provide a Space Shuttle Mated Ground Vibration Test Facility, MSFC announced. The 123-m-high structure would be used to test the vehicle in launch and boost configuration, to determine the bending modes and dynamic response during launch and ascent conditions. (MSFC Release 75-230)

January 29, 1975
Reduction-in-force and reduction-in-grade notices were sent to 213 Civil Service employees at Marshall Space Flight Center as a result of the reduction in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling. In addition to the 93 persons separated and the 120 persons reduced in grade, 191 MSFC employees received reassignments as part of a reclassification survey conducted during the summer of 1974. (MSFC Release 75—24)

June 21, 1975
NASA successfully launched Oso 8 Orbiting Solar Observatory at 7:43 am EDT from Eastern Test Range on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster, after a 1-day delay because of an electrical malfunction in the launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered a near-perfect circular orbit with a 560-km apogee, 544-km perigee, 95.74-min period, and 32.94° inclination. By 23 June Oso 8 was stabilized and was accurately tracking the center of the sun as planned. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. By 27 June all eight experiments had been activated and were acquiring data. Primary objective of the Oso 8 mission was to investigate the sun’s lower corona and its chromosphere, and their interface in the ultraviolet spectral region, to better understand the transport of energy from the photosphere into the corona. Secondary objective was to study solar x-rays and earth-sun relationships and to investigate the background component of cosmic x-rays. The 1064-kg spacecraft had two sections: A rotating cylindrical bottom section—the wheel—accommodated experiments that did not require solar reference pointing or that scanned the celestial sphere. The nonspinning rectangular sail section mounted on top of the wheel accommodated experiments that required stable pointing at the sun. The spacecraft carried eight experiments. The two on the sail section were a Univ. of Colo, high-resolution ultraviolet spectrometer to measure solar-ultraviolet line profiles in the range of 1050 to 2300 A and their variation with time and position, and a spectrometer and a Cassegrain telescope that would observe the solar chromospheric structure simultaneously in six lines from 1000 to 4000 A originating from different levels in the sun’s atmosphere. This experiment was provided by France’s Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. Other experiments—all on the wheel portion of the spacecraft and supplied by U.S. universities, industry, and government agencies— included a high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer to monitor the sun’s emission in the 2- to 8-kev range, obtain a complete spectrum of the sun every 10 sec during flares, and obtain high-resolution spectra of many celestial x-ray sources; a mapping x-ray heliometer to measure location, spectrum, and intensity of intermediate-energy x-rays from individual solar-active regions and to acquire data on extrasolar x-ray sources; an investigation of soft x-ray background radiation using proportional counters; a cosmic x-ray spectroscope to determine the spectra of sources and the diffuse cosmic x-ray background in the energy range of 2 to 60 kev, and to measure intensity variations and identify possible emission lines of discrete x-ray sources; a high-energy celestial x-ray experiment to measure the spectrum of all point x-ray sources observable in the energy range of 0.01 to 1 megaelectron volts, and to search for temporal variations in the intensity and spectrum of the point sources detected; and a study of extreme ultraviolet radiations from earth and space, to determine the behavior of atoms such as hydrogen and neutral and ionized helium in the earth’s atmosphere by measuring the intensity and distribution of solar radiation resonantly scattered by these atoms. Oso 8 was the ninth, and last, in a series of spin-stabilized orbiting solar observatories designed to gather new knowledge of the sun, the earth’s atmosphere, and sun-activated terrestrial phenomena over a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum not detectable by ground-based equipment. Of the eight OSO launches that began with Oso 1 on 7 March 1962, only one, OSO—C, was unsuccessful, because of a launch-vehicle failure. Discoveries made by OSO spacecraft included gamma-ray emissions from the galactic center; a previously unknown isothermal plateau in the chromosphere of the solar atmosphere; differences in the structure of the extreme ultraviolet corona above quiet and active regions on the solar disk; evidence that the corona above the solar poles was significantly cooler than nonactive coronal regions near the equator; and synoptic observations of “holes” in the corona that survived several solar rotations. Oso 8—built by Hughes Aircraft Co.—was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. GSFC was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs, 4 June 75,23 June 75,27 June 75; NASA Release 75 — 158) 23 June: NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration signed an interagency cooperative agreement to enhance the national energy effort. ERDA and NASA management would identify specific program tasks that could be undertaken by NASA centers in support of ERDA programs. ERDA would use NASA’s basic and applied research capabilities in areas including solar heating and cooling systems, gas turbines, fuel cells, hydrogen technology, ground-propulsion technology, bearings, seals, combustion, automatic control systems, and materials and structures technology. NASA would submit proposals and plans to ERDA for specific technology developments including testing, evaluation, and demonstration of projects or hardware; ERDA would also call upon NASA for specific short- and long-term technical and administrative expertise such as technical review boards, evaluation groups, and other assessment techniques. The agreement would establish an ERDA—NASA program committee to annually review NASA research and development work in support of ERDA. (NASA Release 75-182; ERDA Release 75-99)

May 27, 1974
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 656 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 322-km apogee, 185-km perigee, 89.6-min period, and 51.8° inclination. The press reported that Cosmos 656 was probably a test flight of a Soyuz spacecraft. The spacecraft reentered 29 May. (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, Fbis-Sov, 29 May 74, Ul; O’Toole, W Post, 30 May 74, A18) ' 29 May—19 June: The U.S.S.R. launched Luna 22 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 1:57 pm local time (4:57 am edt). The automatic station was separated from a platform rocket system in earth orbit and put into a close-to-planned trajectory for the moon. A flight-path correction maneuver 30 May aimed the spacecraft toward a selected area of near-moon space. Luna 22 went into circular orbit of the moon 2 June, with a 220-km apogee, 220-km perigee, 130.0-min period, and 19.6° inclination. The Soviet press reported 3 June that all instruments aboard the spacecraft were functioning normally and scientific investigation of the moon had begun. Luna 22 was transferred into an elliptical orbit with a 244-km apogee and 25-km perigee 9 June to take detailed TV photos of the lunar surface and to study surface relief using an onboard altimeter. Chemical composition of rocks was obtained by determining the gamma radiation. After completion of the photography program the spacecraft was moved to an orbit with a 299-km apogee and 181-km perigee. By 19 June Luna 22 had completed 187 orbits of the moon; all equipment continued to function normally, (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 30 May 74, Ul; 4 June 74, Ul; 20 June 74, Ul; SF, Nov 74, 434) 30 May—28 June: NASA launched Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite from Eastern Test Range at 9:00 am edt on a Titan TlIC launch vehicle. The booster ejected the transtage and spacecraft into an elliptical parking orbit with a 626-km apogee and 152-km perigee. At the second equatorial crossing the first bum of the transtage placed the spacecraft in a transfer orbit. Launch, parking orbit, and transfer orbit were close to the program plan. At 3:29 pm EDT, Ats 6 was injected into geosynchronous orbit with a 35 845.6-km apogee, 35 774.1-km perigee, 23-hr 57-min period, and 1.8° inclination. The near-perfect orbit eliminated need for corrections, leaving nine kilograms of fuel for operational contingencies. The spacecraft separated from the transtage at 3:33 pm EDT. An orbital correction 7 June changed the 0.27°-per-day westward drift to a 0.05° eastward drift. Checkout of spacecraft systems and onboard experiments was completed 28 June with no significant anomalies. The mission was adjudged a success 26 Sept Primary objectives of the mission were to inject the spacecraft into near-geostationary orbit, erect and evaluate a nine-meter antenna to provide a good-quality signal to small inexpensive ground receivers, stabilize the spacecraft using a three-axis control system, and support user-oriented applications experiments. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate new technology in aircraft and maritime traffic control and infrared earth observations; acquire system data for communications applications in space, including spacecraft-to-spacecraft relay; test spacecraft control; and measure particles and radiation. The 20 experiments included a health-education telecommunications experiment to broadcast programs in several languages simultaneously to citizens in remote areas of the country. The satellite also would aid in remote medical telediagnosis and teleconsultation, transmitting patients’ medical records to faraway hospital centers for emergency assistance. One year after launch Ats 6 would be moved over Lake Victoria in Central Africa. India would then use the satellite to broadcast programs teaching agricultural techniques, family planning and hygjene, school courses and teacher education, and occupational skills to 5000 villages. The $600 ground receiving terminals each consisted of a receiver, converter, and three-meter chicken-wire antenna. Ats 6 was the sixth in a series of ATS satellites developed to advance technology in design, propulsion, and stabilization systems; meteorological concepts; applications; space environmental studies and measurement systems; and communications. Ats 1 (launched 6 Dec. 1966), Ats 3 (5 Nov. 1967), and Ats 5 (12 Aug. 1969) were still transmitting useful data. The ATS program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications. (NASA mors, 24 May, 3 June, 8 July, 2 Oct. 74; NASA prog off, interview, 5 Feb. 74; NASA Release 74-111)

July 11, 1962
nasa awards of less than $1,000 for inventions were made to the following nasa employees: D. H. Buckley, R. L. Johnson, Earl W. Conrad, R. J. Weber, F. D. Kochendorfer, John C. Nettles, Glen E. McDonald, Gerald Morrell, L. A. Baldwin, V.	A. Sandborn, C. J. Blaze, C. G. Richter, and Marcus F. Heid-mann of Lewis Research Center; and David H. Schaefer of Goddard Space Flight Center.

July 11, 1991
The media reported on the "spectacular" nature for some viewers but confusing for some telescopes of the total solar eclipse. Drake Deming of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt said his team was up most of the night but succeeded in time in solving a problem with one of their instruments. (AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 12/91)

August 24, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced Sylvania Electronics Systems-East had been selected to negotiate $1.8 million contract for transportable ground station (“Advanced Technological Satellite Transportable Ground Station”). Sylvania would design, fabricate, install, test, and check out the system, which featured two sxtremely low noise amplifiers: one a maser and the other a parametric amplifier. These amplifiers operate at temperatures in the range of —440° F and prevent spacecraft signals being overshadowed by heat-induced noise generated inside the receiver. (GSFC Release G—23-64)

December 4, 1973
Radio signals from Comet Kohoutek, racing toward a Dec. 28 pass behind the sun were picked up by scientists using the Kitt Peak, Ariz., radio telescope, nasa reported. It was the first strong evidence of radio emissions—produced by electrically excited molecules of methyl cyanide, a gas previously observed in the region of the Milky Way where new stars were formed—from any comet and the first evidence that methyl cyanide molecules existed in comets. The press quoted a Goddard Space Flight Center spokesman as saying, “Comet Kohoutek appears to be bringing a sample of the distant interstellar matter into the solar system for the first time.” (upi, W Post, 12/12/73, A23)

September 29, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Univac Div., Sperry Rand Corp., for negotiation of contract for Message Multiplexer communications processor systems. Final contract would call for Univac to supply, install, check out, program, and document two complete message handling systems to be installed in NASA communications switching centers at London and at an undetermined site in Australia. Contract was expected to amount to about $1.3 million, (csfc Release G-64-28)

March 6, 1963
The ships Rose Knot and Coastal Sentry, two mainstays of the world-wide Mercury tracking network operated by Goddard Space Flight Center, have undergone modifications for the MA-9 mission and are ready for sea duty again. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)

January 15, 1993
An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)

June 25, 1976
Kennedy Space Center announced a broad program of research projects to use the KSC spaceport and its resources to obtain information on thunderstorms and the hazards they offered to launch operations. Meteorological and electronics scientists from the U.S. and abroad converged on the center for sessions of observing the thunderstorms, whose incidence is high in Fla. during the summer months. More than 70 scientists, many of them graduate students, would participate in experiments under the program; 19 principal investigators would represent organizations such as the Naval Research Laboratory, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental research laboratory, the Atlantic Science Corporation, Mass. Institute of Technology, N. Mex. Institute of Mining and Technology, S. Dak. School of Mines and Technology, and the Universities of Miami, Arizona, Florida, New York at Albany, and Manchester (England). NASA’s Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight center also were participating. Experiments would investigate precipitation formation, lightning behavior, air motions in thunderstorm clouds, and intracloud electrical discharges, among the numerous projects beginning this June and continuing through the summers of 1977 and 1978. Experimenters would provide their own instruments for the experiments, but much KSC equipment and material would be available, such as the instrumented aircraft used in previous lightning studies; weather radars; the detection and ranging system and electric-field measuring system used to monitor buildup of electrical charges that might interfere with launches; a weather-information network display; a satellite imagery acquisition system, with equipment for processing weather pictures, and an automatic picture-transmission (APT) recording system with timing and camera devices. An earlier program in 1948 studied dynamics of thunderstorms; the current program would emphasize electrical characteristics. (KSC Release 279-76)

March 16, 1962
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.

August 4, 1965
Absence of proper space laws may lead to dangerous conflicts and complications not only in this sphere of man’s activities but also1 in purely terrestrial affairs,” said Genadii Zhukov, scientific secretary of the Soviet Space Law Commission in an interview with Krasnaya Zvezda. The resolution adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on Dec. 13, 1963, had confirmed that outer space was open to all states. However, he stressed, the resolution made special reservations about the impermissibility of using sputniks for war propaganda and for inciting enmity between peoples: “All states must refrain from potentially harmful experiments in outer space or any other steps liable to interfere with the peaceful use of such space by other countries.” Zhukov noted that in connection with the prospects of creating permanent orbital stations, the need would arise to determine their legal status, as well as conditions of their use by other countries. As human beings made further inroads into outer space, the problem of determining the legal status of stations and settlements on the moon and on other celestial bodies, the conditions for tapping their natural resources, would become important. He added: “Space law must also guarantee protection of other living worlds if such are discovered on distant planets.” (Tass, 8/4/65) August 4^-5: Some 300 representatives of industry, NASA, and other agencies attended a conference on design of leak-tight fluid connectors at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Sponsored by MSFC and the Society of Automotive Engineers, the conference was planned to promote direct exchange of technical information on separable, semipermanent, and permanent fluid connectors, (msfc Release 65-196)

January 16, 1991
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)

May 14, 1973
Findings that solar power held vast potential to supplement energy needs were presented at Marshall Space Flight Center by university faculty fellows in an msfc Systems Engineering Design Program. The joint MSFC-Auburn Univ. program was to provide information and experience for developing multidisciplinary systems engineering design courses and programs. The fellows had made a systems approach study of the application of solar technology and research to meet the energy crisis. (msfc Release 73-109; msfc pao)

January 27, 1994
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)

March 1, 1962
Rift (Reactor-in-Flight-Test) bidders conference held at Marshall Space Flight Center.

May 19, 1962
An estimated 7,000 persons visited the opening of the Space Museum at the nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.

September 6, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it had scheduled for September 12 at Kennedy Space Center a 20-second on-the-pad test firing of the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis's three main engines to verify the flight readiness of Atlantis—the fourth and newest of the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet. The flight readiness firing in a launch-day environment would exercise the Space Shuttle's main propulsion system and computer programs to demonstrate the proper integration of all elements prior to the first Atlantis launch scheduled for October 3 for mission 51-J. Engineers had previously test fired each engine individually at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories. On September 9 a firing simulation would kick off preparations for the test. The one-day test would check out critical flight and ground computer systems that controlled the actual engine firing and give the Space Shuttle launch team a chance to re-review test procedures. Countdown for the flight readiness firing would begin at 4:00 a.m. September 10, with the clock at the T-43 hour mark, and culminate with the 20-second static firing. Three days of preparations would precede the firing countdown, including purging the external tank with inert gases, installing special firing instrumentation, and mounting a radiation shield on the deck of the mobile launcher platform to protect the solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank structures during the test firing. Total flight readiness firing, including pre- and post-test activities, would span six days and require support from personnel and operations from various NASA centers including MSFC and Kennedy and Johnson Space Centers. Events leading to the September 12 engine firing would be nearly identical to those that preceded an actual Space Shuttle launch, with built-in holds distributed throughout the countdown at the same times they occurred in an actual launch countdown. An automated ground launch sequencer would control the final nine minutes of the countdown. The sequencer performed the final series of events in a specific order, monitored various measurements of out-of-tolerance conditions, and detected system malfunctions for which it would automatically stop the countdown. Following the test, technicians would inspect externally and internally the three main engines to verify their readiness for flight. These post-firing activities would take about 11 days. (MSFC Release 85—44)

November 28, 1986
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)

April 8, 1972
NASA announced selection of RCA Aerospace Systems Div. for negotiation on $175 000 fixed-price contract to produce long-range laser traversing system. Nicknamed “Smokey,” system had been developed at Goddard Space Flight Center for U.S. Forest Service. Two back-packable, 18-kg (40-lb) units contained vertical-firing laser and telescope receiver that viewed laser pulse above all obstructions, permitting surveyors to lay out property lines over terrain obstacles faster and cheaper than by previous methods, (nasa Release 72—79)

January 24, 1961
NASA outlined specifications for a low-altitude active communications satellite Project Relay at Goddard Space Flight Center.

January 1, 1973
NASA planned to spend up to $100 million during the next five years on the post-Apollo lunar science program to extract information from 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar samples, 30 000 photos, and “miles” of magnetic tape from six Apollo lunar landing missions, the New York Times reported. Director Anthony J. Calio of Manned Spacecraft Center Office of Science and Applications had said in an interview that recommendations in an October 1972 report of the Lunar Science Institute were being followed in much of msc’s planning, but the msc Lunar Receiving Laboratory would be closed on completion of Apollo 17 sample processing. The sample collection might be divided for storage at another Government facility as a “precaution.” The lrl report had said preservation of MSC curatorial facilities for lunar materials was “absolutely essential” to lunar science objectives. Calio said sample inventory and preparation of rock slivers for the thin sections library should take two years. Repository for Apollo geophysical material, including magnetic tapes, probably would be Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wilford, NYT, 1/3/73, 25)

February 20, 1963
Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched from nasa Wallops Station with scientific experiments designed to measure atmospheric temperatures, winds and diffusion rates at high altitudes. Nike-Apache’s payload ejected sodium vapor trail from 25-mi. altitude to 100-mi. altitude, the vapor clouds visible for several hundred miles. Nike-Cajun’s payload consisted of 12 special explosive charges ejected and detonated at intervals from 24- to 55-mi. altitudes. Experiments were part of continuing program by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center to study characteristics and composition of the upper atmosphere. (Wallops Release 63-17)

February 24, 1972
Deployment tests of Skylab Workshop meteoroid shield were under way at Astronautics Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Shield, thin sheet of aluminum wrapped around outer wall, would protect Skylab crewmen from micrometeoroids and ensure comfortable temperature in space, (msfc Release 72-19)

October 1, 1962
Nova iaunch facilities study contract was awarded to Martin-Marietta Corp., Denver, by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The study assumes Nova will be launched from Cape Canaveral.

January 17, 1964
Four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket vehicle was launched at 12:01 a.m. est from Wallops Station, Va., carrying 120-lb. instrumented payload to 587.22-mi. altitude. Payload experiments: magnetic mass spectrometer to identify ions in upper atmosphere and measure their distribution; Lyman-alpha radiation experiment to determine spatial variation of atomic hydrogen in atmosphere; and experiment to measure altitude distribution and intensity of night airglow from atomic oxygen. Impact occurred 727 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Data were telemetered to ground stations and no recovery operation was attempted. Experiment was designed and built by E. 0. Hulburt Center for Space Research at U.S. Naval Research Laboratory and flown in cooperation with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-6)

August 12, 1975
In the general purpose laboratory (GPL) at Marshall Space Flight Center, investigators from MSFC and Johnson Space Center were conducting experiments in high-energy cosmic-ray astronomy, superfluid helium, optical x-ray astronomy, and life sciences. The objective of the experiments, designated concept verification test (CVT) 5, was to verify operational and integration concepts for their applicability to Spacelab, the reusable manned space laboratory being built by the European Space Agency as a payload for the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the high-energy astronomy experiment was to demonstrate the use of minicomputers for experiment operation, control, and data management, and the real-time interaction of payload specialists with experiment operations. The superfluid helium experiment examined characteristics of helium droplets at temperatures near 2.2 K (—512°F), which would help in developing cryogenic techniques for use in Spacelab. The optical astronomy experiment, which demonstrated remote experiment operation by obtaining data from a Ferson 40.6-cm telescope 9.2 kilometers away, gave practice in investigator-experiment interaction and helped in developing computer control techniques, display requirements for telescope operation and data management, and astronomy training requirements for crew members. The four life-sciences experiments included studies of sporophore formation, the vestibular function, a clinical diagnostic system, and muscle-like contractile protein. Investigators also participated in an experiment to demonstrate the use of a computer in real-time mission planning, scheduling, and applications. By involving investigators in the CVT simulations, NASA would be able to plan the most cost-effective use of Spacelab. (MSFC Release 75-178)

July 6, 1989
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Thomas J. Lee as Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, effective immediately. Lee0*succeeded James R. Thompson Jr., selected by President George Bush to be NASA Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 89108, Jul 6/89)

March 12, 1985
Soviet and French scientists would soon launch into orbit a space observatory, the Gamma 1 Project, that would carry a large gamma-ray telescope to help determine sources of cosmic rays, streams of highly charged particles that bombarded the earth from space, the NY Times reported the newspaper Izvestia as saying. Researchers hoped to obtain a detailed picture of the sky in gamma rays in order to understand the mysterious nature of gamma stars and their possible relationship with known astrophysical objects. Izvestia had gone on to say that testing was underway on the observatory but did not report a launch date. The Izvestia article said the two countries had cooperated in designing a special spacecraft, to be placed in an orbit 216 miles above earth, capable of carrying nearly two tons of scientific equipment for the Gamma 1 experiment, including main, small gamma-ray and X-ray telescopes. Franco-Soviet space cooperation dated back to an agreement signed in 1966; France was a major partner in the Vega missions the Soviets had launched in December to examine Venus and Halley's Comet and, in June 1982, the French cosmonaut Jean-Loup Chretien had been the first and was the only man from a country outside the Soviet block to go into space aboard a Soviet spacecraft, the Soyuz T-6. (NYT, Mar 12/85, C3) The IUE findings of coexisting dust and gas clouds were consistent with scientific theories of planetary system formation, noted Dr. Yoji Kondo, IUE project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center. In general, theories predicted that planets evolved from large stellar clouds of dust and gas that gradually condensed into orbiting planetary bodies. Observations with the IRAS strengthened this theory by suggesting that planetary disks surrounded a number of nearby stars. Also, astrometric measurements of the movement of several stars indicated the possible presence about each star of a planetary body several times more massive than Jupiter. Kondo and his associate Dr. F. C. Bruhweiler of Catholic University, Washington, D.C., used the IUE telescope to obtain the ultraviolet spectra of Beta Pictoris to determine the manner in which ultraviolet light was absorbed by the gas cloud and the extinction of the light by the dust cloud. The ultraviolet spectra showed an absence of selective extinction of the light at shorter wavelengths, evidence that the star's light was being blocked evenly at all wavelengths by dust particles greater than one micron (millionth of a meter), as infrared data had reported. "The IUE observation," Kondo said, "indicates the gas is either clumpy or is varying under the pressure of the stellar wind and radiation. If so, this would tend to complement IRAS and ground-telescope observations that a substantial dust cloud of protoplanetary material exists around Beta Pictoris." Kondo cautioned that the lack of observed extinction could also be due to viewing the star just a little off-plane, so that the telescope's line-of-sight was not aligned directly through the disk of orbiting dusty matter. However, Bruh-weiler added, "that would be unlikely. All evidence seems to point to a belt too thick around Beta Pictoris for the line-of-sight to be missing the dust belt." (NASA Release 85-52)

August 30, 1973
Appointment of Roald Sagdeyev as Director of the Soviet Space Research Institute was announced in Vestnik, monthly publication of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Sagdeyev replaced Georgy I. Petrov, who went into voluntary retirement. Sagdeyev, a nuclear physicist, had been made a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in 1964 and had become a full member in 1968. Before his appointment as Director, Sagdeyev had specialized in plasma physics at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Novosibirsk. (AP, W Post, 9/23/7$, Al; 9/24/73, A21) September 2—7:	The 66th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) was held in Dublin, Ireland. U.S. participants included Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan and Apollo 16 commander John W. Young. The 1972 fai Gold Space Medal was presented to Cernan in recognition of the Dec. 7-19, 1972, final Apollo mission which had “accomplished all of its goals and magnificently concluded the extraordinary and highly successful Apollo program.” Cernan also received t'he 1972 De la Vaulx Medal for his absolute world record of 21 hrs 32 min 44 sec for “Duration of Stay Outside his Lunar Module ‘Challenger’ Spacecraft,” set during Apollo 17. Young received the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for “remarkable leadership, skill, daring and dedication” as commander of the April 16-27, 1972, Apollo 16 mission and the V. M. Komarov Diploma, on behalf of himself and Apollo 16 Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II and Charles M. Duke, Jr., for successful completion of all but one of the mission’s 33 major experiments. The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Aeronautics was awarded to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration “in recognition of its outstanding contribution to air traffic efficiency and safety by the development of the now fully operational Automated Radar Terminal System” (arts). The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Astronautics went to Boeing Co. Aerospace Group for design and production of the lunar roving vehicle (lrv) used during the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions. The Paul Tis-sandier Diploma was presented to Kay A. Brick for “her outstanding contributions to women’s aviation over the past 23 years” as a member and Chairman of the Board of the All-Women’s Transcontinental Air Race “Powder Puff Derby.” (naa News, 9/73, 1—2; faa Release 73— 155; A&A 1972) September 3:	The U.S. had “discreetly blocked” Soviet attempts to purchase 10 ilc Industries’ Apollo lunar-configured spacesuits, Aviation Week & Space Technology'said. The U.S.S.R. had been told that U.S. export of such technology could not be approved. (Av Wk, 9/3/73, 11) September 4:	World atlases were inaccurate in delineating outer boundaries of polar icecaps according to imagery returned by Nimbus 5 (weather satellite launched by NASA Dec. 10, 1972), NASA announced. A Goddard Space Flight Center study had shown that synoptic photos from Nimbus 5 clearly indicated polar regions underwent large-scale changes in a short time. Boundaries between the multiyear icepack around the North Pole and the large areas of first-year ice varied significantly within one freezing season. Even greater changes occurred around Antarctica. Nimbus 5 also was measuring daily rainfall distribution over the earth’s oceans to indicate to meteorologists how much energy was being released into the global atmosphere. An electrically scanning microwave radiometer aboard the spacecraft was measuring rainfall rate and heat thus released to enable forecasters to understand a tropical storm or hurricane and predict its 24- to 48-hr intensity, (nasa Releases 73-176, 73-175)

December 3, 1985
Dr. Michael Kaiser of the Goddard Space Flight Center said at a news conference today that, "We see no radio emissions from Uranus that would tell us it has a magnetic field, and we're less than 46 million miles from the planet" with the Voyager 2 spacecraft, the Washington Post reported. "We still pick up Jupiter's radio noise, Saturn's radio noise and even the sun's radio noise but we're not hearing any radio events at Uranus," he added. If Uranus had no magnetic field, it would make it only the second known planet in the solar system without one, Venus being the other. Kaiser said the sign of a planet's magnetic field was its radio noise, generated when protons and electrons poured off the sun and collided with the planet's magnetosphere. This collision triggered the one billion-watt radio signal from earth called the Northern Lights, a 100 billion-watt signal from Saturn, and a signal so loud from Jupiter that it dwarfed every other radio signal in the solar system. "You don't need much to form a magnetosphere that would generate noise out at Uranus's distance," Kaiser said, "so we figure we're either dealing with a planet that has no magnetic field at all or is so bizarre we don't even know what to look for." Kaiser pointed out that a missing magnetic field suggested that Uranus had no internal heat source—no radioactive core such as that which made the rotating earth behave like a dynamo, and no internal heat source such as those that gave the rapidly rotating Jupiter and Saturn a strong magnetic field. "You need an internal heat source to drive a magnetic field," Kaiser said. "A planet's rotation is not enough by itself to create one." Voyager 2, which had been in space for eight years and had passed Jupiter and Saturn, on January 24 would fly within 51,000 miles of the cloud tops of Uranus. Voyager 2 would in August 1989 encounter Neptune, but its flight would not take it near Pluto, the last known planet from the sun. The spacecraft would then pass out of the solar system. (W Post, Dec 4/85, A20)

March 23, 1974
Key appointments in the space shuttle program at Marshall Space Flight Center became effective. Robert E. Lindstrom became Manager of the Space Shuttle Office, replacing Roy E. Godfrey, who became Special Assistant to the msfc Director. Within the Shuttle Office, James R. Thompson became Project Manager for the space shuttle main engine. John A. Chambers became Deputy Manager of the Shuttle Engine Office and Frank M. Stewart became technical assistant to the Manager of the Shuttle Projects Office, (msfc Release 74-41)

April 5, 1973
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 197.8-km (122.9-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) April 10:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz completed training at Marshall Space Flight Center for a three-hour extravehicular activity scheduled for the Skylab 1—2 mission, set for May 14 and 15 launches. Although Conrad and Kerwin were to perform the EVA, all three crew members trained so that any combination of two could accomplish the activity. The training—begun in February 1972—took place in msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator, which held a full-scale mockup of a major portion of the Skylab cluster in a simulated weightless environment, (msfc Release 73-55)

August 30, 1973
Proposals for developing space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motors (srms) had been received from Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and United Technology Center, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The space shuttle motor program would be conducted in three increments: design, development, and test, ending in September 1979; production of new and refurbished SRMs for 54 flights (108 units) beginning early in 1978; and delivery of new and refurbished units for 385 flights (770 units) beginning in July 1980. (msfc Release 73-125)

April 2, 1963
nasa launched kxpioher xvn (S-6) atmospheric structure satellite from Cape Canaveral, using Thor-Delta launch vehicle m (its 16th consecutive success in 17 attempts). Satellite attained orbit of 571-mi. apogee, 158.9-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period, 57.6° inclination to the equator. The sphere-shaped satellite, measuring 35 inches in diameter and weighing 405 lbs., contained instruments (two neutral mass spectrometers, four pressure gauges, and two electrostatic probes) to measure density, composition, pressure, and temperature of the atmosphere; it was equipped to make direct samplings of atmospheric constituents such as helium, nitrogen, and oxygen. Under project management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xvii was the first scientific earth satellite to use new pulse-code-modulation telemetry system, a solid-state system providing output power of 500 milli-watts and capable of supplying 40 separate channels of information in digital form. LTseful lifetime of the satellite was estimated at two-three months. (nasa Release 63-59 ;nasa Project explorer xvii Prog. Rpt. No. 1)

September 10, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials successfully made the first of two final corrections in the orbit of syncom hi communications satellite, raising the satellite’s perigee closer to perfect circle 22,289 mi. above the earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/10/64)

July 31, 1991
A column by Robert C. Cowen cited variances in figures for global warming among NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and the University of Alabama at Huntsville from those of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, the Climate Research Unit of East Anglia in England, and the Soviet Union's Hydrometerorological Scientific Research Center. According to the British and the Goddard Institute, 1990 was the warmest year on record globally but according to the Marshall Center, using different data, the hottest years in descending order were 1987, 1988, 1983, and 1990. (CSM, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91)

August 5, 1975
The Saturn IB, used to launch three U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts into space [see 15—24 July], had experienced no unscheduled holds whatever during countdown, making it the most perfect launch of the Saturn series, Ellery B. May, manager of the Saturn Program Office at the Marshall Space Flight Center, said. Saturn 210, manufactured in 1967, was 10th of the IB series and had the oldest engine used. All Saturn launches had been successful and had met their objectives; although some had anomalies, such as leaks or faulty wiring, no major configuration changes were ever necessary. The ASTP mission marked the end of the Saturn series, but its impact on technology would continue. “Space Shuttle main engines (SSME) are an outgrowth of technology from Saturn engines,” May explained. The major difference between the two was that the Shuttle must have much higher pressure systems than ever before required and must be reusable. (MSFC Release 75 — 174)

May 6, 1972
Decision to plan large multipurpose optical telescope to be launched and serviced by space shuttle in 1980s was announced by NASA. Large Space Telescope (lst) to study energy processes in galactic nuclei, early stages of stellar and solar system formation, supernova remnants and white dwarfs, and other phenomena relevant to origin of universe would also provide long-term monitoring of atmospheric phenomena on Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Telescope, able to observe galaxies 100 times fainter than those seen by most powerful ground-based optic telescope, would weigh between 9000 and 11000 kg (20 000 and 25 000 lbs) and have length of 12 to 16 m (40 to 52 ft) and diameter of 3.6 to 4 m (12 to 13 ft). It would include diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter. LST project management had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 72—98)

December 21, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a one-year $1.6-million contract to Aero Spacelines, Inc., for flying large rocket cargoes in its Super Guppy aircraft—the only aircraft in existence which could fulfill the size and weight requirement for the S-IVB stage of the Saturn vehicle, the Saturn IB and Saturn V instrument units, and the Lunar Excursion Module adapter. The agreement also provided for an extension of a previous NASA-Aero Spacelines contract for use of the Pregnant Guppy aircraft, (msfc Release 65-311)

January 13, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $59 950 contract to Abbott Laboratories for living human kidney cells to be used by U.S. astronauts in the German electrophoresis experiment during the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Abbott Laboratories would provide the cells as part of an experiment to find a way to isolate effectively the one kidney cell in 20 that produced the enzyme urokinase, an enzyme capable of dissolving blood clots. Because gravity made such separations difficult on earth, scientists hoped to develop new technology in the zero-g environment of space. The experiment was being developed, built, and tested by West Germany’s Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm Gmbtt. (MSFC Releases 75- 7, 75-13) mobile launcher inside the Vehicle Assembly Building on 13 Jan. Engineers began electrical and mechanical systems tests on the first stage and installed flame curtains and panels to shroud the outboard engines. The Saturn IVB second stage was mated to the booster 14 Jan. and the instrument unit added to the stack 16 Jan. A boilerplate unit simulating the Apollo command module was added 17 Jan. The boilerplate would be removed and replaced with the actual spacecraft, and the rollout of the entire vehicle to the launch pad was scheduled for March. The docking system and docking module were mated 17 Jan. after combined systems tests. The complete unit would be placed into the spacecraft adapter in February. Swing-arm launch-control center integration was completed 21 Jan. (KSC Release 165—74; MSFC Release 75—19; Spaceport News, 23 Jan 75, 3; 6 Feb 75, 3; Marshall Star, 2 Jan 75, 2)

May 28, 1987
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)

September 23, 1974
Personnel from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, operator of the solar observatory at Johnson Space Center since 1970, would move to Marshall Space Flight Center, jsc announced. NOAA would continue at msfc as co-investigator in an experiment conducted with the Apollo Telescope Mount on the Skylab Workshop during its 1973— 1974 mission. The experiment had gathered solar radiation data in the x-ray region of the solar spectrum. The jsc-noaa solar observatory would reopen for space shuttle operations, (jsc Release 74-253)

January 14, 1991
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.

May 7, 1987
NASA announced that it, together with the Universities Space Research Association, in Columbia, Maryland, and the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence in Space Data and Information Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new research facility would serve as the nerve center for a network of researchers from leading universities and from industry computer science departments. The emphasis would be on research in areas of potential longterm application to NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 8770)

August 14, 1962
Reported from Moscow and confirmed by Goddard Space Flight Center that pilots of vostok iii and iv were using radio frequencies of 19,990 megacycles, 20,006 megacycles, and 143,625 megacycles.

March 2, 1965
A $1,260,000 contract to build an addition to Central Computer Facility at Slidell, La., had been awarded by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to Quinn Construction Co., New Orleans, La. The computer facility was used to support the Michoud Operations in New Orleans and the Mississippi Test Operations, Hancock County, Miss, (msfc Release 65-48)

May 7, 1964
explorer xvni, the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) satellite, survived sub-zero temperatures during eight-hour flight in the earth’s shadow, a duration record for satellites, imp remained in the shadow for so long because of its highly eccentric orbit, carrying it out 122,000	mi. at apogee. As it entered the shadow, imp shut off automatically, and temperatures on imp’s surface fell to more than 400° below zero. After it emerged once again, imp’s transmitter signal was picked up by nasa tracking station at Santiago, Chile. Preliminary evaluation of telemetry tapes at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center indicated data from the imp experiments were of good quality, (nasa Release 64-111)

July 10, 1991
The Huntsville Times reported that volunteers in a water taste test at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center had difficulty or were unable to distinguish recycled from regular water. The recycled water came from perspiration collected in a test chamber, and in which the salts, oils, and microorganisms were subsequently removed. The recycling process was designed to be used on the Space Station to minimize need for additional water. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 10/91; W Times, Jul 19/91)

May 2, 1996
Joseph B. Gurman of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHO’s scientists were excited and surprised to find that “movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun.” The scientists observed that the Sun’s plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, “Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found,” news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, “Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal,” 2 May 1996.)

April 25, 1994
NASA was to award a Program Information System Mission Services (PrISMS) contract worth up to $800 million by May 1. Three companies were seeking to win the eight-year Marshall Space Flight Center contract: Computer Sciences Corporation, Harris Corporation, and incumbent Boeing Computer Services, Inc. The winning PrISMS vendor was to manage NASAwide communications, provide some NASAwide information management services, and run extensive computational services at Marshall. PrISMS had a two-year base with six one-year options; 10 percent of the work was to be set aside for small, disadvantaged businesses. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 25/94)

November 10, 1993
NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)

April 26, 1976
A $4.5-million structural test data-acquisition system to be used for tests on Space Shuttle components was nearing completion of installation and checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center, MFSC announced. Developed by Avco Electronics, the system included a central facility with a computer system, 6 line printers, 5 graphics display units, a printer-plotter, 2 card readers, and 4 video hard-copy units; 4 data-selector units; and 24 static-input units. The central facility, to be located in MSFC’s Test Laboratory, was designed for a lifespan of 10 yr and would combine extreme accuracy with high reliability and ruggedness. Testing the external tanks, solid-fuel rocket booster, and other parts of the Shuttle for structural integrity would require monitoring up to 6000 channels of data simultaneously, fed into the computers from test hardware elsewhere at the Center. The Avco contract also provided for training MSFC personnel to operate the system when completed late in 1976. (MSFC Release 76-73)

February 1, 1963
nasa announced its first contract to study overall systems requirements for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) had been awarded to Republic Aviation Corp. Administered by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, contract called for four-month study to determine “technical systems needed for 24-hour surveillance of the earth’s cloud cover and to identify the major scientific and engineering advances required for the ground stations.” (nasa Release 63-18)

April 10, 1975
Dust storms had been observed on the moon every sunrise and sunset by a three-axis microparticle detector left on the moon by Apollo 17 astronauts during their December 1972 mission, a Nature magazine article reported. The article, based on a report by scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, said the GSFC scientists suspected that the dust was being lifted from the lunar surface and then driven away from the rising or setting sun by electrostatic fields associated with the transition from day to night, or vice versa. The finding supported a theory advanced 20 yr ago by Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., who had suggested that electrostatic forces transported dust from lunar highlands to lowlands, accounting for the smooth appearance of the lunar seas. Although the Apollo landings had shown that those seas had been formed by lava flooding rather than deep dust accumulations, their surface was covered with very fine dust. Also, because neither wind nor rain existed on the airless moon, some other process must have been responsible for the evident erosion. Electrostatic levitation was being suggested as one possible explanation. Because the lunar vacuum acted as an insulator, the dust cloud hugged the surface, reaching only between 20 and 30 cm high, explaining why it had been detected from a low angle by instruments on the lunar surface but never by orbiting astronauts or earth-based equipment. (Hughes, Nature, 10 April 75, 481—2)

June 11, 1972
NASA had asked private industry to help assess space shuttle boosterrecovery system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Large parachutes would lower 90-metric-ton (lOO-U.S.-ton) spent booster stages to ocean. Six proposals for study of parachute deceleration system had been received, (msfc Release 72-70)

January 14, 1985
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to industry to develop a space platform providing five years of on-orbit services to NASA payloads while allowing the developer to market it to commercial users, an innovative approach considered a first step toward creating a closer partnership between government and industry in space. Industry would finance, develop, own, and operate the platform with first use planned in late 1988 and would be free to market the platform (totally separate from NASA's plans for a government-developed, permanently manned space station) for materials processing or other manufacturing activities. NASA stipulated that the platform be capable of providing services for four future projects: the extreme ultraviolet explorer (EUVE), the x-ray timing explorer (XTE), a zero-gravity payload, and an as yet unidentified project. The Space Shuttle or other launch vehicle would place the commercial platform in orbit. Commercial payloads would reimburse the government for use of the orbiter and facilities. (NASA Release 85-7) Johnson Space Center

April 9, 1975
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)

February 1, 1978
Fifteen scientists who would manage earth-orbital investigations for the third Spacelab in mid-1981 had met at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss preparations for the mission, the Marshall Star reported. Known as the investigators’ working group for Spacelab mission 3 (IWG-3), the group would work with NASA mission management to develop a payload offering the greatest possible scientific return and to select payload specialists who would perform experiments aboard Spacelab 3. Those at the meeting agreed on professional qualifications for payload specialists and on criteria for their selection, beginning in the second half of 1978. Sponsored by the NASA Hq Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications, Spacelab mission 3 would include materials processing in space, the atmospheric cloud-physics laboratory, the drop-dynamics module, and vestibular-function research. Experiments would obtain basic knowledge about crystal-growing processes in earth orbit, mechanisms for generating small latex spheres, dynamic behavior of free-floating drops of liquid, cloud formation in the atmosphere, red blood cell aggregation, and adaptation of life forms to space. MSFC would manage integration and operation of the scientific payloads flown on the first 3 Spacelab missions. CMarshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1)

July 29, 1985
NASA launched from KSC at 5:00 p.m. EDT today Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger carrying Spacelab-2. The flight was the eighth for Challenger and the 19th Space Shuttle mission. The flight commander was Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, who served as pilot on the third Space Shuttle mission. Air Force Col. Roy Bridges, Jr. was pilot; mission specialists were Dr. Anthony England, a geophysicist; Dr. F. Story Musgrave, a physician; and Dr. Karl Henize, an astronomer who at the age of 58 was the oldest American to travel in space. Payload specialists were Dr. Loren Acton, a solar physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, and Dr. John David Bartoe, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory. Approximately 5 minutes and 45 seconds after launch onboard computers shut down Challenger's center engine (SSME 1) due to failure of the orbiter's two high-pressure, fuel turbo-pump discharge temperature sensors. Challenger was 70 miles above earth at the time, about 50 miles below the orbit considered safe for a manned spacecraft. The two remaining main engines ran smoothly and burned about a minute and 10 seconds longer than originally planned, putting the Space Shuttle into a lower-than-scheduled orbit. The crew then used two auxiliary engines to raise the orbit in steps from an initial 122 miles to 194 miles at 10:30 p.m. the night of launch. The crew also dumped as much as 4,400 lb. of fuel to achieve the higher orbit. In explaining the problem with SSME 1, NASA associate administrator Jesse Moore said the onboard sensors first indicated that the center engine might be overheating four minutes after liftoff, the Washington Post reported. "Computers then ordered the center engine fuel pump to bypass one valve and use another to feed fuel into the combustion chamber," he said. Two minutes later computers again sensed that the fuel pump was overheating and automatically shut down the center engine.The mission control center in Houston also received indications of dangerously high temperature readings on a second engine and instructed the crew to disconnect a backup sensor to prevent the second engine from shutting down before the spacecraft reached orbit. The crew encountered the next problem when attempting to operate a $60 million telescope-pointing device. The instrument pointing subsystem (IPS) and its four solor telescopes were one of 13 experiments carried on the European-built Spacelab-2. Mission specialist Henize told mission control that the pointing attempts were "rather dismal," the NY Times reported. Lee Briscoe, flight director, elaborated to reporters. "It appears that we are able to find the sun, find the stars, get into what we call a rough track mode," he said. "But we never appear to get into a fine track and actually finish the total tracking." Since the problem appeared to be with the computer programming that drove the unit, NASA radioed up a new version of the programming. However, it initially failed to correct the problem, and NASA told the crew to try harder. Eventually the IPS operated successfully after the crew inserted a series of software patches developed at Marshall Space Flight Center. NASA extended the mission duration by one day to allow additional collection of engineering and scientific data. The Spacelab-2 aboard Challenger was the second of its two verification test flights and consisted of an igloo attached to a lead pallet, the IPS mounted on it and a two pallet train behind, with an experiment special support structure. Experiments conducted during the Spacelab-2 mission were in the fields of life sciences, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, solar physics, atmospheric physics, and technology. Experiments were located on the IPS, the three pallets, the special support structure, the orbiter mid-deck, and one on the ground (NASA FOR M-989-51-F [postflight] Sept 27/85, [prelaunch] July 9/85; NASA MOR M-977-51-F-03 [prelaunch] July 1/85; W Post, July 30/85, A1, July 31/85, A3; NYT, July 31/85, B4)

January 28, 1964
NASA conducted three grenade experiments with Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched from Wallops Island, Va.; Fort Churchill, Canada; and Ascension Island in the South Atlantic, part of current series to gather comparative data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric temperatures at widely separated locations. At Wallops Island, Nike-Cajun lifted off at 11:11 p.m. est, followed by Nike-Cajun at Fort Churchill at 11:17 p.m. est, and Nike-Cajun at Ascension Island, 11:18 p.m. est. Grenades were ejected and detonated at altitudes ranging from 23 to 56 miles. The series of experiments was under direction of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-11)

November 14, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Kansas City that there was no conflict between science and religion. “Science stands to better understand creation. Religion stands to better understand the creator. Science seeks to harness the forces of nature around us; religion and ethics seek to harness the forces of nature within us.” (Kansas City Times, 11/15/63)

October 19, 1965
Dr. P. H. Fang, a researcher at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, had discovered that silicon solar cells damaged by electron radiation could be completely recovered any number of times when exposed to high temperatures. Report was given at a Photovoltaic Specialists Conference at gsfc Oct. 18-20. (gsfc Release G-28-65)

January 31, 1975
NASA had awarded a $152 565 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, and test of the Space Shuttle external tank, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The contract, which covered the first increment of the external tank project for 1 Sept. 1973 to 30 June 1980, called for a maximum production rate of 24 tanks per year and delivery of major ground-test articles and 6 flight-model tanks. The work would be done at Michoud Assembly Facility under the direction of MSFC. (MSFC Release 75—28) During January: Opportunities and Choices in Space Science, 1974, a report published by the Space Science Board of the National Research Council, recommended that NASA undertake the Large Space Telescope as the only new space research start in FY 1976. The telescope should be followed by a series of permanent national and international observatories in orbit. The report also recommended that, budget permitting, NASA undertake in 1977 a lunar—polar mission, a Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter, a Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission, and a solar maximum mission. However, NASA should compare the importance of the Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter with the Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission if current FY 1977 budget estimates would not support both missions. Other recommendations included an immediate reevaluation of strategy for missions to explore the outer solar system during the next decade and for returning a Martian surface sample to earth instead of landing an unmanned laboratory to perform analyses as current plans propose. The report strongly endorsed the High Energy Astronomical Observatories (HEAO), Pioneer—Venus mission, and Mariner— Jupiter—Saturn mission as vital to the nation’s space science efforts. (Text)

March 22, 1973
Grumman Aerospace Corp. would lay off 1000 employees to reduce operating expenses, the New York Times reported. The expense paring had been ordered by Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements to increase operating efficiency after the controversy over increasing costs of the Crumman-produced F-14 fighter aircraft. (Andelman, NYT, 3/28/73, P28) March 28—29:	Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: The Office of Space Science had assumed total responsibility for collecting, handling, and analyzing data from the Apollo program, and “we plan to devote the next several years to their detailed analysis and interpretation. Our objective is a better understanding of the origin, history and present environment of the Moon, and the definition of goals and objectives of possible future flight programs. These studies will also use the data from the still-continuing flight program of the Soviet Union.” The French-built laser reflector on the Soviet lunar roving vehicle Lunokhod 2 deposited on the moon by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), “in addition to the three carried by Apollos 11, 14, and 15, provides another control point for lunar mapping studies and other scientific objectives. The close cooperation between the French and Soviets in putting the device on the Moon and between the Americans and French in securing early observations is a striking example of the possibilities for effective scientific cooperation in space among the nations of the world.” Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972) was “very much a pathfinder as it goes to Jupiter. We know Jupiter has intense radiation fields. We plan for Pioneer 10 to pass by Jupiter about three-and-a-half Jupiter radii from the planet. We think that Pioneer 10 at that distance . . . will be able to survive as it goes through those radiation belts. If by chance it does not, then we would probably retarget Pioneer G so that it stayed farther out.” If Pioneer 10 survived the radiation belts, “we would probably target Pioneer G closer so that we could get a better look at Jupiter and get more information about the intensity of the radiation belts as we get closer to Jupiter.” (Transcript) March 28-30:	A symposium on federally sponsored university research in transportation noise was conducted at Stanford Univ. by the Dept, of Transportation in cooperation with NASA and the National Science Foundation. Papers presented by university researchers and representatives of Government agencies covered jet noise, combustion noise, noise from moving bodies, sound propagation through ducts, rotor noise, high-intensity sound, tire noise, and economic and community aspects of noise, (dot Release 15-73; dot pio) March 29:	usns Vanguard, 181-m (595-ft) nasa tracking ship, left Port Canaveral, Fla., for Mar Del Plata, Argentina, to support Skylab missions scheduled to begin in May. Vanguard would be a link in NASA’s worldwide tracking network relaying two-way information between a spacecraft and mission control at Johnson Space Center in Houston via Goddard Space Flight Center. En route Vanguard would record tracking data for the Pioneer G launch scheduled for April 5. (gfsc Release; Skylab prog off)

November 24, 1965
Ground test version of the Saturn V launch vehicle’s first stage (s—ic—1T stage) was static fired for its full flight duration of about 2V2 min. at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. S-IC-T, designed by msfc and the Boeing Co., generated its full thrust of 7,5-million lbs., equivalent, at maximum flight velocity, to about 160 million hp. Firing was the second conducted by the Boeing Co., MSFc’s prime contractor for the s-ic. All early firings were conducted by the msfc Test Laboratory, which directed today’s test, (msfc Release 65-287)

September 27, 1965
U.S. Army’s Nixe-X Project Office at Redstone Arsenal announced appointment of Dr. Oswald H. Lange as Chief Scientist and Charles E. Richardson as Chief Engineer. Lange was returning to the Army after more than five years with NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, where he directed the Saturn vehicle project and for the past two years was assistant msfc director for scientific and technical analysis. Richardson was formerly chief of the Nike-X Project’s Test and Range Operations Div. (Marshall Star, 9/29/65, 1)

March 20, 1973
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center magnetospheric physics experiment to a 239.8-km (149-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) March 21-25:	Skylab mission simulation and flight-readiness tests were completed at Kennedy Space Center, including experiment hardware and the control system. The first Skylab crew—Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz—participated in the checkout. Decisions were made to replace three water accumulators and bladders in the airlock module and the multiple docking adapter coolant system. (nasa Release 73—55)

November 20, 1961
NASA announced consolidation of nuclear-electric propulsion program at Lewis Research Center by transfer of the Marshall Space Flight Center Research Projects Division under Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger to Lewis within 3 months.

August 1, 1973
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Kiruna, Sweden, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to an 88-km (54.7-mi) altitude. The objective was to study ion composition and density of the ionospheric D- and E-regions at polar latitudes. The data would be compared with data from two Nike-Apaches launched Aug. 1. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily and all experimental objectives appeared to have been achieved. (NASA Rpt SRL)

May 11, 1962
nasa Inventions and Contributions Board made awards of less than $1,000 to the following nasa employees: Wade E. Lanford, Langley Research Center; Billy C. Hughes, John R. Raskin, Robert J. Schwinghamer, Wilhelm Angele, and Hans G. Martineck, Marshall Space Flight Center.

May 30, 1973
The People’s Republic of China was preparing to deploy the first group of 10 nuclear missiles capable of reaching U.S.S.R. targets, Joseph Alsop reported in Washington Post. U.S. intelligence agencies had observed missile sites carved into mountain sides and believed the new intermediate range missile had already been successfully tested. (W Post, 1/17/73, January 17—19:	A Skylab simulation at Manned Spacecraft Center picked up the Skylab flight plan in the 10th day of the mission scheduled for April 30 launch. Flight controllers worked in shifts to tally the day’s activities, prepare a summary flight plan for the day following, and complete a detailed flight plan for use the next day. Activities included all elements of flight between 8 am and 5 pm each day but were oriented toward experiments rather than flight operations. Skylab astronauts manned crew simulators, principal investigators manned support stations, and the Marshall Space Flight Center Operations Support Center for Skylab provided support for the Orbital Workshop. Prime contractors North American Rockwell Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. supported the simulation, msc controllers inserted simulated malfunctions to exercise procedures and mission rules for the flight and to observe the reaction of control teams, (msc Roundup, 1/19/73, 2) January 18:	The European Space Research Organization Council met in Paris and unanimously authorized establishment of a project to develop the sortie laboratory to fly with nasa’s space shuttle in the 1980s. Participating states would provide funding and would use esro facilities and assistance. The Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Belgium, and Spain would participate initially, with other esro member countries expected to join later. After definition studies of the research and applications module (ram), the sortie lab final design would be agreed on by NASA and ESRO. esro would proceed to development phase, with delivery of the sortie lab to NASA scheduled for 1979. The laboratory would consist of a pressurized manned module to house equipment, experiments, data-processing equipment, electrical power and environmental control systems, and a six-scientist crew. An external, unpressurized instrument platform would house experiments and large instruments controlled remotely from the laboratory. Project cost was estimated at $250 million to $300 million. Negotiations at agency and governmental levels would begin shortly, (esro Release, 1/19/73; NASA Release 73-12)

November 25, 1975
A metering truss made of graphite—one of the few materials that expands with cold and contracts with heat—and epoxy, which expands with heat and contracts with cold in the usual way, had been designed to hold stable the mirrors of NASA’s Large Space Telescope without being distorted by temperature changes. Built by Boeing Aerospace Co. under a $185 000 contract with Marshall Space Flight Center, the structure had been subjected to a 2-day vacuum-chamber test at Boeing’s Space Center in Seattle under temperatures ranging from —84°C to +21°C without suffering lens-limiting thermal distortion. (Huntsville Times, 25 Nov 75; Boeing Release A—0459)

March 16, 1986
This date marked the 60th anniversary of liquidfueled rocket flight. In 1926 Dr. Robert H. Goddard assembled and launched a gasoline propelled rocket from his aunt's farm in Worcester, Massachusetts. In commemoration of the event, NASA planned to launch a fullscale replica of the rocket from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release

August 6, 1962
Announced that Boeing had received $15,954,096 supplementary contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center for work leading to design, development, fabrication, and test of Saturn C-5 first stage (S-IC).

April 12, 1963
U.S.-Australian experiment to obtain data on the ionosphere conducted at nasa Wallops Station, with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carrying 144-lb. payload of radio instruments 1,253 mi. high during eight-minute flight. Experiment was designed to measure intensity and spectrum of vlf radio waves above “E” region of the ionosphere. This was third U.S.-Australian attempt of the space experiment and first success, the previous two having failed to reach desired altitude because of vehicle structural failure. Scientific payload was provided by Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. Technical facilities, telemetry recording, and the two-stage rocket were provided by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-39)

February 27, 1963
First Block II flight configuration of Saturn I space vehicle, SA-5, was static-fired for 33 sec. at Marshall Space Flight Center, developing full 1.5 million lbs. of thrust. All objectives of the firing were met. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)

October 21, 1962
nasa announced U.S. and Swedish experimenters were studying samplings of noctilucent clouds obtained in four Nike-Cajun sounding rocket flights during August. Preliminary analysis indicated that samples taken when noctilucent clouds were observed contained significantly more particles than when no noctilucent clouds were visible. Analysis of origin and structure of the particles may take up to a year. Participants in the project include scientists from University of Stockholm Institute of Meterology, Kiruna (Sweden) Geophysical Observatory, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories.

August 22, 1973
Demonstration electromechanical devices developed for emergency aid to astronauts in space had been adapted, tested, and installed in a Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital room by Marshall Space Flight Center, nasa announced. The devices permitted remote control by severely handicapped or paralyzed patients of communications systems and appliances for comfort and recreation, (nasa Release 73-169) August 25:	A New York Times editorial praised Skylab 3 (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14) as the mission passed the 28-day mark set by Skylab 1—2 (May 14-June 22), to become the longest manned space mission to date: The Skylab 3 astronauts “already have much more than mere longevity in space to their credit. Their two long walks in space have permitted them to do more useful work in orbit outside their vehicle than human beings ever have done before. Their scientific observations and experiments—particularly the study of the sun—have added much to human knowledge.” With its midpoint near, Skylab 3 had already “proved itself one of the most productive manned space missions since the first sputnik went into orbit almost a generation ago.” (NYT, 8/25/73, 22) August 26:	Albion, Mich., police had reported the recovery of a spacesuit worn by Astronaut Alan L. Bean during the Apollo 12 mission (Nov. 14-24, 1969), the Associated Press reported. The suit, valued at $6000, had been on loan from the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum when it was taken from the Kingman Museum in Battle Creek, Mich., a week earlier. (W Post, 8/27/73, A22) August 27:	nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center was officially rededicated as Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in ceremonies at jsc, attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator; Texas Gov. Dolph Briscoe; and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson. A bust of the late President Johnson by sculptress Jimilu Mason, donated by the Houston Chamber of Commerce and the Albert Thomas Space Hall of Fame, was unveiled. A Johnson Room opened in the jsc Visitor Center displayed the original U.S. copy of the Treaty for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, signed in 1967 during President Johnson’s Administration. At the dedication Dr. Fletcher said that President Johnson had needed “great political courage” 1965-1967 to fight for funds for NASA programs of the 1970s such as Skylab and Viking. “The decision to continue with a strong space program after Apollo may . . . prove to be the most important of all the decisive actions Lyndon Johnson undertook on behalf of space progress.” Earlier in the day Astronaut Alan L. Bean, commander of the Skylab 3 crew orbiting the earth after July 28 launch to join the Orbital Workshop for 59 days, had radioed: “We think the work in which we are engaged right now would not have been possible except for [Johnson’s] strong support and leadership in the Senate and the Presidency.” President Johnson himself had said—on a March 1, 1968, visit to msc—referring to the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958: “The one legislative enactment that I suppose I am proudest of is the bill that I wrote and introduced that made possible NASA, that brought into existence this great facility and others in the program throughout the nation.” President Nixon had signed the law making the name change Feb. 17. Mr. Johnson had died Jan. 22. (Transcript; jsc Roundup, 8/17/73; 8/31/73; McElheny, NYT, 8/28/73, 24)

December 5, 1963
F-l rocket engine static-nred in 10-sec. test, first in series conducted by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. (Marshall Star, 12/11/63, 2)

September 7, 1988
NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)

May 13, 1994
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division, Seattle, Washington, for a contract to provide the Shuttle Upper Stage system with related integration and launch support services for the space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). (NASA Release C94-q)

April 8, 1963
Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft arrived at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center for dynamic and compatibility tests with the Saturn I. Boilerplate model included command and service modules and mockup of launch escape system. (Huntsville Times. 4/9/63; naa S&ID Skywriter, 4/19/63,1)

February 13, 1990
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiations leading to a $172 million contract for payload mission integration. Under the contract, the company would provide management, personnel, equipment, services, supplies, facilities, and materials for Shuttle/Spacelab missions. Spacelab, carried in the Shuttle's cargo bay, converted the Shuttle into a versatile onorbit research center. (NASA Release

February 3, 1964
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in coordination with Nike-Apache launch at Ascension Island, third set in current NASA series to obtain data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric temperatures. A correlated launch from Ft. Churchill, Canada, was postponed due to sound interference problems. The Wallops experiment was timed to coincide with the annual east-to-west “warming trend”, was to measure its effects on the upper atmosphere. The experiments were designed to obtain measurements at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. The Wallops experiment used grenade payload; for the Ascension experiment, the grenade payload was replaced with pitot-static probe to measure densities, pressures, and temperatures. The series was being conducted for NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-12; nasa Rpt. srl)

November 21, 1985
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) requested proposals for a 12-month study of an advanced high-thrust, high-performance liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engine that could be used for the advanced launch vehicles being examined in NASA/Air Force Space Transportation Architecture Studies (STAS), which included heavy lift launch vehicles, Defense Daily reported. NASA considered the advanced LOX/hydrogen cryogenic engine and a new LOX/hydrocarbon engine to be key elements to advanced transportation systems. MSFC said it planned to award up to three parallel firm-fixed-price contracts for the study of the Space Transportation Main Engine (STME). During the study, the contractors would prepare parametric trade-off data for engine requirements and configurations that might be employed in future launch vehicles. NASA would compare these engine configurations to the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) for application to new launch vehicles. The contractors would identify candidate engine configurations, compare their features, and then recommend engine configurations that would best satisfy the requirements of future launch vehicles. The three principal contenders for the STME study were Rockwell's Rocket-dyne Div., prime contractor for the SSME; and Aerojet Technologies and United Technologies's Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, who conducted component improvement studies for the SSME. (D/D, Nov 21/85, 105) Military Applications

July 13, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that MSFC engineers had developed an optical processing system that could use earth pictures taken by satellites such as Landsat or Seasat to survey highway traffic. When the New Orleans, La., planning commission asked the Center if space technology could provide an automated way to conduct thorough, reliable, and inexpensive traffic surveys, MSFC responded with a technique used several years ago of scanning phototransparencies with a laser beam; the new laser scanner would sense differences in intensity of the filtered beam, recognize vehicle sizes and shapes, and store size and location data for later use. Data from an aerial traffic survey using the system could be in the hands of users within hours. The new method must start with aircraft photographs, said MSFC engineer Joseph H. Kerr, who patented the rapid survey system; present Landsat satellites passed over a target only once in 18 days, but the project gave NASA a chance to refine the method for use on satellites in the 1980s. Whereas processing of satellite data might now take months, Kerr said his system could produce data 100 times faster. (NASA Release 76-128)

March 19, 1963
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, in cooperation with nbc and rca, accomplished 'first known transmission of television in color via relay i communications satellite. 15-min. sequence of movie Kidnapped was relayed by relay from 4,000-mi. high orbit, and was scheduled to be shown on Walt Disney's program on March 24. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A5)

December 11, 1975
NASA issued a request for proposals from industry on a space-station systems analysis study. The proposals would be due 26 Jan. 1976. Two $700 000 contracts would be issued in April for parallel 18-mo concept studies, one to be managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the other by Johnson Space Center. Contractors would study low-orbit and synchronous-orbit facilities, to begin module construction in the mid-1980s. The space station would be used as a test facility and construction base to support the manufacture and assembly in space of various kinds of space structures—e.g., generation of electric power by large solar collectors and transmission to earth by microwave antennas. Other uses would be the retrieval and repair of automated spacecraft, or storage and transfer of fuel and other expendables. Elements of the station would be compatible with the Shuttle cargo bay, 18.3 m long by 4.6 m in diameter. (NASA Release 75-310; MSFC Release 75 -262; JSC Release 75 -99)

October 1, 1972
Twenty-fifth anniversary of Office of Naval Research Project Skyhook was celebrated with launch from Cape Girardeau, Mo., of 940 000-cu-m (33.1-million-cu-ft) thin-walled plastic balloon. Balloon carried 1360-kg (3000-lb) experiment designed by Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Jonathan F. Ormes to measure high-energy cosmic rays. It reached altitude of nearly 40 000 m (more than 130 000 ft) and on-station time of more than 25 hrs. Payload was recovered 25 mi east of Nashville, Tenn. Project Skyhook, gathering information for future space flights, launched its first balloon Sept. 25, 1947. Since then more than 3000 flights had been launched throughout the world, including launches from the high seas, (onr, Naval Research Reviews, 2/73, 1-10)

July 13, 1965
A ground firing of the Saturn s—II battleship stage was conducted for 25 sec. at the Santa Susana test site of North American Aviation, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The firing—longest to date in the s—II program—was one of a series leading to full flight duration runs of nearly 400 sec. Next test, expected within a week, was planned for about two minutes, (msfc Release 65-183)

August 31, 1978
Air Force Magazine, in an article on Goddard Space Flight Center, called it the jack-of-all-trades among NASA’s space centers. It was NASA’s communications hub, with a system of landlines, undersea cables, and satellites reaching around the world and connecting the 21 sites of the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) that had served all NASA’s spaceflight activities. GSFC also had one of the world’s largest assemblies of scientists, who theorized either scientific or applications satellite missions and made investigations into disciplines such as astronomy, planetary atmosphere, solar activity, and near-earth physics. About a third of scientific experiments on U.S. spacecraft were conceived, designed, and/or built by Goddard scientists. The Goddard-developed earth-resources survey programs used orbiting Landsats capable of scanning the planet (except for the polar regions) every 9da. The photographs they provided had allowed detailed study of the earth faster, cheaper, and more accurately than aerial photography. Its impact on agriculture worldwide could be enormous; Landsat would make possible, for example, an inventory in Calif.’s Imperial Valley of more than 25 separate crops in nearly 9000 fields scattered over 458 000 acres. Landsat data would identify specific crops and indicate their condition, permitting very accurate agricultural production forecasts. NASA planned to launch in the early 1980s a pair of Goddard-developed satellites containing space-tracking equipment to replace all but sue of the present ground-based tracking stations, supplying data 85% of the time with greater efficiency and manpower savings. GSFC scientists were also making experimental and practical applications of laser technology. One program would eventually establish laser-satellite systems on each continent, to measure the most minute movements of the plates forming earth’s crust. (AF Mag, Aug/78, 68)

October 9, 1991
NASA announced that the Antarctic ozone levels had reached the lowest values ever observed on October 6 (110, plus or minus 6), according to preliminary data from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-168; LA Times, Oct 10/91)

August 8, 1975
NASA launched Cos-B scientific satellite for the European Space Agency at 3:48 pm PDT from Western Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Launch had been delayed for 2 days because a telemetry aircraft was grounded with hydraulic-valve failure. The satellite entered the planned highly elliptical polar orbit with a 99 886-km apogee, 344-km perigee, 36.7-hr period, and 90.13° inclination. NASA’s objective for the launch was to place Cos-B into a highly elliptical near-polar orbit with sufficient accuracy to allow the satellite to conduct its planned scientific experiments. Purpose of the Cos-B mission was to study extraterrestrial gamma radiation in the energy range 25 mev to 1 gev in order to establish the intensity of the average gamma-ray flux; examine large-scale anisotropy of the radiation over angular regions corresponding to galactic features; study quasars, x-ray, and radio sources of small angular size in supernova remnants; measure energy spectra of various galactic radiations; and study time variations of radiation from pulsars, x-ray, and radio sources. On 11 August, ground controllers sent low-voltage commands from ESA’s space operations center (ESOC) in West Germany to check out spacecraft and experiment performance. After a second switch-on at high voltage, a series of inflight tests further validated all onboard systems and experiment performance. On 15 Aug. a complete review of spacecraft operational status showed all air and ground systems were operating normally; by 19 Aug., the first data had been returned to earth. Cos-B, first satellite launched for the newly organized ESA, was the eighth developed by ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization [see 30—31 May]. Under the direction of the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC) and prime contractor Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH, Cos-B had been designed and built by organizations in 7 of the 10 ESA member countries. The single experiment—a 115-kg spark chamber—had been assembled from five primary and two subsidiary experiment units supplied by six institutes in four European countries. After separating from the launch vehicle, Cos-B transmitted data in real time to ground stations of the European Space Tracking Network with central control at the European Space Research Operations Center in West Germany. For NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center had the responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle under the direction of the Office of Space Science. GSFC also had responsibility for limited tracking support. (NASA MOR S-492 -301 -75 -01, 22 July 75, 10 Sept. 75; NASA Release 75—214; Releases 7—19 Aug 75)

September 27, 1991
The Huntsville Times reported that engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had successfully tested a 17.5-foot-long solid rocket motor on September 26. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)

September 5, 1972
Appointment of Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, Director of Air Force Materials Laboratory, as Director of Science and Technology for Air Force Systems Command was announced by Gen. George S. Brown, afsc Commander. (afsc Release 104.72) September 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for series of 20 water-entry simulation tests with solid-fueled rocket casing assembly. Tests would provide valuable data for assessment of parachute water recovery of space shuttle booster and aid in preliminary solid-fueled rocket motor design. Rocket assembly—representing 77% scale model of shuttle booster—was 30 m (100 ft) long, weighed 39 000 kg (43 tons), and was from previously fired motor, (msfc Release 72—120)

April 30, 1964
First production J-2 rocket engine was accepted by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center from naa’s Rocketdyne Div., then turned over to Douglas Aircraft Co. for use in ground captive tests associated with Saturn S-IVB stage work. (Marshall Star, 5/6/64,1)

October 20, 1973
Skylab 4 crewmen Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue began a 21-day prelaunch isolation period geared to a possible Nov. 10 launch. The astronauts would crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) in the third and final manned Skylab mission. The isolation would minimize the exposure of the crew to infectious disease, (nasa Release 73—220) October 21:	Not since the 1947 first report of what came to be known as “flying saucers” had there been “such widespread reports of unidentified flying objects, or ufo’s, as in recent days,” the New York Times said. They had ranged from a report of a flying V formation of lights in Rochester. N.Y., to press accounts of “strange creatures with weirdly shaped heads” stopping cars on Route 90 in Gulfport, Miss. Two men in Pascagoula, Miss., had said they had been taken aboard a UFO by creatures with crab-claw hands [see Oct. 12]. The Federal Aviation Administration had said that no reports of special significance had been submitted by airline pilots, and an Air Defense Command spokesman had denied that any UFO had been detected in the last three weeks. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/73, 65) October 23:	Two fuel tanks on the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Skylab 4 astronauts toward a Nov. 10 rendezvous with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) buckled slightly after fueling at Kennedy Space Center. The dome-shaped top sections of the tanks sank after ground crews pumped 163 cu m (43 000 gal) of kerosene fuel into the Saturn IB’s four giant tanks and then drained some off to prevent expansion or overpressurization. A plastic cover protecting the tanks from a rainstorm prevented air from rushing into the aluminum tanks as the fuel was drained. The resulting vacuum buckled the tanks inward. Metallurgy experts were flown to KSC from Marshall Space Flight Center to assess the problem. (W Star-News, 10/24/73, A23; AP, B Sun, 10/24/73)	.

November 26, 1965
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 48 additional 3—2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engines would be purchased from Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., under an amendment which converted the engine production contract to a cost-plus-incentive-award-fee agreement. The initial contract was a cost-plus-fixed-fee agreement. Cost of amendment was $75.8 million which brought the total value of the contract to approximately $206 million. A total of 103 J-2 engines was now on order for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicle program, (msfc Release 65—289)

September 7, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists, via Rosman, N.C., tracking station, succeeded in turning on 14 of the experiments onboard OGO I and received scientific data transmitted from the satellite. Power level in the NASA “space bus” was said to be satisfactory. OGO I was obtaining less than half the power it needed for full-time operation of its 20 experiments, because it was spinning slowly in space instead of having its solar panels constantly aimed at the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/64; AP, NYT, 9/8/64, 31)

March 12, 1965
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 155.5 km. (96.6 mi.) The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Because of an attitude control system failure no experimental results were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)

April 12, 1978
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aerospace Corp. had almost completed fabrication of an automatic device for forming continuous structural beams in space. MSFC had developed the “beam builder” to demonstrate techniques for fabricating large structures in space; the device would form triangular beams from flat rolls of very light materials, a complete section of the beam being easily supported with one hand. Housed in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle in earth orbit, the machine would form continuous miles-Iong beams for building large structures such as satellite power systems and service platforms. (Marshall Star, Apr 12/78, 1)

October 20, 1973
NASA launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Johns Hopkins Univ. planetary atmosphere experiment. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) The apogee kick motor was fired at 1:00 am est Oct. 29, placing Explorer 50 in its mission orbit with 288 857-km (179 487.4-mi) apogee, 141 184-km (87 727.7-mi) perigee, 12-day period, and 28.7° inclination. The spacecraft was oriented to the ecliptic and spun up to 23 rpm. Explorer 50 would make detailed and near-continuous studies of the interplanetary environment for orbital periods comparable to several rotations of active solar regions and study particle and field interactions in the distant magnetotail, including cross-sectional mapping of the tail and neutral sheet. Over a two-day period beginning Oct. 30, 11 of the 12 experiments were turned on. On Nov. 12 they would be turned off while four 60-m (200-ft) antennas would be deployed. The experiments would be turned back on Nov. 13 and 14 along with the 12th experiment. The experiments were supplied by Goddard Space Flight Center, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and universities. Explorer 50 was the 10th and final spacecraft in the IMP series, which had monitored solar radiation during an entire solar cycle. The series had provided the first accurate measurements of the interplanetary magnetic field, the magnetosphere boundary, and the collisionless magnetohydrodynamic shock wave associated with the interaction of solar wind with the geomagnetic field. The first spacecraft in the imp series, Explorer 18, was launched Nov. 26, 1963; the most recent, Explorer 47, was launched Sept. 22, 1972. The imp program was directed by nasa’s Office of Space Science and managed by GSFC. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under the direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. gsfc was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle, (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73—211; ksc Release 231—73)

August 18, 1965
The launch of Oso-C was postponed from Aug. 24 to Aug. 25 because NASA’s Fort Myers tracking station might be acquiring data from EXPLORER XXVI satellite about the same time it was scheduled to conduct Oso-C’s critical first-orbit interrogation. Recent calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center indicated the conflict was expected to last for only two minutes, but project officials decided to avoid jeopardizing Oso-C’s first orbital data, (nasa Release 65-227)

July 17, 2008
NASA announced that Robert D. Strain had accepted the position of Center Director of NASA’s GSFC, the Greenbelt, Maryland, facility that develops uncrewed scientific spacecraft and administers NASA’s Earth observation, astronomy, and space physics missions. Strain had been serving as the Head of the Space Department at the Johns Hopkins University’s APL in Laurel, Maryland. He had previously served as the Associate Department Head and Assistant Department Head at APL, and as an executive at Axiom Corporation, Orbital Sciences Corporation, and Fairchild Space and Defense Company. NASA expected that Strain would begin work as Center Director at NASA’s GSFC on 4 August 2008.(NASA, “NASA Names Strain New Goddard Space Flight Center Director,” news release 08-179, 17 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08179_Strain_GSFC_Director.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)

July 28, 1965
A 28-day-old wage strike by 60 guards at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center ended with agreement on a two-year contract by the United Plant Guard Workers of America and Wackenhut Services, Inc., which employed the gsfc guards. (Wash. Post, 7/29/65, A18)

January 10, 1991
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that Advanced Computer Systems, Inc. of Fairfax, Virginia, would provide administrative automated data processing services for GSFC's Information Management Division. The contract would take effect April 1, 1991, and would consist of a one-year basic period and four one-year priced options for a total of $58.8 million. (NASA Release C91-d)

December 5, 1972
International Business Machines Corp. outlined variety of computers used in launching and tracking manned spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center for Judge David N. Edelstein, who was hearing Justice Dept, antitrust suit against IBM [see Nov. 23]. Judge and party would leave ksc for Goddard Space Flight Center Dec. 7 to examine computer operations there. {Today, 12/7/72)

July 6, 1994
NASA announced its selection of Brown & Root Services Corporation, Houston, as a contractor to provide minor construction, modification, and rehabilitation to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-y)

January 31, 1965
Seventh anniversary of the first U.S. satellite, explorer I.	In defiance of the original predicted lifespan that should have ended some two years ago, the satellite continued to pass overhead every 104 min., with perigee of 214 mi. and apogee of 983 mi. Trajectory plotters at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center believed explorer I would plunge into the atmosphere and burn in 1968. It had slowed down since launch but had logged 904 million mi. around the earth. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1, 6)

September 21, 1973
A New York Times editorial praised Skylab 3’s solar observations: “The special value of the observations on the sun arises from that body’s extraordinary behavior this month.” An unexpected burst of tremendous solar activity had occurred. “An unprecedented wealth of data on this startling phenomenon [had] been gathered . . . , which should contribute significantly to helping scientists understand the physics and chemistry of the vast celestial body that is the source of almost all the energy available on earth.” (NYT, 9/23/73) September 24:	A Memorandum of Understanding on international cooperation in NASA’s space shuttle program was signed in Washington, D.C., by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, Director General of the European Space Research Organization (esro) . Nine ESRO-member countries would design, develop, manufacture, and deliver a Spacelab flight unit to be carried in the space shuttle orbiter. The Spacelab would comprise a pressurized manned laboratory module and an instrument platform, or pallet, to support telescopes, antennas, and other equipment requiring direct space exposure. The Spacelab would be transported to and from orbit in the orbiter payload bay and would be attached to and supported by the shuttle orbiter throughout 7- to 30-day missions. At the mission’s end, the Spacelab would be removed and prepared for its next mission. The estimated $300-million to $400-million Spacelab cost would be borne by Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland—the European nations that signed, with the U.S., the Intergovernmental Agreement for space shuttle cooperation [see Aug. 14]. The agreement was open for signatures by other nations as well. Under Memorandum of Understanding terms NASA would manage all operational activities, including crew training and flight operations, following delivery of the Spacelab unit in late 1978, about one year before the space shuttle’s scheduled first operational flight. NASA planned to carry a European flight crew member on the first shuttle flight and subsequent European flight crew opportunities would be provided in conjunction with ESRO or ESRO-member-govern-ment projects. NASA would make the shuttle available for Spacelab missions on either cooperative or cost-reimbursable basis. NASA would procure from ESRO any additional Spacelab units needed for U.S. programs and would not develop any further units duplicating the Spacelab’s design and capabilities. Final signature of the Memorandum of Understanding having established the cooperative Spacelab program, NASA had decided to use Spacelab terminology. Steps were instituted to change designations of the Sortie Lab Task Force and Task Team at Marshall Space Flight Center to Spacelab Task Force and Task Team, (nasa Release 73-191; nasa Shuttle Off, omsf; Spacelab Newsletter, 9/26/73)

May 25, 1964
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co. for S-IVB stage mockup to be used with Saturn V launch vehicle simulator at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Expected to cost about $5 million, the mockup would be used in study of prelaunch, launch, and orbital checkout of third stage. (NASA Release 64-123)

March 26, 1991
Marshall Space Flight Center Director Jack Lee told the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce that the news media were to blame for NASA's bad image during the preceding year. In discussing Marshall's economic impact on the area, Lee cited increases in its budget, which had risen from $1.8 billion in 1983 to a requested $3.6 billion in fiscal 1992. Of this amount, an estimated $1.08 billion would be spent in Alabama. Moreover, Marshall civil service and contractor employees represented about 12 percent of the total Huntsville population. (Hntsv Tms, Mar 26/91)

February 23, 1972
Marsall Space Flight Center issued requests for proposals for development of visible laser communications experiment for ATS—G Applications Technology Satellite mission in 1974. Contractor selected would begin designing experiment in July and would build and test experiment and provide ground support through experiment’s two-year lifetime, (msfc Release 72-17)

November 10, 1965
Four Nike-Apache sounding rockets would be launched from Chamical, Argentina, for the study of an ionospheric phenomenon called “Sporadic E” under an extension to a cooperative U.S.-Argentine agreement. The Argentine Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales ( cnie ) would provide the personnel for payload fabrication at nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center, procure the rockets, operate the range at Chamical, and be responsible for the reduction and analysis of data obtained. NASA would provide the equipment and facilities for construction of the payloads and a Nike-Apache launcher on loan. No exchange of funds between CNIE and NASA was contemplated. (nasa Release 65-350)

February 21, 1991
Scientists from several US government and university laboratories reported finding the rare atmospheric isotope Beryllium-7 present on the surface of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF). Dr. Gerald J. Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, commented on the significance as twofold: to date the isotope is known as produced at much lower altitudes than the LDEF was orbiting; and only one atmospheric gas, atomic oxygen, is previously known as interacting with orbiting spacecraft. The LDEF was returned from space by Space Shuttle Columbia in January 1990 after nearly six years in Earth orbit and was still being analyzed. The LDEF program was managed by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-30)

March 7, 1961
First flight model of Saturn booster (SA-1) installed on static test stand for preflight checkout, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville.

September 3, 1963
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced Belgian astrophysicist, Dr. Francois V. Dossin, working at gsfc on a National Academy of Sciences fellowship, discovered faint comet about 5° from sun during July 20 solar eclipse. Dr. Dossin made seven camera-plate exposures of comet from Pleasant Pond, Me., during 60 sec. of total eclipse. He used blue-green filter to bring out the light of carbon molecules in the comet. Microscopic examination of developed plates showed a diffuse image emitting the light of molecular carbon, (gsfc Release)

February 28, 1994
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to develop and manufacture an improved, lighter version of the Space Shuttle External Tank. The Super Lightweight External Tank was to be made of aluminum alloys and weigh 8,000 pounds less than the current model. (NASA Release 94-32; AP, Feb 28/94; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)

April 12, 1973
Johnson Space Center notified 45 Civil Service employees that they would be released because of NASA manpower reductions; an additional 38 were informed they would be reassigned or placed in lower-grade jobs. The action, to be completed by June 1, would reduce the JSC work force to 3727 Civil Service personnel, (jsc Release 73-40) April 20—30:	Canadian domestic communications satellite Telesat-B— named Anik 2, Eskimo for brother—was successfully launched at 6:47 pm EST from Eastern Test Range by a three-stage, long-tank, thrust-augumented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. Anik 2 was placed in a highly elliptical transfer orbit with a 36 480-km (22 667.6-mi) apogee, 212-km (131.7-mi) perigee, and a 26.7° inclination. After checkout and reorientation of the spacecraft, the apogee motor was fired at 5:00 pm EST April 23, bringing the spacecraft into near synchronous circular orbit with a 35 709-km (22 188.5-mi) apogee, 35 604-km (22123.3-mi) perigee, 1430.7-min period, and 0.1° inclination. The spacecraft was drifting 3° per day toward its final operational position off the west coast of South America. Under NASA-Telesat Canada contract, the NASA mission objective was to place Anik 2 into an orbit of sufficient accuracy to allow the spacecraft propulsion systems to place it in a stationary synchronous orbit while retaining sufficient stationkeeping propulsion to meet the mission lifetime requirements. The objective was met and the mission was adjudged a success April 30. Anik 2—second in a series of Canadian domestic communications satellites—was built by Hughes Aircraft Co. under contract with Telesat Canada and designed to provide transmission of TV, voice, and data throughout Canada for seven years. The spacecraft system provided 12 channels of communications to relay 10 color TV channels or up to 9600 telephone circuits. Two channels would be protection channels for the 10 traffic-carrying channels. The spacecraft was 1.8 m in diameter and 3.4 m high (6 by 11 ft). At launch it weighed 540 kg (1200 lbs) and its orbiting weight was 270 kg (600 lbs). The electronics system was powered by 23 000 solar cells with sufficient onboard battery capacity to maintain service during a sun eclipse of the solar cells. Anik 1 had been launched Nov. 9, 1972. The two-satellite system would act as space repeaters to receive transmissions from earth stations and retransmitt them to earth stations in Canada. A third satellite was retained on the ground as protection against space failure of the first two spacecraft and could be launched in 1975 to expand the system if required. NASA would be reimbursed by Telesat Canada for costs of the Thor-Delta launch vehicle and services. The project was managed for NASA’s Office of Space Sciences by Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-58; GSFC SSR, 4/30/73) April 20:	Checkouts of the first two Skylab launch vehicles and their spacecraft, in position on Pads A and B of Launch Complex 39 at Kennedy Space Center, continued without major problems. Top program officials from NASA Hq. and Centers had completed the final flight readiness review of all aspects of Skylab, including launch and mission operations, spacecraft and experimental hardware, safety, range readiness, recovery, and flight-crew readiness, (nasa Release 73-81)

June 12, 1986
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June

June 18, 1965
An ionospheric sounding probe launched by nasa on a Nike-Apache vehicle from Wallops Station, Va., reached peak altitude of 116 mi. in an experiment to measure electron density in the E region of the ionosphere. Electron profile data were obtained during both the ascent and descent portions of the flight trajectory and were telemetered to ground receiving stations during the flight. Experiment was conducted for National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Lab. and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 65-36)

March 20, 1985
NASA had completed a series of tests to validate parachute systems to be used with advanced lightweight, solid-fuel rocket boosters that would replace the boosters then in use on the Space Shuttle, Ames Research Center (ARC) announced. The new boosters would be first used during a Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB no earlier than January 29, 1986. For the tests, researchers used a vehicle a third the size of a solid-fuel booster with one main parachute and, to simulate a splashdown, drop tested it from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility's (DFRC) B-52 over the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Ridgecrest. Most drops were made at an altitude of about 40,000 feet with an airspeed of about 230 knots. ARC and DFRC conducted the drop tests in cooperation with Marshall Space Flight Center, which was responsible for the parachute system. (ARC Release 85-1)

October 13, 1965
Telecomputing Services, Inc., was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to two-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract for computer operations and data processing services at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract, expected to exceed $4 million, would include an option for an additional year increasing the value by $2 million, (nasa Release 65-324)

September 2, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, in Munich for the International Transport Fair, said at a press conference: “The fact is that never to date has a manned American satellite flown over even one square centimeter of Soviet soil.” Von Braun denied rumors that he might accept a position with a European aeronautics and space organization. He was presented with the international aviation decoration, Pioneer Chain of the Compass Card with Diamonds, while at the Fair. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 9/3/65)

February 11, 1994
Boyce Mix, deputy manager for the Shuttle main engine program at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, said that technicians at Paragon Precision Products of Valencia, California, had used a super-strength glue for as many as six years to make unauthorized repairs on Space Shuttle engines, without the knowledge of company officers. A January inspection revealed the glue and the situation was corrected. (AP, Feb 11/94; Reuters, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; NY Times, Feb 13/94; USA Today, Feb 14/94)

December 18, 1974
Post-storage checkout was proceeding at Marshall Space Flight Center on the first propulsive stage and instrument unit of the Saturn IB launch vehicle (SA-210) for the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Fin-mounting brackets on the stage, taken out of storage 27 Nov., had been rod-peened (pounded with a small bundle of rods to place compressive stresses in the surface of the material) to avoid the stress-corrosion problems that had delayed the Skylab 4 launch in November 1973. Bolt holes for the fins had been rounded to eliminate stress points. The complete Saturn vehicle was to be stacked in January 1975. (msfc Release 74—241; Spaceport News, 12 Dec 74)

December 20, 2000
NASA’s Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASA’s Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument,” news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)

July 25, 1973
NASA launched two Aerobee 200 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range. The first carried a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 30.6-km (19-mi) altitude to test rocket performance. The rocket performed unsatisfactorily. The second carried a GSFC heat-pipe experiment to a 275.7-km (171.3-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)

September 22, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $4,514,295 modification to its existing contract with Boeing Co. to provide services in Saturn V ground support. Tasks included analysis of ground support equipment, monitoring equipment qualification testing, acceptance testing, conducting design verification, and interface and installation control documentation, (msfc Release 65-234)

March 9, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded $1,059,000 contract to Aetron, a division of Aerojet-General Corp., for installation of equipment on a Saturn V second-stage test stand at Mississippi Test Operations. Equipment would include consoles to check out systems on the flight stages being tested as well as in the area’s test control center, (msfc Release 65—53)

May 12, 1976
A joint U.S.-British astronomy project to study the remnant of an exploded star failed when a rocket-motor malfunction kept the x-ray telescope aboard from acquiring its target, a supernova remnant called Puppis A some 10 trillion km from earth. An English Skylark sounding rocket fired from the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia carried a NASA-designed flight telescope, fabricated and assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center, to obtain information on evolution of stars and the formation of neutron stars. Although the telescope assembly, as well as the detectors and electronics supplied by the United Kingdom, worked perfectly, a hole burned through one side of the rocket’s aft end produced more spin than the despin device could offset, said Richard Hoover of MSFC, principal U.S. investigator for the project. “Even with the residual spin, we scanned a portion of the sky in the area of the prime target and acquired data on the diffuse x-ray background [a secondary objective] . . . but we couldn’t lock on Puppis A in order to get a high-resolution map as desired.” The payload was recovered by parachute about 160 km down-range in excellent condition, Hoover said. (NASA Releases 76-62, 76-92; MSFC Release 76-54; MFSC Star, 17 Mar 76, 3)

January 11, 1994
NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)

September 14, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Saul H. Genatt and Edwin Reid said they had seen “red and blue bands” on the moon last Aug. 25 through a 16-in. telescope at GSFC, Greenbelt, Md. Reid first sighted the hands, which appeared at the crater Aristarchus, then he and Genatt continued to observe them for an hour. Two bands were red and one was blue, Genatt said; the two red bands lay across the southern half of the crater and the blue band lay across the northern half parallel to the other two. The colors were “very strong” at 10:00 p.m., when the men began observations, then gradually faded in intensity until the blue band disappeared at 10:30 and the red bands, shortly after 11:00. Similar sightings had been reported by Lowell Observatory scientists in October and November 1963, and prior to that time, by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64; Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 9/14/64; A&A 63) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster with unidentified payload from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 9/21/64, 11)

September 26, 1963
nasa announced first television experiments via stncom ii communications satellite had been conducted. Test pattern signals sent Sept. 23 were followed by TV pictures Sept. 24 and 25; because of bandwidth limitations, no audio was sent. Officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said transmissions were of good quality. Transmissions originated at Fort Dix, N.J., ground station, were sent to syncom n 22,300 mi. above the earth, and retransmitted to at&t ground station at Andover, Me. (nasa Release 63-216)

April 22, 1974
NASA had applied for a patent on a special absorptive coating developed by a Marshall Space Flight Center engineer. It would be applied to aluminum panels used in the construction of the solar heating and cooling system being demonstrated at msfc. The coating absorbed 93% of the total solar heat, which was transferred to water circulated through flow passages to a storage tank for use in heating or cooling; it reradiated only 6% of the infrared heat, (nasa Release 74-96)

May 3, 1994
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, awarded the Computer Sciences Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, an eight-year contract to provide Program Information Systems Mission Services (PrISMS). (NASA Release C94-l; W Post, May 4/94)

September 10, 1972
Huntsville (Ala.) Times editorial criticized attitude of Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) toward U.S. space program: “The McGovern space-budget figure of $2 billion may not seem a paltry sum to many taxpayers and voters. But it becomes a piddling figure . . . when compared Avith massive governmental outlays for farm price-supports and other questionable multibillion-dollar expenditures. And even in endorsing this minimal space effort, Senator McGovern stresses the negative aspect of not wanting to see additional thousands of aerospace employees thrown out of work, rather than emphasizing the positive contributions of space to the expansion of man’s scientific knowledge, to the strengthening of the technological know-how of American industry, and to the enhancement of the nation’s image throughout the world.” (Huntsville Times, 9/11/72) September 11—13:	American Society of Mechanical Engineers held annual Aerospace Div. Conference at Anaheim, Calif. Application of aerospace technology to societal problems and future of space exploration were discussed by officials of NASA; National Science Foundation; Depts. of Commerce, Transportation, and Interior; state and local governments; industry; and education. Aviation’s role in earth resources surveys was described in paper by Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson and Airborne Science Office Chief Donald R. Mulholland of Ames Research Center: “At the present time, 275 companies are engaged in aerial surveys, but less than 50 of these are equipped for nonphotographic remote sensing. New sensor technology growing from and stimulated by the space program has made it possible to obtain vastly improved data.” Federal Aviation Administration data showed that in 1971 “some 230 aircraft were used for aerial surveys and another 31 for patrolling.” ARC used general-aviation, high-altitude research, and four-engine jet transportation craft. Remote sensing from aircraft provided data to improve environment, conserve natural resources, and contribute to economic growth. “The sensors required . . . are evolving rapidly, in part from well-established aerial reconnaissance technology, and in part from technology developed for the space program.” asme Spirit of St. Louis Award was presented to Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man on moon, for “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics.” (asme Release 7/18/72; NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 207-10) September 11-October 1:	Series of six stratospheric balloons were launched to altitudes from 58 000 to 41000 m (125 000 to 135 000 ft) from Cape Girardeau Municipal Airport, Mo., in project directed by Navy’s Office of Naval Research and Raven Industries, Inc., in cooperation with four universities and NASA. Balloons, with volumes from 310 000 to 937 000 cu m (11 000 000 to 33 100 000 cu ft), achieved all flight objectives. Sept. 11 flight carried instruments from Univ. of New Hampshire to study charge and isotopical composition of cosmic radiation particles and two ionization chambers from Atomic Energy Commission and Rice Univ. Sept. 14 flight carried Washington Univ., St. Louis, experiments, including one to measure isotopic abundances of silicon, sulfur, calcium, and iron nuclei. On Sept. 14 and 24, Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago Univ., counter experiments were launched to measure nuclear composition of very-high-energy cosmic rays. Univ. of California, at Riverside experiment was launched Sept. 19 to measure albedo neutrons from earth and solar neutrons from solar flares and quiet sun. Sixth flight, Oct. 1, carried Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to measure flux of very-high-energy cosmic rays. (Navy, onr Field Representative [Navy Balloon Proj])

January 9, 1972
Cost reduction suggestion by Marshall Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Thomas A. Parnell had saved NASA $57 000 in development of gamma ray telescope for scheduled balloon probe to investigate gamma ray sources, MSFC announced. Dr. Parnell had suggested substitution of scrap crystal (sodium iodide) for large, expensive crystal used to shield gamma-ray detectors from radiation sources other than desired target during probes. Scrap crystal material in tank containing oil-based liquid served as effective shield. Balloon probe was to be launched in March or April from National Center for Atmospheric Research. (msfc Release 72-2)

April 17, 1964
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., two with grenade payloads to investigate winds, temperature, density, and pressure in the upper atmosphere. The first, a Nike-Cajun was launched from Wallops; it sent payload to about 57-mi. altitude, where aluminum-coated mylar plastic sphere was ejected and inflated to 26-in. diameter. The sphere continued up to about 78.4-mi. altitude before floating down to earth. Radar tracking of ascent, descent, and drift provided data for calculating densities at various altitudes. Less than two hours later the Ft. Churchill rocket was launched, sending 82-lb. payload which ejected grenades detonating at intervals in region of 28 to 58 mi. 20 min. later the final rocket—the second carrying grenades—was launched from Wallops Island, with grenades exploding in about the same altitude range. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center conducted the flights to observe characteristics of the upper atmosphere and to measure variations occurring through the period of increased heating. The grenade experiments were an extension of series conducted from Jan. 23 to Mar. 6 involving 13 Nike-Cajun flights which “yielded excellent data on the characteristics in the upper atmosphere during winter conditions,” according to project scientist Wendell S. Smith. Follow-up experiments were planned for late summer when solar heating would be near maximum, for comparative data. (Wallops Release 64-38)

November 5, 1972
Los Angeles Times editorial criticized Jet Propulsion Laboratory name change: “While the alteration may meet with some approval in parts of the 20th Congressional District, it has gone over with a thud at the laboratory and on the Pasadena campus of Caltech.” Scientists and teachers were asking “why the nonpolitical space lab has to be saddled with the name of a retiring congressman, especially one with no distinction in the technology of space .... Congress could reconsider; it should.” (LA Times, 11/8/72) Under contract between NASA and Telesat Canada, NASA mission objective was to place Anik 1 in orbit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place spacecraft in stationary synchronous orbit while retaining sufficient station-keeping propulsion to meet mission lifetime requirements. Objectivie was met; mission was adjudged successful Nov. 15. Launch was first on Thor-Delta “straight eight” launch vehicle, so called because diameter was eight feet for all three stages including fairing. Previous Thor-Deltas had been tapered at joint of first and second stage. New design allowed Delta to launch new generation of larger volume spacecraft. Flight was also first with nine solid-fuel thrust-augmentation rockets from Cape Kennedy. Third stage was TE-364-4 solid-fueled motor. Anik 1—first of two—was built by Hughes Aircraft Co. under contract with Telesat and designed to provide transmission of TV, voice, and data throughout Canada for seven years. It would provide 10 color TV channels or up to 9600 telephone circuits. System could distribute analog or digital signals with overall performance comparable to that of terrestrial methods. Spacecraft, 1.8 m in diameter and 3.4 m high (6 by 11 ft), weighed 540 kg (1200 lhs) at launch and 270 kg (600 lhs) in orbit. Electronics system was powered by 23 000 solar cells, with onboard battery capacity to maintain service during sun eclipse. Telesat Canada would reimburse NASA for cost of launch vehicle and services. Goddard Space Flight Center managed project for NASA Office of Space Science, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-206; GSFC Operations Center Br) November 9:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base on Thor-Burner II into orbit with 879-km (546-mi) apogee, 824-km (512-mi) perigee, 101.5-min period, and 98.6° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 11/16/70, 70)

June 1, 1987
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had invited industry to develop advanced solid rocket motor designs. The preliminary designs called for both a segmented motor design and a monolithic motor design. Requests for these designs, called Phase B studies, followed completion of "Phase A" conceptual studies of alternative solid rocket motor designs. Those designs were done by five aerospace firms. (NASA Release 8790)

December 4, 1973
Skylab backup hardware was being stored in plastic tents with controlled environments at Marshall Space Flight Center for later "use or disposal. (msfc Release 73-193)

August 1, 1961
NASA directed Marshall Space Flight Center to enter contract negotiations with contractors for procurement of five operational Atlas-Centaur vehicles. These launchings were planned to begin in second quarter of 1964.

March 19, 1974
Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified during FY 1975 NASA authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that the Thor-Delta launch vehicle improvement program begun in 1971 was nearing completion. The most modern Thor-Delta configuration, the 2914, was expected to fly for the first time during the April launch of Westar-A. Final decision for the launch was pending recommendation of the Failure Review Board set up at Goddard Space Flight Center to investigate the 2nd-stage failure of a Thor-Delta during the 18 Jan. Skynet IIA launch. NASA believed that, with the 2914 Delta, the present family of vehicles could launch any mission, but RCA Corp. had determined that a 30% to 35% increase in the 2914 Thor-Delta capability would permit a 24-channel, rather than the usual 12-channel, satellite to be launched into synchronous orbit, rca and McDonnell Douglas Corp. had agreed to share the cost of the uprating and McDonnell Douglas would reimburse NASA for technical direction. NASA had not agreed to make the new 3914 Thor-Delta a part of its launch family but probably would do so following successful proof flight. The first flight was scheduled for 1975. (Transcript)

September 10, 1972
Central Switzerland Cultural Foundation awarded annual cultural prize to Alfred Waldis, Director of Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne. (Swiss Trans Museum Announcement, 11/72) September 11:	NASA released prints from infrared photos of New York area taken by Erts 1 (launched July 23). Black-and-white photo of New York City taken from 915-km (569-mi) altitude covering area 185 km (115 mi) square was covered by clouds, but was valuable as a general test of Erts 1 instrumentation. Images of infrared radiation from which prints had been made clearly showed distribution of vegetation in New Jersey. Dr. Paul D. Lowman of Goddard Space Flight Center said in interview that pictures of other areas had been of higher quality. “Our first discovery from erts is that all our maps, topographic as well as geologic, are out of date.” In California’s Monterey Bay area, scientists had discovered “a whole series of unsuspected faults” in earth’s crust. While major earthquake faults ran northwest and southeast, newly discovered faults ran at right angles to mountains, northeast and southeast. About 15 faults, each extending about 16 km (10 mi), had been discovered in Monterey region and about 12 faults had been discovered near Lake Tahoe, Calif. Satellite picture of Dallas-Fort Worth area showed many new roads, reservoirs, suburbs, and airports that were not on area’s most recent map, made three years before. (nasa Photos 72-HC-711, 72-4^241; Wilford, NYT, 9/12/72, 26)

October 12, 1971
Training models of Sky lab’s Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount arrived at the Manned Spacecraft Center from fabrication at the Marshall Space Flight Center. They would be used for training crewmen for the 1973 mission, planned to include three separate crews of three astronauts each—the first crew to stay for 28 days and the next two for 56 days each. The overhead view above shows crew quarters in the 1-g trainer model of the Workshop. At the top is the general control and working area with several experiments. At the right is the wardroom, where crewmen would prepare and eat food and spend leisure time. At the lower center is the waste management compartment, or “space bathroom.” At the left is the sleep compartment. perigee, 116.6-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/71; fbis-Sov-199-3, 10/14/71, LI; SF, 4/72, 132)

February 19, 1965
NASA approved inclusion of three x-ray and gamma ray telescopes on the first Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) and rescheduled the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s celescope experiment for the third Oao. The three x-ray and gamma ray telescopes, already fabricated, contained experiments for surveying the sky proposed by: MIT, to detect high-energy gamma rays that did not originate from earth; Lockheed Missiles and Space Div., to seek new sources of low-energy (soft) x-rays and to study those recently developed; and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, to detect low-energy gamma rays. The celescope experiment was designed to map the stars and nebulae through observations in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum but had encountered development problems. Unaffected by the change and proceeding on schedule for a 1965 launch was the Univ. of Wisconsin’s photometer-telescope system to measure the energy distribution and emission intensities of stars. (nasa Release 65-49)

March 5, 1965
NASA had awarded one-year, cost-plus-incentive-award fee contracts to nine firms for engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of Marshall Space Flight Center. Cost of work was estimated at $58.5 million for one year and was primarily in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program. The firms were Sperry Rand Corp., Brown Engineering Corp., Vitro Corp., Hayes International Corp., Northrop Corp., Spaco, Rust Engineering Co., RCA Service Co., and Management Services, Inc. (nasa Release 65-77; msfc Release)

July 30, 1985
NASA announced that, based on a review of engine data following the July 29 Space Shuttle mission 51-F launch, Marshall Space Flight Center and Kennedy Space Center engineers believed that failed sensors—not an engine failure—were the probable cause of the main engine No. 1 shut down [see Space Transportation System/Missions, July 29]. The data suggested the high-pressure fuel turbopump on that engine performed normally, because there were no indications the pump was running hot. If the pump were running hot, Johnson Space Center flight engineers, who monitored engine performance during ascent, would have expected to see changes in the position of an oxidizer valve indicating an increased flow to supply the pump with more power. Data showed the valve position did not change. A second data indication of normal pump performance was present in the engine discharge pressures, which were monitored by ground controllers and the main engine controller. Based on these indications, NASA engineers reviewing the cause of the engine shutdown tentatively concluded that the main engine controller was receiving faulty data from failed sensors. Resistance measurements taken by the engine controller provided an indicator of pump temperatures, because the resistance increased as the temperature increased. The controller logic was able to distinguish, within certain limits, a valid reading from one that indicated the sensor wire, a very thin wire, was broken or had otherwise failed. The controller recognized the bad reading from the Channel B sensor; the reading from Channel A, however, drifted, indicating a temperature rise above the redline limit. Because of the failure mode in the second sensor, which gave readings above the redline limit but below those that would cause the controller to disregard them as unreasonable and thus indicative of a sensor failure, the engine controller believed there was a possible pump problem and shut down the engine. A temperature sensor on main engine No. 3 also failed. Because there was a history of these temperature sensors failing on previous Space Shuttle flights, NASA decided to develop a new sensor for use on future Space Shuttle flights beginning with mission 51-1. Until such time as NASA confirmed this explanation by an examination of the engine and its various systems, NASA would not launch another mission. Flowever, the agency did not anticipate that this would result in a delay in the next mission. The call "abort to orbit" used to describe the action ordered for the July 29 Space Shuttle flight was the preferred type of Space Shuttle launch "abort" in that it gave the crew, the orbiter, and the ground controllers time to review options and to ascertain that the crew and orbiter were in good condition. In nearly all cases, the abort-to-orbit contingency would allow completion of most of a particular mission's flight requirements. Once NASA determined that an orbiter was in a safe orbit (minimum would be about 105 nautical miles circular), then the crew and ground flight controllers could begin to assess the impact on planned mission activities. In the case of mission 51-F, the orbit achieved was 106 by 146 nautical miles, 40 miles short of the planned designations; the orbiter was at a velocity of 25,760 feet-per-second, which was 110 feet-per-second less than planned. NASA determined all abort modes based on the weight of the orbiter, the inclination of the desired orbit, and other characteristics. Each mode had a specific applicable time and duration during the ascent phase, and crew and ground controllers practiced these contingency situations regularly. (NASA Release 85-114)

July 18, 1961
Saturn SA-T2 booster successfully static tested for 111 seconds at Marshall Space Flight Center.

June 15, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar-simulator test facility, believed to be the largest of its kind in existence, to compare the efficiency of solar-energy collectors in MSFC’s program of assisting the Energy Research and Development Administration in its solar energy program. Designed to provide variable levels of energy similar to ground-level solar radiation, the simulator contained a lamp array with 405 tungsten halogen 300-watt lamps paired with the same number of Fresnel lenses to provide an illuminated area for solar collectors up to 1.2 by 2.4 meters. After a 6-wk checkout of the lamp array, power equipment, and solar-collector fluid-flow systems, the simulator would serve to test solar-energy collectors that used either air or liquid as the heat-transfer medium. (MSFC Release 76-111) ,

February 27, 1963
Nike-Apache sounding rockef launched at Wallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 94-mi. altitude in experiment to obtain measurements of electron density profile, electron temperatures, and solar radiation in ionosphere. Test was part of continuing nasa program conducted by Goddard Space Flight Center to study ionosphere. (Wallops Release 63-20)

September 1, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Science Applications, Inc., of Los Angeles and Rockwell Inti. Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study space industrialization. The study program would lead from Shuttle Spacelab and early space-station experiments to permanent, practical, commercial use of space. The space-industrialization accomplishments so far achieved would be expanded into disciplines other than communications and meteorology; the study program would attempt to define a balance between future opportunities (satellite power systems) and relatively immediate benefits (space processing of materials). Possible areas of activity would include development of new techniques and materials, new development of earth resources, and eventually the movement of people to space for tourism or medical purposes, and the industrialization of the moon. The parallel studies would proceed in two phases, each requiring about 8 mo, and would cost about $200 000 each. (MSFC Release 76-160)

August 12, 1977
NASA launched the first high-energy astronomy observatory, HEAO-A, from ETR on an Atlas Centaur at 2:29am EDT into a near circular orbit with 456.3km apogee, 431.4km perigee, 93.5min period, and 22.75° inclination. Heao 1, nearly 19ft long and nearly 9ft in diameter, weighting 56261b at liftoff (including 29601b of experiments and an 8311b separation system), had a 6mo design lifetime but would carry enough consumables and orbit at an altitude to allow extension of its mission up to lyr. It would operate in 2 modes, pointing and scanning: its batteries would point continuously at the sun as the vehicle moved l°/day in the ecliptic longitude, and its detectors would scan in wide circles perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic. TRW had built the spacecraft equipment module (SEM) containing all the subsystems used by all the experiments for operation and control, and a mission unique experiment module (EM) filling the requirements of each payload segment. Dr. Fred Speer, HEAO manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, said the spacecraft, rotating end over end, would survey the entire sky within its 6mo lifetime. This launch was the first in a three mission program to study x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays emitted by stellar sources, the other launches to be in 1978 and 1979. The HEAOs would carry large and heavy scientific instruments needed for observations at the high-energy and low-flux levels of these phenomena. Estimated cost of the 3 observatories was $237 million. The original plan in 1968 had been to launch a 40ft vehicle weighing 22 0001b; budget problems had reduced the size of the undertaking. However, the x-ray detector built by NRL as 1 of 4 experiments carried by Heao 1 was the largest instrument ever flown on an unmanned satellite, weighing almost 10001b. The NRL package, called the large area x-ray survey, was a 7-module array 20 times as large as any of its predecessors that would map the sky by recording incident x-ray fluxes and would determine the spectrum, time, and intensity variations of newfound x-ray sources. NRL’s Dr. Herbert Friedman noted that known x-ray sources now numbered about 200; Heao 1 might increase the list to several thousand. Celestial sources of x-ray emission included white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes, products of stellar catastrophe, as well as quasars and radio galaxies; also, a class of ministars almost too small for detection by the biggest optical telescopes might emit radiation 10 000 times as great as all the radiant energy of earth’s sun. The other experiments on Heao 1 were a scanning-modulation collimator to make parallel observations, using instruments designed by Harvard and MIT, to pinpoint locations of sources and determine their structure; a cosmic x-ray experiment designed by NASA and CalTech, to look for diffuse x-rays or cosmic rays; and another experiment from MIT and the Univ. of Calif. San Diego, to look for hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays. NASA planned a guest observer program for this mission, participants to be selected from responses to a “Dear Colleague” letter issued by the Office of Space Sciences. A malfunctioning rate gyro had delayed the planned June 30 launch; the Bendix-built instrument had been removed and returned to the manufacturer March 31, but further similar delays occurred [see July 26]. Early data from orbit showed spacecraft systems and experiments were operating normally. (NASA Releases 77-45, 77-56, 77-71, 77-83, 77-87; OSS rept S-832-77-01 [prelaunch] May 16/77, July 29/77; MOR S-832-77-01 [postlaunch] Aug 12/77, Apr 3/78; MSFC Releases 77-32, 77-64, 77-107, 77-142; KSC Releases 85-77,140-77; Spacewarn SPX-284; NYT, Apr 10/77, 23; Aug 13/77, 33; NRL Release 23-8-77S)

October 11, 1974
President Ford signed into law the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (P.L. 93^138), abolishing the Atomic Energy Commission and establishing in its place three new Federal entities: the Energy Research and Development Administration, the Energy Resources Council, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The President also signed Executive Order 11841, activating the Energy Resources Council and appointing the Secretary of the Interior its Chairman. P.L. 93—438 was to become effective not later than 120 days after signature. {PD, 14 Oct 74,1271-3; CR, 8 Oct 74, H10134) Ariel 5—a 132-kg, solar-powered, 16-sided polygon designed by the U.K.—was the fifth satellite launched in a cooperative program between NASA and the U.K. Science Research Council. The mission of its one-year operating life was to study x-ray sources both within and beyond our galaxy, using five experiments from U.K. and one from Goddard Space Flight Center. Instruments were designed to follow up findings of UhuTu (Explorer 42), launched 12 Dec. 1970, and Oao 3, launched 21 Aug. 1971. Uhuru had extended the number of known celestial x-ray sources from about 30 to 200 and found evidence of a black hole companion to Cygnus X-l, later supported by Oao 3, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations. Four Ariel 5 pointing experiments focused on specific x-ray sources, and two scanning experiments swept the entire galaxy with every revolution. The GSFC scanning experiment—first of its kind to fly on an orbiting scientific satellite—consisted of two x-ray pinhole cameras, each with a 90° field of view, providing together a sweep of the entire sky. After evaluation, Ariel 5 results would be available to the world scientific community. Though all experiments obtained data during initial tests, two were drawing excessive current. The problem was resolved by outgassing. A slight delay in shutter closing on Experiment A, a star sensor, had little or no effect on the mission. The U.K.-U.S. cooperative satellite series had begun with Ariel 1 in 1962 and continued through Ariel 4, launched 11 Dec. 1971. Ariel 5 was launched under a 2 Nov. 1970 src-nasa Memorandum of Understanding, with a 27 Dec. 1973 letter modification shifting the launch site from Wallops Flight Center to San Marco to enhance scientific data return. The Memorandum tasked src with spacecraft design, fabrication, and testing, five experiments, primary command and control, and data reduction and analysis, nasa was responsible for one experiment, spacecraft technical support, the Scout launch vehicle, and tracking, command, and data acquisition, src financed all aspects of the Ariel program. The launch by members of the Univ. of Rome’s Aerospace Research Center was the seventh from San Marco, but the first payload for a country other than the U.S. or Italy (nasa mors, 11 Oct 6, Nov 74; nasa Release 74-274)

December 5, 1991
NASA Associate Administrator Spence Armstrong met with Marshall Space Flight Center officials on December 4. He said NASA's programs put it in a good position to continue to attract top engineering talents. NASA would need to attract engineers from several previously underrepresented groups, including blacks, women, the disabled, and other minorities. (Htsvl Tms, Dec 5/91)

August 6, 1962
nasa announced signing of $215,502,744 contract with Chrysler Corp. for production of Saturn S-I stages. Chrysler would deliver the 21 units (instead of 20 as originally planned) between early 1964 and late 1966, beginning with the S-I for Saturn SA-9. nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, with development responsibility for Saturn, would fabricate boosters for first eight vehicles. Chrysler would build the S-I stages at nasa Michoud Operations plant near New Orleans.

April 1, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a single-source request to Sunstrand Corp. to submit a proposal for the design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of the auxiliary power unit for the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster’s thrust-vector control subsystem. The APU would include a gas generator, turbine, gearbox, fuel pump, electrical controls, control valves, instrumentation, mounting system, and the mechanical and electrical connections required to interface with other SRB subsystems. Two APUs would be used during prelaunch and ascent phases of flight to provide hydraulic power to the thrust-vector control system of each booster. (MSFC Release 75 —62)

March 12, 1972
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiments. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

January 20, 1973
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo/ASTP Program Manager, became Marshall Space Flight Center Director on the retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees. The appointment had been announced Dec. 22, 1972. (msfc Org Ann 0101)

April 1, 1965
The s-ib— 1 stage of the Saturn IB booster was successfully static-fired by Chrysler for the first time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; the test lasted about 30 sec. Powered by 8 Rocketdyne uprated H—1 engines, each developing 200,000 lbs. of thrust, S-IB—1 stage would be fired at least one more time before being returned to Michoud Operations in New Orleans for checkout. It would then be shipped to Cape Kennedy for launch early next year, (msfc Release 65-75)

September 11, 1975
NASA was considering resuming exploration of the moon in 1980, using a low-cost unmanned satellite to map the entire lunar surface from orbit, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Marius B. Weinreb told United Press International in a telephone interview. The proposed satellite, together with a small communications relay satellite, would gather information needed by scientists to organize the vast amount of data collected during the Apollo lunar landing missions. One mission of the satellite would be to provide a detailed chart of the lunar gravitational field, including field variations, to tell scientists more about the composition of the moon and perhaps about its origin and evolution. Previous lunar orbiters had merely mapped and photographed the lunar surface. Although scientists had learned much from Apollo data about the gravitational field of the moon’s near side, they knew little about the far side. The proposed satellite— equipped with instruments including x-ray and gamma-ray sensors— and its accompanying high-orbiting comsat, which would remain in range of both the satellite and the earth at all times, would send back to earth data on the entire lunar surface. Weinreb told UPI that NASA administrators had considered including the proposed project in the FY 1977 budget. Budget restrictions might prevent NASA from initiating new projects. (UPI, NYT, 11 Sept 75, 11; interview, Weinreb, 13 June 78)

January 19, 2007
IBM announced that NASA had selected, for its James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), IBM’s Rational Rose Real-time software, which used unified modeling language (UML). The choice marked a change in NASA’s strategy for software development and management of its space- based telescopes. Because a number of organizations had used proprietary software to build components and instruments for the HST, the software had lacked a UML, preventing the software codes of the various programs from relating to one another. Furthermore, the contractors who had built the scientific instruments had not maintained them after the launch of the craft. Instead, NASA staff had assumed that responsibility. Glenn Cammarata, leader of NASA’s Integrated Science Instrument Module (ISIM) flight-software development team at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), explained that the management of telescopes with instruments containing incompatible software was a nightmare. Resolving problems in the HST software had often required NASA to locate the person who wrote the code in the original software, whereas IBM’s UML would allow any programmer to examine JWST software and to understand its system architecture. Additionally, the UML would allow close collaboration among the various developers working on individual components of the JWST.(IBM, “NASA Eyes Open Standard Software for Next-Generation James Webb Space Telescope,” press release, 19 January 2007, http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/20901.wss (accessed 30 October 2009); Jon Brodkin, “The Software Plan for NASA’s New Space Telescope,” Infoworld, 23 January 2007.)

December 8, 1965
Full-scale Saturn V booster (s-ic stage) weight simulator was shipped from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Poseidon. Trip would require five days. Simulator would be used in checking equipment and handling procedures at KSC’s Launch Complex 39 in preparation for arrival of the Saturn V facility vehicle early in 1966. (msfc Release 65-295)

April 4, 1996
An international team of researchers announced that, while tracking Comet Hyakutake in March 1996, they had discovered x-rays emitting from the comet. German scientists working at Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had collaborated on the project with NASA scientists based at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Konrad Dennryl, who had directed the use of Germany’s ROSAT (Röntgensatellit) for the project, called the discovery of the x-rays “a thrilling moment.” The comet emitted far stronger radiation signals than the scientists had expected, about 100 times brighter than anticipated. The scientists could not explain why the comet gave off such intense x-rays, but offered two preliminary hypotheses: 1) the gaseous molecules surrounding the comet absorbed x-rays from the Sun before reemitting the same x-rays; or 2) violent collisions between the comet material and the supersonic wind and particles from the Sun produced the extraordinarily strong x-rays. The scientists vowed to ascertain conclusively why the comet x-rays behaved as they did.(NASA, “First X-rays from a Comet Discovered,” new release 96-66, 4 April 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Scientists Seek Explanation for X-rays Seen from Comet,” New York Times, 5 April 1996.)

December 4, 1973
Marshall Space Flight Center announced two contract awards. A $1 176 872 extension was made in a $5 188 357 contract with Bendix Corp. to provide management, sustaining engineering, and logistics support for the ST—124M stabilized platform for the July 1975 mission of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The contract extension, bringing the total contract value to $6 365 229, was from May 1, 1974, through July 31, 1975. A $160 000 contract was awarded Norman Engineering Co. for architect-engineering services to modify a test stand for space shuttle testing, (msfc Releases 73-190, 73-191) December 6:	Concorde 201—Air France’s first Concorde supersonic airliner, the first production Concorde and the fifth Concorde to fly—made its maiden flight, from Toulouse, France, including 45 min supersonic flight. The aircraft reached mach 1.57, more than 1600 km (100 mi) per hr, at 1280 m (42 000 ft) during its 2-hr 50-min flight. Command pilot was Aerospatiale’s Andre Turcat. (Concorde Bull 12, 1/1/74)

December 2, 1985
NASA announced the appointment effective November 25 of Joseph Alexander to deputy chief scientist with responsibility for providing assistance to the chief scientist in advising the Administrator and in establishing policy related to scientific aspects of NASA programs and missions. Alexander joined Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in 1962, where he participated in the establishment of NASA's program in space radio astronomy and conducted studies of the sun, the planets, and the galaxy from earth-orbit, lunar-orbit, and planetary flyby spacecraft. In 1970 he became head of the Galactic Studies Section where he was responsible for scientific studies associated with the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite program. Following leave as a visiting scientist at the Department of Astro-Geophysics at the University of Colorado, Alexander became head of the Planetary Magnetospheres Branch and directed a research team conducting both experimental and theoretical studies of planetary environments by using instruments on board spacecraft such as the Interplanetary Monitoring Probes, Mariner-10, Magsat, Pioneer-11, and Voyager 1 and 2. From January 1984 until March 1985, Alexander was a senior policy analyst at the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy where he concentrated on issues related to space science and technology in the civil space program. He then returned to GSFC as associate chief of the laboratory for extraterrestrial physics. A member of the American Geophysical Union, the U.S. National Committee of the International Union of Radio Science, and the International Astronomical Union, Alexander received in 1960 a B.S. degree and in 1962 an M.A. degree, both in physics, from the College of William and Mary. (NASA anno., Dec 2/85)

October 21, 1975
Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded a $45.8-million contract to RCA Astro-Electronics Division for design and production of eight third-generation Tiros-N spacecraft, the company announced. Scheduled for launch in 1978, the 635-kg spacecraft would forecast weather 2 days in advance with accuracy equal to that of present 1-day predictions. RCA earlier had received a $16.6 million NASA contract for long lead-time items for the Tiros-N series, bringing the total cost of the satellites to $62.4 million. (SBD, 21 Oct 75, 259)

January 18, 1985
Observations by the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) revealed what appeared to be a variable gas cloud surrounding the star Beta Pictoris. This was the first evidence of gas around the star as well as the large dust particles previously observed from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) and ground-based telescopes, the JSC Roundup reported. Many astronomers considered Beta Pictoris, in the constellation Pictor in the southern hemisphere, a leading candidate for another planetary system. Dr. Yoji Kondo, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) IUE project scientist, and Dr. F.C. Bruhweiler of Catholic University jointly made the observations in December and said the coexisting dust and gas clouds were consistent with scientific theories of planetary system formation. "Many stars like Beta Pictoris show evidence of being surrounded by clouds of gas at ultraviolet wavelengths," said Kondo. "If such data imply that these stars also are surrounded by a protoplanetary gaseous cloud with a disk of dust particles, then many nearby stars may have evolving planetary systems. That's exciting," he concluded, "because these stars would offer a unique opportunity to see the way a solar system might appear in formation." Theories of planet formation had generally predicted that planets evolved from large stellar clouds of dust and gas that gradually condensed into orbiting planetary bodies, a theory strengthened by the IUE observations. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 3)

May 28, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a new approach to issuance of 2 parallel contracts, to be awarded for studies of a space industrialization effort that would run from 1980 to 2010. One of the study contracts would be awarded to an aerospace firm, the other to a research or “think-tank” firm, to obtain different viewpoints. The proposed work would consist of 2 phases, each lasting about 8 mo, and each contract would cost about $200 000. Replies to today’s requests for proposals were due 29 June, and contracts were to be awarded this fall. Whereas the space program had so far emphasized scientific and other exploratory activities, space industrialization would emphasize production of goods and services for economic benefit. First phase of the study would define goals, establish the rationale for a space program on the basis of terrestrial alternatives, and set up a time frame with options and budgetary considerations. The second phase would study future mission opportunities and the optimum role of man in the program, responsiveness of the concepts to national and industrial needs and goals, and technological implications as against costs. (MSFC Release 76-98; NASA Release 76-107)

July 11, 1973
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for proposals for space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motor (srm) development to Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and United Technology Center. Technical proposals were due Aug. 27 and cost proposals Aug. 30. The program would include increments for design, development, and test (including production of sufficient hardware for six development flights) ; for production of new and refurbished SRMs for 54 flights; and for delivery of new and refurbished units for 385 flights., (nasa Release 73-133)

February 3, 1964
NASA established ranger VI Review Board, composed of members from NASA Hq., Langley Research Center, and Goddard Space Flight Center, and chaired by Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs Earl D. Hilburn, to review program effect of ranger vi failure. The Board would review results of failure analyses and corrective procedures being prepared by jpl, then make recommendations regarding remainder of Ranger flight program. At press conference, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., explained that the single aim of the Board was to determine when Ranger 7 would be launched. Until the mystery of ranger Vi’s failure was solved, NASA was delaying launch of Ranger 7, which also would have mission of photographing lunar surface, (nasa Release 64-26; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/4/64; Finney, NYT, 2/4/64)

October 1, 1965
First complete test model of the s—n stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle left North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., Seal Beach, aboard the U.S.S. Point Barrow for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The 4,000-mi. trip via the Panama Canal would take about two weeks, (msfc Release 65-246)

May 6, 1965
Techniques for weather predictions reliable up to two weeks were discussed at Geophysics Corp. of America in Bedford, Mass., by Dr. D. Q. Wark of the U.S. Weather Bureau, Dr. William Nordberg of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and Dr. Jean I. F. King of gca. These scientists had successfully utilized radio waves to collect weather data and were planning to build a new weather satellite which could log greater amounts of data and provide constant coverage. They proposed placing weather buoys in the oceans and weather balloons in the atmosphere equipped to relay data to the orbiting satellite which, in turn, would relay data to ground stations. (Hughes, CSM, 5/6/65)

March 31, 1975
Boeing Co. scientists were studying a way to cut aircraft fuel consumption as much as 40%, according to the Baltimore Sun. The technique involved cutting many tiny holes in the aircraft wings and applying suction from within. This would control the laminar flow of the airstream, preventing drag-producing turbulence from being created by the change in pressure as the air flows over the wing surface. In the 1960s Northrop Corp. had built the Air Force a plane incorporating the concept but technical problems had discouraged further development. Rising fuel costs and recent improvements in structural materials and manufacturing techniques had sparked new interest in the method. (AP, B Sun, 31 March 75, A7) During March: NASA’s Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974) was the means for coordinating long-distance emergency operations of ships near the Azores Islands during search and rescue tests conducted by Goddard Space Flight Center. The tests evaluated the effectiveness of Ats 6 functioning as a communications relay between a ship in distress and a coordination center thousands of kilometers away. In the tests, a “stricken” ship dropped a buoy equipped with a position-indicating radio beacon into the ocean. Ats 6 picked up the signals and transmitted the ship’s identification and position to a NASA ground station, which relayed them to the Coast Guard’s New York Rescue Coordination Center. The rescue center then sent the information to rescue aircraft and ships. As they neared the area, they could home in on the buoy’s signals. Within 2 hr of the time the buoy was dropped, the ship and the buoy were located. The search and rescue communications tests were part of continuing joint L-band experiments using Ats 6 and conducted by GSFC and the Depts. of Commerce and Transportation, as well as by the European Space Agency and the Canadian Dept, of Communications and Ministry of Transport. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 3)

May 7, 1992
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, selected the New Mexico State University, Physical Science Laboratory of Las Cruces, New Mexico, to negotiate a cost contract for the operation and maintenance of scientific balloon facilities and engineering support for the NASA Balloon Program. The total cost for the 5-year program was $65 million. (NASA Release C92-6)

September 4, 1985
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) were pursuing a 10-year program scheduled for completion in 1991 to improve Space Shuttle engine performance, reduce operational costs, and develop advanced engine technology for future space travel. Although the Space Shuttle propulsion system had performed well for a number of space missions, it incorporated state-of-the-art technology at the time of its development some 15 years before, so NASA believed the engine's operational life and performance levels could be improved. According to Stanley Marsik, LeRC's Space Shuttle main engine technology program manager, "The current engine represents the first generation of reusable engines. In a way, the first reusable space engine can be compared with the Model-T automobile. Now that we have experienced numerous flights with this engine, we have learned how to improve its life and performance. We now are working towards advancing the technologies necessary to support those improvements." In the age of reusable Space Shuttle engines, demands would increase for higher performance with lighter weight components, resulting in higher operating pressures and temperatures and increased mechanical vibrations and fuel flow turbulence. The system also severely taxed engine components such as turbine blades, bearings, seals, fuel ducting, and combustion chambers. Engineers were studying new high-temperature, high-strength metal alloys and other advanced materials such as new protective coatings and combustion processes. Researchers using advanced computer modeling techniques studied loads on turbine blades and fuel flow, and examined the use of hydrostatic ball bearings where a film of gas would separate the bearing from metal surfaces, resulting in no metal-to-metal contact. Engineers were developing new methods of measuring wear and deterioration, so parts would be replaced only when necessary, and studying ways to monitor engine health by means of a series of computer-connected diagnostic sensors on the engine to signal deviations from normal performance and to facilitate more economical on-the-ground maintenance. The two centers had formed ten disciplinary groups to work with some 130 different technology elements of engine design. Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Internatl., engine manufacturer, and other NASA contractors and several universities were supporting the program. (NASA Release 85-122)

March 7, 1991
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)

May 31, 1974
Dr. John F. Clark, Goddard Space Flight Center Director, announced appointment of a committee to review all aspects of the Thor-Delta launch vehicle program, including all anomalies in recent Thor-Delta launches. Pending completion of the review, the 10 June launch of Westar-B—the second of Western Union’s domestic communications satellites—had heen postponed, (nasa Release 74—147)

October 23, 1972
NASA launched Black Brant VB sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test rocket configuration that would be used in support of Skylab mission. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

August 30, 1991
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)

August 17, 1964
Two NASA sounding' rockets were launched from Kronog&rd, Sweden, in early morning coordinated launchings. Nike-Apache with micrometeoroid-particle-collector payload reached 77-mi. altitude in conditions of moderate noctilucent cloud display. The payload impacted in a lake and was recovered safely, usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories and Stockholm Univ.’s Meteorological Institute cooperated in the experiment. Twenty minutes later, Nike-Cajun was launched with grenade payload to 80-mi. altitude, providing good data on atmospheric temperature, wind, air density, and pressure. Stockholm Univ.’s Meteorological Institute cooperated with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in this experiment. (NASA Rpt. SRl)

February 3, 1964
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said at Washington press luncheon that the two astronauts in Project Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module would stand up during the descent to the moon. He described support gear—like elasticized parachute harness—which would cushion the landing for the crewmen. Elimination of chairs and rearrangement of Lem’s gear permitted weight reduction of 1,000 lbs., he said. (Halsell, Houston Post, 2/4/64)

May 14, 1973
NASA launched two sounding rockets. A Black Brant IVB, launched from Wallops Island, carried an Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory and Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 603.5-km (375-mi) altitude to flight-test a modified version of the Black Brant IVB. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. A Black Brant VC, launched from White Sands Missile Range, carried a Harvard College Observatory experiment to a 268.8-km (167-mi) altitude to collect data on solar activity to collaborate with data collected by the Apollo Telescope Mount instruments aboard the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), now manned by the Skylab 3 crew (launched July 28). A capsule containing film was parachuted to the earth and recovered 160 km (100 mi) from the launch site. One detector failed but the experiment was 80% successful. The rocket performed satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; Reuters, B Sun, 8/10/73, A6) August 10:	NASA announced it had granted a five-year patent license to K-H Enterprises to manufacture and sell a burglar-intrusion detection system based on an Ames Research Center-developed capacitance pressure transducer. The transducer had been developed by ARC scientist Grant Koon to measure pressures on wind-tunnel models. In its application as an aircraft intrusion detection system, the transducer sensed the physical mass of an approaching person in the aircraft’s vicinity as a change in capacitance and activated an alarm, (nasa Release 73-148)

January 23, 1985
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) would transfer spacecraft tracking and data acquisition operations from its Beltsville Tracking Station to its Wallops Flight Facility by early 1986, consolidating the operations to support balloon, sounding-rocket, and aeronautical-flight research. Diminishing need for ground stations due to the new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) necessitated the realignment. TDRSS would consist of three communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit, providing global coverage by earth-orbiting satellites and replacing the worldwide network of ground stations. NASA had launched the first TDRSS satellite in April 1983 and would launch the second about February 20. GSFC would phase out or transfer to other agencies most of its tracking stations. In addition to Wallops, however, GSFC would maintain ground stations at Bermuda and Merritt Island, Florida, to support Space Shuttle launches from KSC. The White Sands, New Mexico, station was the ground terminal for orbiting TDRSS satellities (NASA Release 85-11)

March 19, 1965
NASA launched a scientific payload for the Univ. of Michigan from Wallops Station using a two-stage Nike-Tomahawk. The 122-lb. payload, consisting primarily of a thermosphere probe in the form of a 32-in. ejectable cylinder, was boosted to a peak altitude of 315 km. (196 mi.). Purpose of the experiment, a joint project of the Univ. of Michigan and Goddard Space Flight Center, was to measure density and temperature of electrons and neutral particles at 75-200 mi. altitude and to test a solar aspect sensor. This was the first firing of Nike-Tomahawk configuration from Wallops Island, (nasa Rpt. SRL; Wallops Release 65—16)

December 10, 1985
NASA announced that scientists from the U.S., France, the United Kingdom, and West Germany released their findings from the rendezvous on September 11 of the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft with Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although some ICE data confirmed the traditional portrait of a comet, other information was unexpected. Perhaps most surprising was detection of electrical wave (plasma) disturbances and high-speed molecular species coming from the comet more than a day before rendezvous. The spacecraft's Plasma Wave Experiment, developed by TRW's Dr. Frederick Scarf, detected the electrical waves while ICE was 1,429,200 miles from the comet. Scientists had theorized that first detection might occur just a few hours before the spacecraft crossed the comet's tail. A few hours after initial detection, but still one day before intercept, two of ICE's instruments discovered electrically-charged particles (ions) as far as 1,130,000	miles from the comet. The Energetic Proton Experiment, directed by Dr. Robert Hynds, Imperial College, London, and the Low-Energy Cosmic Ray Experiment, directed by Dr. Dieter Hovestadt of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching, West Germany, detected these ions. According to Hynds, it was believed solar ultraviolet light ionized gas molecules escaping from the comet's nucleus, then the solar wind picked up and accelerated the ions back toward the comet. In another finding, Dr. Samuel Bame of the Los Alamos National Laboratory reported that, in contrast to the hot electrons on the outskirts of the comet, its tail consisted of a dense narrow structure of cool plasma. The Radio Wave Experiment of France's Meudon Observatory made this same finding. The ICE's Ion Composition Experiment, directed by Dr. Keith Ogilvie of Goddard Space Flight Center, made the first direct measurements of molecules in a comet. The experiment found mainly water vapor ions, confirming the "dirty snowball" model of comets. A major prediction confirmed by the ICE data was that the magnetic structure of the comet's plasma tail consisted of two parallel lobes, each threaded by a magnetic field of opposite polarity. ICE's Magnetometer Experiment of Dr. Edward Smith of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory mapped this structure, which was predicted in 1957 by Nobel physicist Dr. Hannel Alfven. Putting conflicting scientific conjectures to rest, the ICE mission revealed that no clear-cut bow shock—a surface moving ahead of the comet like that through which a jet aircraft passes as it breaks the sound barrier—accompanied the comet. Instead, researchers found around the head of the comet what they called "a transition region" in which the solar wind was heated, compressed, and slowed. Neither the ICE spacecraft nor its instrument payload suffered any detectable damage as a result of the impact with the comet's dust. (NASA Release

July 10, 1973
U.S. Patents Nos. 3 744 480 and 3 744 794 were granted to Marshall Space Flight Center physicist Raymond L. Gause and engineers Raymond A. Spier and Bobby G. Bynum. They had invented the ergometer installed in Skylab 1 (launched May 14) to evaluate the astronauts’ muscular output and heart rate and also the harness that held the astronaut to the ergometer in zero-g or earth environment. (Pat Off Pio; Jones, NYT, 7/14/73, 31)

November 3, 1972
Large Space Telescope (lst) status briefing was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for representatives of potential industry participants in program to develop multipurpose telescope for launch by space shuttle in 1980s. lst feasibility studies would end in December. NASA expected to invite industry proposals on preliminary design and definition phase in early 1973. LST would operate from earth orbit to pick up galaxies 100 times fainter than those observed by most powerful ground-based optical telescopes. It would weigh maximum 11 000 kg (25 000 lbs) and have diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter, (msfc Release 72-142)

September 21, 1972
North American Rockwell Corp. Downey Div. announced receipt of $5 500 000 contract from Air Force Systems Command’s Space and Missile Organization (samso) to build one-of-a-kind satellite for late 1973 launch. Spacecraft would be orbiting base from which quartet of instruments would gather scientific data for several Government agencies. (NR Release) September 22-25:	NASA launched Explorer 47 (imp-h) Interplanetary Monitoring Platform from Eastern Test Range at 9:20 pm edt by three-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered transfer orbit with 237 796-km (147 759.6-mi) apogee, 246-km (152.9-mi) perigee, 7365-min (5.11-day) period, and 28.6° inclination. Primary objective was to provide more detailed understanding of dynamics of regions discovered and broadly surveyed by previous earth-orbiting imps and lunar imp by obtaining scientific data during period of decreasing solar activity. Explorer 47 would continue studies of interplanetary radiation, solar wind and energetic particle emissions, and magnetic fields in earth’s environment from orbit halfway to moon. Apogee kick motor was fired Sept. 25 to place Explorer 47 in circular orbit with 235 639-km (146 419.3-mi) apogee, 201599-km (125 267.8-mi) perigee, 12.3-day period, and 17.2° inclination. Ry Sept. 25, 10 experiments had been commanded on and were operating satisfactorily. Three remaining experiments would be turned on about Oct. 5. Explorer 47 was drum shaped, weighed 378 kg (833 lbs), and carried 13 experiments to measure energetic particles, plasmas, and magnetic and electric fields. Experiments were provided universities, industry, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Explorer 47 was ninth spacecraft in imp series. First—Explorer 18 (imp—a)—had been launched Nov. 26, 1963, and most recent—Explorer 43 (imp—i) . —had been launched March 13, 1971. Four of the eight previously launched spacecraft were still operating, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-185) September 22:	Skylab Orbital Workshop, scheduled to carry three-man crews in earth orbit in 1973, arrived at Kennedy Space Center after two-week barge trip from McDonnell Douglas Co.’s Huntington Reach, Calif., plant. Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) was flown to KSC from Manned Spacecraft Center, where it had been undergoing thermal testing since mid-July. Airlock module (am) and multiple docking adapter (mda) were scheduled to arrive at ksc Oct. 9 and instrument unit Oct. 22. (upi, NY News, 9/23/72; ksc Releases 268-72, 270-72)

May 30, 1973
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to a 49.4-km (30.7-mi) altitude. The objectives were to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The sounding rocket was launched in conjunction with a Nimbus 4 weather satellite (launched April 8, 1970) overpass. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt Srl) September 19—21:	The exhibition “Technology in the Service of Man” was opened at Lewis Research CenteT by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator. Some 1400 representatives of business, industry, labor, professions, and Government viewed exhibits that included a Skylab slide show, Saturn launch vehicle models, a Skylab Student Project exhibit, mockups of future space shuttle payloads, a lunar roving vehicle, and material on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao). (msfc Release 73-129; LeRC Release 73—42; Lewis News, 9/21/73, 1) September 19—28:	Five Soviet radiation specialists toured U.S. industrial process radiation facilities under the Memorandum on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy between the Atomic Energy Commission and the U.S.S.R. State Committee on the Utilization of Atomic , Energy. The visit reciprocated a Soviet tour by a delegation of U.S. radiation specialists in July 1972. (aec Release R-389) September 20:	President Nixon presented Harmon International Aviation Trophies to chief test pilots Brian Trubshaw and Andre Turcat of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft during White House ceremonies that coincided with the Concorde’s first U.S. visit. Trubshaw of Great Britain and Turcat of France received the 1971 Aviator’s Trophy for their Concorde flights. The 1972 Aviatrix Trophy went to Geraldine Cobb for humanitarian flights in the Amazon River Basin area of South America in 1971. Air Force pilots l/c Thomas B. Estes and l/c Dewain Bick received the 1972 Aviator’s Trophy for their April 26, 1972, SR—71 reconnaissance jet aircraft flight that set a record for sustained speed after a 24 100-km (15 000-mi) flight from Beale Air Force Base, Calif., at mach 3-plus speeds. In the first visit of a supersonic transport aircraft to the U.S., the Concorde arrived at Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport at Grapevine, Tex., to participate in Sept. 21 dedication ceremonies for the world’s largest jet airport. The Concorde—carrying 32 aviation officials, press representatives, and a 10-man crew—was flown from Caracas, Venezuela, to Texas by Concorde test pilot Jean Franchi in two and one half hours. The passengers had flown from Texas to Caracas the previous day in a conventional jet aircraft in four and one half hours. {PD, 9/24/73, 1170; NYT, 9/21/73, 1, 43; A&A 1972)

November 18, 1964
The Hermann Oberth Award, presented annually by the Alabama chapter of AIAA, was awarded posthumously to Hugh M. Taylor, former special assistant to the Chief of the Guidance and Control Division, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Taylor, who had worked at Redstone Arsenal since 1951, was killed in a plane crash July 9 near Newport, Tenn. {Marshall Star, 11/11/64, 1, and 11/25/64, 1)

October 1, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Reeves Instrument Co. for negotiations of $2.5 million contract for three 30-ft. Unified S-Band Antenna Systems. The antenna systems would be installed in tracking ships for Project Apollo, (gsfc Release G-64-29)

February 25, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center had requested quotations from industry on a contract to study a two-way data link using laser beams and operating between ground and payloads in low earth orbit, msfc announced. The study, which could lead to a flight system on the space shuttle, would indicate the most effective lasers and frequencies and analyze effects of orbital dynamics on acquisition, tracking, and pointing systems, (msfc Release 74-28)

July 29, 1964
His Excellency Philibert Tsiranana, President of the Malagasy Republic, toured NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and received briefings on the Goddard mission by GSFC Director Dr. Harry Goett. In his official party were his wife, the Malagasy Foreign Minister, their Ambassador to the U.S., and officials of the U.S. State Dept, and NASA Hq. (Goddard News, 8/10/64,1)

November 12, 1991
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, announced the appointment of former NASA deputy director J.R. Thompson Jr. as executive vice president. He was to manage the new Orbital office in Huntsville, Alabama, near Marshall Space Flight Center. (AP, Nov 12/91; W Post, Nov 13/91; W Times, Nov 13/91; Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 14/91)

October 25, 1994
NASA was scheduled to open a new facility, the Global Hydrology and Climate Center, in Cummings Research Park West in Huntsville, Alabama, October 27. The focus of the Center's $15 million annual program was to study Earth's water cycle and the ways in which it affected climate. Research would involve collection and analysis of rainfall, lightning, and temperature data on a global scale, according to Center director Ron Greenwood. The Center was to house 42 scientists from Marshall Space Flight Center, 59 from the Universities Space Research Association, and 46 faculty, staff, and students from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was present to open the Center, which was to operate in cooperation with the other institutions mentioned and to concentrate on studying water vapor. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 25/94; Htsvl Tms, Oct 27/94)

December 29, 1988
E. Ray Tanner was appointed Director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tanner had been serving as Manager of the Space Station Projects Office, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August 1988. Prior to that he was Deputy Director for Space Systems in the Science and Engineering Directorate. (NASA Release 88175; MSFC Release 88178)

December 7, 1962
Analysis of data from mariner ii interplanetary probe revealed there are 10,000 times as many small dust particles near the earth as there are in interplanetary space, reported W. M. Alexander of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. This was revision of earlier estimate of 1,000 times as many dust particles near earth as in interplanetary space. Other observations from mariner ii included in the report, which was published in Science: solar plasma experiment showed constant presence of solar plasma (or “solar wind”), generally ranging from 850,000 mph to 1,550,000	mph; magnetometer experiment found “convincing evidence” that magnetic fields of at least a few gamma are nearly always present, except perhaps for occasional, transient lulls.

June 1, 1977
DFRC announced it would drop-test at the Natl. Parachute Test Range, El Centro, Calif., the parachutes for recovering the reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters on the Shuttle. The tests would be a series of air drops to evaluate design, deployment, performance, and structural integrity of full-scale parachutes loaded with two configurations of drop-test vehicles offering various limit and overload conditions for the drogue and main parachutes at reefed and full open-canopy shapes. Engineers from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had responsibility for developing the Shuttle boosters, and from Martin Marietta, developer of the parachute system, would use the results to evaluate the adequacy of the system. (DFRC Release 21-77; MSFC Release 77-98)

February 22, 1991
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)

April 12, 1976
Electricity from outer space to power homes and industry would be not only possible, but entirely probable, soon after the turn of the century, said Ralph I. LaRock of NASA Hq at a recent meeting held at Marshall Space Flight Center. LaRock, director of the Energy Technology Applications Division in NASA’s Office of Energy Programs, described a proposed satellite power system under study by NASA, industry, the Energy Research and Development Administration, and other groups. MSFC’s share of the study was aimed at defining overall systems requirements (including satellite structure, economical size and materials for the solar array, new technology needed in satellite and support systems, and transporting, erecting, and maintaining the system in space). LaRock said predictions of technology advancement during the 1980-1990 time period indicated a good chance of “our having a few solar-power satellites in operation by the turn of the century.” (MSFC Release 76-75)

December 9, 1965
Ground test version of Saturn V’s first stage, s-ic-t, was captive fired for the 14th time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. This was a full-duration firing in which the unit developed 7.5-million lbs. thrust for 150 sec.; it was conducted by Boeing Co., s-ic prime contractor, (msfc Release 65-301)

June 29, 1985
Goddard Space Flight Center announced the Wallops Flight Facility would celebrate its 40th anniversary on June 29. The events planned were in recognition of the scientific and technological achievements at Wallops, which had conducted rocketborne experiments since July 4, 1945, when researchers first launched a 17-foot Tiamat. Since that original flight, Wallops had launched approximately 13,000 rocket-propelled research vehicles and conducted thousands of aeronautical and aircraft tests to obtain information on aircraft and spacecraft flight characteristics and to increase knowledge of the upper atmosphere and the nearspace environment. This research led to major contributions to the U.S.'s aeronautical and space programs. The breakthroughs to supersonic flight by aircraft and to hypersonic flight by rocket systems were largely attributed to fundamental aerodynamic research conducted at Wallops by means of aerodynamic models propelled by multiple-stage rocket systems. Using sounding rockets Wallops personnel developed the technologies for measuring atmospheric structure and the space environment, such as temperature, pressure and density, micrometeorite densities, electric fields, energetic particles, and radiation levels. These measurements formed the basis for developing design criteria for scientific satellites and manned spacecraft. Wallops's researchers also pursued technology development for the manned space program, such as manned capsule-escape techniques and maximum dynamic pressure tests for the Mercury Program. Most recently Wallops was known as a center for the NASA suborbital program. Sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft conducted space science and aeronautical research missions. The island obtained its name from John Wallops, appointed deputy surveyor of Virginia in the 17th century by Col. Edmund Scarburgh. Wallops received a Crown Patent to the island in 1672. At present, the facility, in addition to the island, included the mainland area in back of the island and the main base (formerly the Chincoteague Naval Air Station) about seven miles northwest. In addition to an open house, the day's anniversary events would include an Air Force F—15 aerial demonstration and demonstrations in crash/fire/ rescue, space sciences, model rocketry, and radio controlled model airplanes. (GSFC Release 85-16) Office of Inspector General

April 9, 1975
NASA announced that Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Associate Administrator, would leave NASA in May to join the National Center for Resource Recovery as president and chief executive officer. Dr. Petrone, who in 1960 was assigned on loan from the Army to Kennedy Space Center as Saturn project officer, later became Apollo program manager responsible for planning, developing, and activating all launch facilities for the Apollo program. Upon retirement from the Army he served at KSC as director of launch operations from 1966 to 1969, when he was appointed Apollo program director. In 1972 he was assigned additional responsibilities as program director of the NASA portion of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. In Dec. 1972 he was appointed Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, a position he held until his appointment in 1974 as Associate Administrator. (NASA Releases 69-124, 75-98)

May 10, 1996
At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the station’s air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISS’s air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, “Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test,” news release, 10 May 1996.)

April 6, 1964
First large batch of unusual stones arrived from Iowa at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center for analysis in Project Moon Harvest. Residents of six Iowa counties were gathering the specimens, which GSFC scientists were analyzing to determine if they were of lunar origin. Dr. John A. O’Keefe, project scientist, theorized that pieces of the moon’s surface were chipped off the moon by meteorite impapt and attracted by gravity to the earth. (Goddard News, 4/20/64, 4; GSFC Release G—13-64)

February 28, 1965
The first industry-produced Saturn I first stage (s—I—8) arrived at Cape Kennedy aboard the NASA barge Promise after a six-day trip from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The stage, which was 80 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in diameter, had been built by the Chrysler Corp. (msfc Release 65^16; ap, NYT, 3/1/65, 12)

October 24, 1961
Long duration static test of the S-I stage (SA-2 vehicle) occurred at Marshall Space Flight Center, for a period of 120 seconds.

July 11, 1975
NASA announced the appointment of Donald P. Hearth as Director of Langley Research Center, effective in September. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center since 1970, would replace Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, who is leaving NASA to pursue other interests. Prior to being at GSFC, Hearth had served 3 yr as Director of Planetary Programs at NASA Hq. He came to NASA in 1962 from the Marquardt Corp. where he managed research on hypersonic propulsion and flight systems. Before that, he had been an aeronautical research scientist at Lewis Aeronautical Laboratory of NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (NASA anno 11 July 75)

June 12, 1985
Approximately 200 NASA management officials and contractors met June 12 and 13 at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to discuss initiatives to improve quality and productivity in NASA/contractor operations, the Marshall Star reported. The first NASA/Hardware Contractors Productivity Conference was at MSFC in April 1984. Attendees at the 1985 conference heard an interim report on the status of activities implemented as a result of the 1984 meeting and related recommendations. NASA and contractor panels discussed topics such as quality in relationship to productivity; productivity and quality initiatives and incentives; efforts toward implementing participative management techniques; and improvement in specification, preplanning, and measurement. The conference was part of NASA's continuing effort to provide national leadership in the development and application of advanced technology and management practices. During fiscal year 1984, about 85% of NASA's $7.2 billion budget was placed with contractors. "It's very important,'' said William Reynolds, associate director for management in MSFC's science and engineering directorate, "that NASA's productivity effort include an improved relationship with the NASA hardware and service/support contractors.'' (Marshall Star, June 12/85, 1)

June 6, 1961
NASA Agena B management meeting was held at Marshall Space Flight Center with representatives from MSFC, NASA headquarters, AFSSD, LMSD, JPL, and GSFC.

November 21, 1974
In a Skylab awards ceremony at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Group Achievement Awards to the Skylab Program Offices at msFc, Kennedy Space Center, Johnson Space Center, and NASA Hq. and to special Skylab teams. Dr. Robert A. Parker, NASA astronaut and Skylab program scientist at JSC, received an Outstanding Leadership Medal. Dr. Fletcher also presented 28 individual Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medals to principal investigators for Skylab experiments and to Comet Kohoutek scientific investigators, (msfc Release 74-227; Marshall Star, 27 Nov 74) Questioned about a newspaper article saying the Viking lander might sink deep into Martian surface dust, Dr. Petrone said that tests mentioned in the article had been made some years earlier, not “two weeks ago” as reported. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified that the lander’s footpad area had been increased since the earlier tests and that radar observations had indicated the proposed landing sites for the first mission appeared “well within the capability” of the lander. Sites for the second mission were still being studied. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 20 Nov 74, A3) 22 November-6 January 1975: NASA launched Skynet IIB, a U.K. military communications satellite, for the U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Office as agents for the U.K. Ministry of Defense. The satellite was launched on a three-stage Thor-Delta launch vehicle from Eastern Test Range at 7:28 pm est into an orbit with a 36 965-km apogee, 185km perigee, and 24.6° inclination. The apogee kick motor, fired at 8:10 pm est on 24 Nov., circularized the orbit with an apogee of 36 595 km, perigee of 35 896 km, period of 24 hrs 19.4 min, and inclination of 2.2°. The spacecraft then drifted to its geosynchronous station at 50° E longitude over the Indian Ocean. NASA adjudged the launch a success 6 Jan. 1975. The first-generation Skynet A and B had been developed for the U.K. in the usaf’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) and launched by NASA 21 Nov. 1969 and 18 Aug. 1970. Skynet IIA failed to achieve a satisfactory orbit when launched 18 Jan. 1974 and reentered 25 Jan. The launch of Skynet I IB had been delayed from 19 Nov. by a defective component in the Delta 2nd-stage attitude control system. (nasa mors, 7 Nov, 5 Dec 74; 6 Jan 75; gsfc Wkly SSR, 21-26 Nov 74; NASA Release 74-303; AP, W Post, 12 Nov 74, C5)

June 2, 1993
NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)

August 12, 1993
Twenty-six Prince George's Country students with physical, mental, or learning disabilities spent six weeks in a jobs program at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, during the summer.  The program, which was under the auspices of the President's Commission on Employment for Persons With Disabilities, aimed to steer more young people into fields like science, engineering, and computer programming. (W Post, Aug 12/93)

April 23, 1963
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 195-lb. instrumented payload to 125-mi. altitude in 7V2-min. flight. Conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, experiment was designed to measure electron densities in ionosphere by several methods and to yield information necessary to further development of direct measurement techniques. (Wallops Release 63-42)

November 29, 1975
States involved in NASA’s land-use satellite applications had included Ala., Miss., and Tenn., which had organized statewide survey programs, and Mo., which had just begun such a program. The Southern Growth Policies Board, a 15-state group monitoring the South’s development, had investigated application of Landsat capabilities to identify prime farm land, potential commercial sites, and land values. Georgia, working through Ga. Tech., Marshall Space Flight Center, and the U.S. Dept of Agriculture, had begun aerial surveys of Georgia’s peach orchards to study the problem of premature loss of the fruit trees. MSFC aircraft provided multispectral photos and thermal data to be processed through Ga. Tech, computers, detecting stages of decline not visible from the ground. (MSFC Release 75—247, 75—251)

September 14, 1962
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in published interview: “People talk too much about crash programs and too little about sustained support. These space programs take time. A decision you make today on some engineering or scientific aspects of our space program may take anywhere from four to five years before it takes the form of hardware. “When you make a wrong decision now, the payoff, good or bad, could come five years later, not sooner than that. We can’t work miracles overnight. . . .”

November 30, 1964
Linde Division of Union Carbide has “grown” a new solid-state laser material for use by scientists in laser research at the Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory. The new material was yttrium aluminum garnet doped with neodymium. It supported solid-state continuous-wave laser action, with common tap water as the only coolant. Toughness of the garnet was comparable to that of ruby laser rods. {Marshall Star, 11/18/64, 2)

December 31, 1963
More than 150,000 visitors visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, more than 50,000 visits recorded by persons on business. Biggest single attraction was Space Orientation Center, drawing about 83,000 visits during the year. (Marshall Star, 1/22/64, 1)

March 18, 1964
Eleanor Pressly, head of Vehicle Section, Spacecraft Integration, Sounding Rocket Div. at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and winner of a 1963 Federal Women’s Award, was guest speaker at Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson’s White House luncheon for “women-doers.” (Wash. Post, 3/17/64)

May 22, 1972
nasa announced start of development of space experiment to test equivalence principle of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Principle asserted that pull of gravity and oppositely directed mechanical acceleration could not be distinguished in small region of space. Thus, when two identical clocks were in areas with different gravitational pull, clock rates would appear to be different, although rates themselves would not change. Gravitational Redshift Space Probe Equipment would be launched from Wallops Station on Scout-D rocket in late 1974.	“Gravitational redshift” was term for decrease or shift toward red spectrum as a light wave escaped from strong gravitational field of sun or other massive body toward weaker gravitational field. Clock in experiment would follow 3%-hr elliptical flight trajectory over Atlantic and would always be in weaker gravitational field than identical clock at Bermuda ground station. Frequency of clock in probe, as observed by telemetry, should appear greater than frequency of clock on ground and rate should appear to increase as strength of gravitational field decreased up to 18 000-km (11000-mi) altitude and decrease as it returned to stronger field at lower altitudes. Difference between experimental and ground-based clock rates would be compared with shifts predicted by Einstein’s theory. Hydrogen maser clocks for experiment would be developed by Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center. (nasa Release 72-105)

November 21, 1962
nasa confirmed Rift nuclear rocket stage would be manufactured in renovated dirigible hangar at Moffett Field nas, Calif. To be used to flight-test nasa-aec Nerva engine, Rift was being developed under technical direction of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. as prime contractor. Rift would be flight-tested in 1967-68 as top stage of Advanced Saturn (C-5) launch vehicle.

November 19, 1961
NASA announced the completion of the preliminary flight rating test of the Nation’s first liquid-hydrogen rocket engine. The engine, the RL-10, was designed and developed by Pratt and Whitney, of United Aircraft, for the Marshall Space Flight Center, and 20 captive firings were completed within 5 days under simulated space conditions, consistently producing 15,000 pounds of thrust. RL-10, previously known as XLR-115, was initiated in October 1958 and over 700 firings were conducted in its development.

February 4, 1987
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a contract for continuation of maintenance and operations of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN). The DSN provides tracking and data acquisition for planetary spaceflight missions and for NASA's crewtended and untended space programs. The fiveyear contract, with an option for an additional five years, was expected to begin April 2, 1987. (NASA Release 879)h)0*0*0*February 5: Jesse W. Moore resigned from NASA, effective February 8, 1987. Moore joined NASA in 1966. Among the varied positions he held included Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science (19781979); Director of Space Flight Division (19791981); Director of the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (19811983); Acting Associate Administrator of Space Flight (April 1984August 1984); and Associate Administrator of Space Flight (August 1984January 1986). He was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in January 1986, and in October 1986 he moved to Headquarters as a Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Policy and Planning. (NASA Release 8710; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87)

July 15, 1962
nasa announced that two technical notes propose new concept on the mechanics of solar heating of the upper atmosphere. Dr. Isadore Harris (TN-D-1443) and Dr. Wolfgang Priester (TN-D-1444) of Goddard Space Flight Center proposed that corpuscular radiation (i.e., solar wind) in association with hydromagnetic waves may be the energy source required to explain the results obtained from orbiting satellites. Harris’ note provided for the first time a diurnal picture of the thermosphere (120 to 2,050 kilometers above the earth’s surface). Priester’s note postulated the physical properties scientists are likely to encounter during a complete 11-year solar cycle when upper atmospheric conditions change according to solar flare activity.

September 30, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had resumed acoustic testing of a 6.4%-scale model of the Space Shuttle to provide information needed in designing the Shuttle and its launch facilities, MSFC announced. The tests would also produce data on effects of hot exhaust gases on the aft portion of the Shuttle immediately after ignition. Data from earlier testing of the model, which included the liquid-fueled engines and solid rocket motors, had alerted designers that special provisions would be needed to deflect hot gases out of the solid rocket boosters away from the facility fuel lines near the launch pad. A pad design based on this analysis had been tested and proven. During the tests, which had begun originally in August 1974, the model was held in a test stand while its engines were fired from 6 to 10 sec. (MSFC Release 75—205) During September: NASA had invited nearly 5000 scientists worldwide to propose experiments for a possible 6-yr mission to Uranus, beginning with a November 1979 launch. The mission, which could include a swing by Neptune, was being studied for inclusion in NASA’s FY 1977 budget request. A mission to Uranus and Neptune would mean that every planet in the solar system except Pluto would have been probed by a U.S. spacecraft by 1988. The spacecraft itself would be adapted directly from the Mariner probe now under development at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a planned 1977 mission to Saturn; like Mariner-Satum, the Uranus mission would use the gravity of Jupiter to hurl the spacecraft on toward the more remote planet. If the spacecraft remained healthy after it investigated Uranus, it would use the gravity of that planet to fly on to Neptune, more than 1.6 billion km deeper into space. (GSFC Goddard News, Sept 75, 2; UPI, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 20) October 1975

June 6, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations for a proposed study contract to design, build, test, and deliver a full-scale solar-array wing for solar electric propulsion and Space Shuttle payload applications. The selected contractor would establish design requirements and develop techniques for low-cost fabrication and testing incorporating all previously developed technology. (MSFC Release 75—109)

February 26, 1965
Joseph Campbell, Comptroller General, reported to Congress that the decision of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center to lease rather than buy two electric substations from the Potomac Electric Power Co. had resulted in $174,000 of unnecessary costs thus far. Campbell explained, “We believe that the Center failed to make this determination because of the Administration’s failure to provide guidelines to its employees, setting forth pertinent factors necessary for consideration in making decisions whether to lease or purchase property.” He added, however, that NASA had agreed with GAO findings and would purchase substations as provided for in contract. The matter was nevertheless reported to Congress because it “further illustrates that significant unnecessary costs can be and are being incurred,” when agencies do not make complete lease-versus -purchase studies. (Wash. Post, 2/28/65)

August 16, 1972
Wallops Station announced award of $1074 000, one-year contract renewal to Computer Sciences Corp. for engineering support services at Wallops. (WS Release 72-9) In past, NASA had been forced to develop expensive equipment for one-time use. “Today we have 52 operating civilian spacecraft. By the end of next year we will launch 35 more, for a total of 87” representing “43 different spacecraft types—on the average each spacecraft [type] is flown only twice!” But payloads had become more complex, while launch costs decreased. “We are no longer as limited in weight and volume as we were ten years ago; with the shuttle, weight and volume constraints will be non-existent for many missions. This means that we should now optimize our payloads for low cost and high reliability, and not for minimum weight and maximum performance. ... I am convinced that if we do this, we can drastically reduce the cost of doing business in space. And this ... is as great a technological challenge as everything else that we have done in space.” (Text) Air Force initiatives in controlling system cost were summarized by Gen. George S. Brown, Commander of Air Force Systems Command: prototyping to avoid high developmental costs, joint operational technical reviews to identify tradeoffs that would reduce acquisition costs, contracting techniques to reduce acquisition costs, full support of program managers to reduce acquisition costs, improvement in life-cycle costing technique to identify actions that would minimize total cost of ownership, and positive actions to achieve reliability and maintainability goals for increasing system effectiveness and decreasing cost of ownership. (Text) August 17:	Plans for regional earth resources information system were announced at Marshall Space Flight Center by team of msfc Summer Faculty Fellows headed By Dr. Reginald I. Vachon of Auburn Univ. and physicist Herman G. Hamby of msfc Environmental Applications Office. System—Earth Resources Information Storage, Transformation, Analysis and Retrieval (eristar)—would gather and correlate data from instrumented packages into data cross-sections useful in industrial development, conservation of natural resources, and pollution reduction. Information would be made available to Alabama Earth Resources Information Committee. Developed by team during 11-week stay at msfc, system would assist in disseminating information from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched July 23. (msfc Release 72-105)

January 31, 1975
Contracts involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space Flight Center during the month totaled nearly $200 million. Among them were awards to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Inc., for $67 500 to develop the capability of predicting radiant heating at the base region of the Space Shuttle, and for $49 971 to continue a two-phase study of flow effects on Space Shuttle plume simulation. Lockheed also had received $59 740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount data obtained during the Skylab mission. A $29 945 contract had gone to Northrop Services, Inc., to continue studies on Space Tug recovery of a spinning satellite. The U.S.'Army Engineer Div., Ala., had received two contracts. A $2-million contract had been awarded for construction at MSFC of the structural test facility for the Solid Rocket Booster and a $2.93-million contract has been awarded for construction and modifications to the Dynamic Test Facility for vibration testing of the Space Shuttle in the vertical positions. The contracts also included a $152.6-million award to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the Space Shuttle external tank, including six flight units and test hardware. MSFC had awarded the Dept, of Commerce $60 000 for an atmospheric measuring program. Bendix Corp. had received $99 736 for a Skylab control-moment gyro anomaly investigation, and the University of New York had received $36 253 to continue data analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75— 39) February 1975

November 19, 1985
The TOMS, or Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, aboard Nimbus-7 made measurements the previous week indicating that the gas cloud ejected from the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Columbia released twice as much sulfurous gas into the sky as the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens and five times as much as the 1982 eruption of Galung-gung in Indonesia, the NY Times reported. Dr. Arlin Krueger of the Goddard Space Flight Center said that within 14 hours of the November 13 eruption, the cloud spread over an area of 600,000 sq. km (230,000 sq. miles). NASA researchers designed TOMS to monitor changes in earth's protective ozone layer, and it scanned the stratosphere at a succession on ultraviolet wavelengths whose relative intensities provided an index of ozone abundance. But the TOMS readings could also identify sulfur dioxide. The sulfur cloud, 14 hours after the main eruption, spread chiefly to the east, covering most of Colombia and part of Venezuela. One arm of the cloud reached as far south as the equator in Colombia and as far north as Lake Maracaibo in Venezuela. Because TOMS was not used for day-to-day weather forecasting, it was not ordinarily subjected to a rapid-analysis process. As soon as the Colombian eruption occurred, however, Dr. Krueger and his colleagues began to study its readings. The sulfur dioxide, he said, "shows up very well." Although estimates of the cloud's volume were preliminary, Krueger said it appeared much smaller than that formed by the eruption in 1982 of El Chichon in southern Mexico. Visible and infrared data from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration satellites had traced El Chichon's dust, which formed a narrow plume, through one complete circuit of the globe from April 5 to April 15, 1982. Although Nevado del Ruiz's sulfur cloud was extensive, it did not appear sufficient, with its associated ash cloud, to have an effect on climate. Whereas El Chichon's sulfur cloud was traced around the world, researchers expected del Ruiz to dissipate within days without any severe environmental effects. (NYT, Nov 19/85, A14)

July 26, 1973
The National Science Foundation released Graduate Student Support and Manpower Resources in Graduate Science Education (nsf 73—304). Graduate science enrollment in doctorate departments applying for nsf traineeships declined 3% from 1970 to 1971 in all scientific areas except psychology and the social sciences. The number of students enrolling for the first time dropped 4% in 1970 and 8% in 1971. Graduate enrollment of foreign students declined 2% in 1971, after having increased 10% from 1967 to 1968 and another 11% by 1969. The enrollment dropoff of nearly 2% in full-time graduate science students was attributed to an acute financial squeeze, during which several leading universities began restricting enrollment, and to student disenchantment with science and technology because of rising unemployment among scientists and engineers. (Text) July 31—August 1:	A five-member Universities Scientific Research Assn, committee to advise on the production of glass in space held a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center. The committee discussed an msfc study dealing with the basic phenomena of glass production and toured msfc facilities. (Marshall Star, 8/1/73, 2) During July:	Ames Research Center and Hersh Acoustical Engineering Co. began wind-tunnel experiments to test the effect of serrated rotor edges on the noise level of a simulated jet engine compressor. The concept had been inspired by observations of the owl. A British naval officer had theorized that the owl’s unique serrated wing might help explain the bird’s quietness in flight. ARC engineer Paul Soderman had discovered through five years’ study and testing that comb-like edges did reduce noise at low tip speeds, but the tests had been limited because they were made only statically to simulate a helicopter’s hover. (NASA Release 73-144)

January 11, 1978
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun work on a foot-thick primary-mirror blank for the Space Telescope, for which the center would have overall management responsibility. The telescope had been scheduled for launch in 1983. Corning would deliver two 8ft,discs to Perkin-Elmer Corp. for grinding and polishing and telescope assembly; Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the primary spacecraft and support system, and integrate the complete telescope. Glass had been used for the mirror blank as it would change shape only slightly with temperature changes during viewing; the titanium-silicate mirror blank would have zero expansion on a scale used by physicists. Aperture of the mirror blank was about 94in; diameter of the center hole was about 2ft. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)

January 17, 1963
nasa Space Vehicle Review Board met at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, board being composed of 28 members representing Marshall, Manned Spacecraft Center, and Launch Operations Center. (Marshall Star. 1/23/63,3)

April 22, 1974
Reduction-in-force notices were delivered to 397 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. Another 250 employees received notices that they would be reduced in grade. Earlier, msfc officials had projectd a personnel reduction of about 500 employees, but retirements and attrition since then had reduced the number required, (msfc Release 74-68)

October 1, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had opened for competition a research and development program to develop and demonstrate cryogenic components for the Space Tug vehicle. Work would include design of a reusable cryogenic storage system, and fabrication and evaluation of a testing system. Proposals were to be submitted by 31 October. (SBD, 1 Oct 75, 159)

November 5, 1972
Unidentified Administration officials told New York Times there was evidence that People’s Republic of China had deployed strategic missiles capable of reaching Moscow. Missiles were said to have 5600-km (3500-mi) range, carry 3-megaton warheads* and be installed in well protected launching sites. Times said officials had declined to reveal source of evidence but paper surmised source to be reconnaissance satellite. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/72, 67) November 7-8:	Goddard Space Flight Center sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Technology” at Greenbelt, Md. Fifty-two papers covered spacecraft and vehicle technology, sensor technology, ground operations, and communications and navigation. Robert J. Goss of gsfc reported design changes had increased Thor-Delta launch vehicle performance while maintaining reliability and low cost. Payload that could be placed in synchronous transfer orbit would have increased from 45 kg (100 lbs) in 1960 to 680 kg (1500 lbs) when H-l booster was operational in 1974. Joseph Arlauskas of gsfc described multispectral scanner in orbit on Erts 1, launched July 23, that permitted simultaneous imaging in three visible bands and one nearinfrared, to provide data for management of environmental resources. gsfc also sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Science” on high-energy and solar astronomy; optical and ultraviolet astronomy; planetary, lunar, and cometary studies; earth observations; and earth physics. Dr. John A. Philpotts of gsfc reported that three years study of lunar samples from Apollo and U.S.S.R. Luna missions showed essentially three kinds of rocks: iron-rich basalts in mare basins, KREEP basalts in Mare Imbrium and Oceanus Procellarum, and anorthosites in highlands. He thought there was enough material in hand “to work out the origin of these . . . rocks, and from that, the evolution of the moon and its relation to other solar system materials.” (Proceedings, NASA SP-326, SP-331) November 8:	Operational control of Noaa 2 Improved Tiros operational weather satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 15, was officially transferred to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Environmental Satellite Service, (nasa Release 72-221)

June 3, 1993
Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.

July 25, 1975
NASA announced the development of an improved inorganic paint, a potassium silicate zinc-rich coating with a silicon additive that could provide long-term protection from salt spray, fog, heat, and rapid temperature changes. Produced at Goddard Space Flight Center as an anticorrosion coating for use in the space program, the paint had shown no deterioration after 5300 hr of continuous exposure to a 3% brine spray. The paint had also been applied to a 2-m panel mounted under the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco for further testing. (NASA Release 75-213; Newsweek (int’l ed), 18 Aug 75)

April 5, 1965
One of TIROS ix’s two cameras had stopped returning useful photographs, NASA announced, possibly because of malfunction of a diode. Second camera was taking about 250 pictures daily of the earth’s cover. Project engineers at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center had begun a “turnabout” maneuver to prevent the meteorological satellite from overheating and to ensure continued solar power. Maneuver would not affect satellite’s picture-taking ability. Launched into polar orbit Jan. 22, 1965, tiros ix had apogee of 1,605 mi. and perigee of 435 mi. The “cartwheel satellite,” so called because it was moving through space like a rolling wheel with the cameras mounted opposite each other on the perimeter, had taken more than 32,000 pictures, 92% of them useful to weather forecasters. (nasa Release 65-120)

July 13, 1972
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, died at age 59 after long illness. Wasielewski had been principal official for institutional management of gsfc and for operation of worldwide tracking and data-acquisition network. He had joined gsfc in 1960 after career in private industry. (W Post, 7/19/72, C4)

April 23, 1968
Eleventh Saturn IB booster was successfully static fired at Marshall Space Flight Center at 1.6-million-lb thrust for 145 sec by Chrysler Corp. personnel. It would be returned to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static checkout, (msfc Release 68—85)

July 16, 1989
NASA announced the selection of three contractors to research possible propulsion systems for the proposed Advance Launch System (ALS). NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Aerojet General Corporation, Sacramento, California; Pratt and Whitney Division of United0*Technologies Corporation, West Palm Beach, Florida; and Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California, to research ALS designs. The systems definition contract totaled $20 million. The ALS would be a nextgeneration launch system capable of transporting 150,000pound payloads into low Earth orbit. (Def News, Jul 17/89)

July 3, 1991
Per Gloersen, a senior scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was quoted by the media as reporting in the British publication Nature findings concerning the shrinking of the polar ice cover. Global warming might be the cause, but Gloersen said 30 years of records would be needed for a definite conclusion. (UPI, Jul 3/91; B Sun, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; W Post, Jul 8/91)

March 8, 1974
Preliminary reports for Skylab principal investigators indicated that large-scale zero-g production facilities in space could manufacture alloys, composites, and crystals of a homogeneity and perfection far greater than that obtainable on the earth, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. A sample from a Skylab brazing experiment demonstrated an almost perfect brazed joint, suggesting that it would be possible to assemble large facilities in space using welding and braizing techniques. Two ends of 2.5-cm tubes of nickel or steel joined with a sleeve by brazing with a silver-copper alloy showed a metallic structure that could not form under gravity conditions. Crystals of germanium selenide, typically 2 to 3 mm on the earth, were grown in zero g to a length of 25 mm with straight edges and no surface structure defects. A mixture of metals that would not form alloys under gravity conditions showed at least some alloying under zero g. A strengthening fiber of silicon carbide whiskers introduced into composite materials was uniformly distributed, suggesting a potential for space production of materials of greater strength and lighter weight, (msfc Release 74-33)

November 29, 1975
Radio astronomers in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had intensified their search for possible civilizations out in space, Walter Sullivan wrote in theNew York Times. Little publicity had been given the search to prevent raising public expectation for “what is likely to be a prolonged effort.” Costs were minimal, because the observations had made use of equipment also used for other research. Dr. Hans Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, had told students at the Polytechnic Inst, of N.Y. that the search for other civilizations would become “one of the major scientific enterprises,” and cited his belief that “communicative civilizations” had been a natural consequence of biological evolution. Dr. Mark pointed out that the U.S. giant antenna at Goldstone, Calif., used for spacecraft communications, could pick up emissions only from the vicinity of the nearest stars. One American search is using the largest antenna on earth—the dish at Arecibo, P.R.—to scan the five nearest galaxies at 1420 mhz, the frequency of radio waves given off by hydrogen atoms, long considered a logical frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The Arecibo search had been conducted by two Cornell professors, Dr. Frank B. Drake and Dr. Carl Sagan. Another American search had been using the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., to scan 700 stars (resembling earth’s sun) within 80 light years of the solar system for signals at the 1420-mhz wavelength. No obvious signals had been detected, but the recordings had not been subjected to detailed analysis, according to Dr. Patrick Palmer of the Univ. of Chicago and Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of the Univ. of Md. The Soviet program, scanning the entire portion of the celestial sphere visible from the Soviet Union, had been using two networks with a total of eight stations spread across the vast width of the Soviet Union. The November issue of Icarus, international journal of solar-system studies, had carried a prospectus of the Soviet CETI (communication with extraterrestrial intelligence) program divided into two phases. CETI 1* scheduled from 1975 to 1985, included the whole-sky Scan by eight stations plus monitoring by two space stations and a survey of nearby galaxies like the one under way at Arecibo. Only the eight-station project had been initiated, as far as U.S. scientists knew. CETI 2, from 1980 to 1990, had been scheduled to continue satellite monitoring but would also use setnirotatable antennas such as the RAT AN—600 antenna 600 m wide, known to be located high in the Caucasus; the system consisted of numerous plates that had to be aimed individually* calling for hand alignment since no computer had been designed to perform this role. The Soviets also envisioned a monitoring station at the point beyond the moon where the gravitational fields of earth and moon would balance each other; a station at that point would be protected from the earth’s own radio emissions. Identical fluctuations of signal recorded simultaneously at widely separated points would be considered to have extraterrestrial origin rather than to result from a local manmade effect. (NYT, 29 Nov 75, C13) During November: An x-ray telescope assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center for the study of remnants of an exploded star had been shipped from England; where it had undergone payload integration, to the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia for launch. The project, called Skylark for the British sounding rocket on which the telescope would fly, was a joint British-Anierican undertaking to study a supernova remnant known as Puppis A for information on the evolution of stars and perhaps oil the formation of neutron stars. The flight would provide at least 3 min 20 sec for the 346.5-kg payload to make its observations above 120-km altitude. (NASA Release 75—287; MSFC Release 75—238)

August 2, 1978
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that its test engineers had successfully completed the first series of live firing tests of the Space Shuttle’s main propulsion system, with all major test objectives achieved. Rockwell Intl.’s Space Systems Group had conducted the test program for MSFC. The test version of the propulsion system had consisted of three Shuttle main engines mounted on an orbiter aft fuselage with a flight-type external propellant tank and associated systems. The first series of tests (Apr. 21, May 19, June 15, and July 7, 1978) had recorded systems operation at thrust levels from 70 to 90% of rated power for up to 100 sec; in the final test, engines were throttled down from 90% thrust to 70% and back up to 90%. The Shuttle would be the first spacecraft with throttleable engines. After removal from the test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories, the engines had undergone modifications for more firings later in 1978. The next test series would run the engine at rated power levels (357 0001b, or 1.67 million newtons at sea level) for more than the 500sec required to lift the Shuttle into orbit. Results of the tests would verify main propulsion system operation before the first manned orbital flight, scheduled for 1979. (Marshall Star, Aug 2/78, 1)

June 11, 1965
Laser beams could be used to track satellites, a group of scientists reported at a news briefing at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. The briefing followed a two-day meeting discussing efforts to track explorer xxii and explorer xxvii satellites which were orbiting the earth at a height of about 700 mi. Dr. Henry Plotkin, Head of Gsfc’s Optical Systems Branch, said the experiments had indicated that: 1) a beam of laser light from the ground could be directed with sufficient accuracy to strike satellite reflectors; 2) turbulence in the atmosphere would not break the beam enough to interfere with its lighting up the satellite; 3) very short bursts of light from lasers could be used to measure the range of a satellite precisely by means of timing the flight and rebound of the pulse; 4) reflected light could be photographed against a stellar background to provide angles by which the satellite could be identified very accurately. (Transcript)

April 2, 1976
Two engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a solarenergy collector using air rather than water for heat transfer; this might be the key to low-cost solar-energy systems. The collector consisted of 3 parts: a rigid foam structure, a metal collector plate, and a transparent cover. The device needed no tools or fasteners, but could be fitted together, and required no insulation; it measured 1 by 2 m and weighed about 17 kg. The inventors said their collector had shown itself in tests to be as efficient as other more costly and complicated collectors, and the chief patent counsel at MSFC was considering it for patenting. An average house of about 140 m“ would require about 67 m" of collector area, or a 40-collector system, to provide sufficient heating. A solar-energy system could save a household about 75% of its normal winter heating expense, and could be modified to heat water year round. (NASA Release 76-56)

August 31, 1993
Orbital Sciences Corporation said its Orbital Imaging Corporation unit had been awarded a two-year, $7 million contract to provide atmospheric research data to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center.  (W Times, August 31/93)

January 12, 1964
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with sodium-vapor payload was launched to 106-mi. altitude from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India, in joint effort of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India. Rocket performed as predicted, sodium ejected as predicted, and temperature and turbulence measurements were made with ground-based cameras and instrumentation. (NASA Rpt. srl)

December 21, 1973
Establishment of a Spacelab Program Office at Marshall Space Flight Center to manage nasa’s activities in the international project was announced by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, MSFC Director. Thomas J. Lee had been appointed Spacelab Program Manager, (msfc Release 73-202)

June 25, 1965
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co1, for nine additional s-ivb flight stages to be used as the third stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle being developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would also include related spares and launch support services. Value of the S-IVB contract presently totaled some $312 million. The new work was expected to exceed $150 million. (nasa Release 65-209; msfc Release 65-162; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 1)

July 19, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that about 80 scientists from universities, medical facilities, and industry, serving as the Universities Space Research Association, would meet at Huntsville 26-30 July to evaluate experiments proposed for the first Spacelab mission. NASA’s Space Science Steering Committtee would use the evaluations in selecting experiments to be carried on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the 3rd quarter of 1980. The 10 categories in which experiments were proposed were: astrophysics, upper atmosphere, space plasma, biomedicine, atmospheric observations, biology, technology/behavior, communications/navigation, drop dynamics/atmospheric cloud physics, and technology experiments. MSFC was assigned management responsibility for defining, integrating, and operating the payloads for the first 3 Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 76-130)

July 5, 1978
NASA announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Corp. a $32 million contract to develop a teleoperator retrieval system (TRS), a reusable TV-equipped propulsive device for use by Space Shuttle crews to deliver, stabilize, and recover satellites in orbit. Managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the contract called for delivery of flight hardware by September 1979. The TRS, a low-thrust box-like spacecraft operated from the Space Shuttle by remote control, could be carried in the orbiter cargo bay or left in space after completion of a mission for retrieval by the next Space Shuttle. First mission for the TRS would be a docking with Skylab to boost it into higher orbit or to aid a controlled reentry; a camera on the forward end of the TRS would permit an astronaut to maneuver it for rendezvous and docking, or for other purposes. The TRS would return to the Space Shuttle using its own guidance and control system. (NASA Release 78-96; Marshall Star, July 5/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, July 14/78, 2; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1)

January 25, 1985
The Mutual Broadcasting System announced plans to use its excess satellite space to deliver messages at rates low enough to compete with the postal service, the Washington Post reported. The company estimated that telecommunications business from the new Mutual Satellite Services division would generate 50% of its revenue by 1990. Mutual's principal business was the Mutual Radio Network, which owned receiving dishes at more than 700 locations nationwide. Mutual planned starting in mid-1985 to send audio and data transmissions over a little-used portion of the FM radio spectrum to specially tuned radios in clients' offices. Cassette tape recorders attached to the radios would receive voice communications and send them to high-speed printers. Called MultiComm, the system would allow any organization to create its own private network for sending encrypted audio, data, printed material, or computer software to a number of locations simultaneously. Senders could relay a 300- to 450-word message to 500 receivers for 25 to 30 cents per recipient, compared to a first-class letter at 22 cents. Other electronic mail systems use a wire hookup between the company providing the satellite link and the preceding page blank not filmed PACT. % Ih ...INTENTION ALLY BLAKE message recipient; Mutual would provide the first system in which the signal was transmitted by radio. (W Post, Jan 25/85, D2) During January. A six-man Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) team at the South Pole on December 14, 1984, had taken turns talking to colleagues in Greenbelt, Maryland, using one of two unprecedented satellite communications links the group had installed over the previous month, the Goddard News reported. "The conversation was amazingly audible," said Tony Com-beriate, a GSFC communications expert and member of the South Pole satellite data-link project team. "The folks at Goddard sounded like they were just a few feet away." Although voice communications capabilities from the South Pole using Ham radio had existed for some time, the systems were weather dependent and usually very noisy. The GSFC group used the 17-year-old Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-3) to establish the two-way voice link. The key breakthrough was installation of the scientific data link, which enabled daily transmittal of information from the Pole, across Antarctica, and to the U.S. Before system installation, scientific data from the pole was stored during the region's winter months and shipped out by aircraft from November through February. The new system permitted transmission of high-quality scientific data by using three existing polar orbiting satellites (a 4th was scheduled soon). Each satellite passed the pole about 14 times daily and relayed data to McMurdo Sound, which retransmitted it to a geosynchronous satellite, which in turn transmitted it to the U.S. Since the Pole signals were too far below the horizon to be acquired by normal communications satellites, the relay route was necessary. Researchers had previously considered a communications link from the South Pole, but decided it was too costly and impractical, perhaps taking several years and costing an estimated $35 million. The GSFC approach had cost about $250,000 and taken nine months, because it used existing satellites, excess equipment, and had support from several organizations. Scientists could receive daily transmission of reliable data on global weather patterns, the magnetospheric cusp, upper atmosphere, and glacio-logical and seismic studies to name a few. The link also could evolve into a data collection network for many of the unmanned observatories (ground-based satellites) scattered throughout Antarctica. (Goddard News, Jan 85, 6)

March 27, 1964
ARIEL ii (UK—C) scientific earth satellite, the second in series of three U.S.—U.K. satellites, was orbited by NASA Scout booster launched from Wallops Island, Va. Initial orbital data: 843-mi. apogee, 180-mi. perigee, 101-min. period, and 52° inclination to the equator. Under overall administrative responsibility of the British Office of the Minister for Science, the three onboard experiments were designed and built by the U.K. to measure vertical distribution of ozone in the upper atmosphere, measure galactic Tadio noise, and detect micrometeoroids encountered by the satellite. The experiments were chosen by the British National Committee on Space Research, chaired by Sir Harrie Massey, in consultation with NASA. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and tested the spacecraft and contracted with Westinghouse Electric Corp. for subsystems. (Wallops Release 64-30; NASA Release 64-56)

January 31, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two contracts to Martin Marietta Corp. for further studies on the Earth Orbiting Teleoperator System (EOTS). Under a $246 570 contract Martin would design EOTS, an unmanned remotely controlled spacecraft, to operate in earth orbit near the Space Shuttle Orbiter. The spacecraft would carry a TV camera for close-up inspection, have docking capability, and be propelled by cold-gas expulsion. Under a $64 000 contract Martin would develop a complete set of requirements for the control and display station, a unit in the Orbiter that would contain control equipment common to all experiments requiring a teleoperator system. (MSFC Release 75—29)

July 26, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of six contracts, totaling $1.8 million, for development studies of the interim upper stage (ius) and space tug. The ius—a predecessor to the space tug, to be used with the space shuttle by both the Dept, of Defense and NASA until the more sophisticated and capable tug was ready for use in 1983—was being developed as the orhit-to-orhit stage (oos) by the Air Force. General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. was awarded a $290 000 contract to study space shuttle and tug compatibility and develop detailed interface requirements. A second contract to General Dynamics, totaling $268 000, was awarded for a definition study of space tug avionics systems with emphasis on areas where transition from the ius to the tug would require significant hardware or operational changes. United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. received a $375 371 contract to evaluate and verify the RL-10 high-area-ratio nozzle engine performance for space tug application. Under a $246 000 contract, Martin Marietta Corp. would develop concepts, techniques, and tools for tug fleet and ground operations, mission assignments, payload and orbiter integration, tug scheduling, and physical status, msfc awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $293 277 contract to study ius-tug payload requirements compatibility and International Business Machines Corp. a $337 250 contract to study ius-tug orbital operations, (msfc Release 74-135) <f

August 7, 1972
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight held hearing on policies and procedures governing disposal of real property under NASA Administrator’s control. Purpose was to determine whether legislation should be enacted to require formal reports to Congress on real estate disposed. General Services Administration surveys had determined that certain lands at Wallops Station, Langley Research Center, and Lewis Research Center were excess to NASA needs. Congress had not previously been apprised of plans for property’s disposal by gsa. Subcommittee heard testimony of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz. GSA was surveying LeRc’s Plum Brook Station, Wallops Station, LaRC, and Marshall Space Flight Center. Final decisions had not been made. (Transcript)

March 4, 1965
Firefly, a new life detection instrument containing an extract of common firefly’s lamp, had been developed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to help determine how far out and how much life existed in earth’s atmosphere. This information would be essential to prevent contamination of sterilized probes enroute through earth’s atmosphere. Firefly, containing luciferin, luciferase, and oxygen, would glow whenever it encountered adenosine triphosphate, a chemical essential to all life known on earth. Report of any encounter with live microorganisms would be immediate, precluding need for recovering detector, (gsfc Release G-5-65)

March 30, 1964
NASA awarded $158, 466,800 contract to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for production of 76 F-l rocket engines for the Saturn V launch vehicle. The action defined and detailed the procurement action initiated with letter contract in June 1962. Delivery of static-test engines to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had already begun, and the first flight F-l would arrive at msfc in November, (nasa Release 6448; Marshall Star, 4/1/64,1)

November 1, 1978
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch had announced establishment of a $250 000 Center Director’s Discretionary Fund to support innovative ideas in research and technology at NASA centers, the Marshall Star reported. Funds would be used exclusively for pursuit of research and technology tasks, not for facility, personnel, travel, or R&D project problems. Priority would be given to support of in-house activities as opposed to studies or research by contractors. Dr. William Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he considered establishment of the fund a significant and favorable step, and he intended to be personally involved in all facets of the use of the fund and to retain direct control of all fund allocations. A small advisory panel of center personnel would assist the director in evaluating proposed fund uses and the progress of approved activities. (Marshall Star, Nov 1/78, 1)

December 18, 1961
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Chief of Theoretical Division and Director of the Institute for Space Studies, Goddard Space Flight Center, making the 25th annual Wright Brothers’ Lecture before the Institute of Aerospace Sciences, reviewed progress in the space sciences, said the most exciting and fruitful area thus far had been investigation of “solar control over the atmosphere of the Earth, causes of weather activity in the lower atmosphere, and the structure of the upper atmosphere.”

October 24, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued requests for proposals for development of solar-energy cooling and heating systems for both residential and commercial applications. The RFPs had been issued in five areas of procurement: firms already producing and marketing solar heating and cooling subsystems; firms developing marketable subsystems and needing government assistance; firms with complete systems under development; firms designing innovative complete systems; and firms to compete for test and evaluation of the subsystems procured under the first two RFPs. The Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, which requires demonstration of the practical use of solar heating in the U.S. within 3 yr and of combined solar heating and cooling within 5 yr, made the Energy Research and Development Administration responsible for managing and coordinating the national program. ERDA assigned MSFC the responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling systems in an all-out effort to create a viable industrial and commercial capability of producing and distributing such systems. (NASA Release 75— 284)

April 15, 1991
NASA and the Defense Department were expected to present the National Space Council with a proposal to build a new, heavy unmanned booster for the late 1990s. It would be based on a Space Shuttle external tank equipped with oxygen/hydrogen engines, using strap-on solid rocket motors. Jack Lee, director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, told the US Space Foundation Symposium in Colorado Springs that the belief was that the new device could achieve a payload cost to orbit as low as $500-$1,000 per pound. (AvWk, Apr 15/91)

March 31, 1966
Fifth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler Corp. for 2k£ min.—longest duration firing—at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Stage would be shipped to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static-test checks and would be used in checking out the Apollo spacecraft, perfecting rendezvous and docking techniques, and training astronauts in preparation for manned lunar landing, (msfc Release 66-69)

December 10, 1972
Nimbus 5 (Nimbus-E) meteorological satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 11:56 pm EST by two-stage, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered near polar orbit with 1101.3-km (684.3-mi) apogee, 1089.5-km (677.0-mi) perigee, 107.2-min period, and 99.95° inclination. Solar array lock-on and three-axis stabilization were achieved as planned. Activation was proceeding. Nimbus 5 carried new and improved instruments to extend observation into cloudy areas and higher altitudes, making first vertical temperature and water vapor measurements through clouds of earth’s atmosphere. Assigned primary objectives were to improve and extend capability for vertical sounding of temperature and moisture in atmosphere with particular regard to altitude coverage and cloud interference, providing nearly total global coverage for first time, and to demonstrate improved thermal mapping for 10 wks. As secondary objectives spacecraft would determine feasibility of using passive microwave remote sensing techniques to obtain earth observational data and would demonstrate capabilities of improved selective chopper radiometer (scr), provided by United Kingdom, to obtain atmospheric soundings. Butterfly-shaped 769-kg (1695-lb) satellite carried six meteorological and earth resources experiments: scr; infrared temperature profile radiometer (itpr) ; Nimbus E microwave spectrometer (nems) ; electrically scanning microwave radiometer (esmr) ; surface-compositionmapping radiometer (scmr) ; and temperature-humidity infrared radiometer (thir). Nimbus 5 was sixth of seven spacecraft designed to provide atmospheric data for improved weather forecasting. With added sophistication program had grown to include wide range of earth sciences. Sensors aboard Nimbus 5 would map Gulf Stream off east coast of U.S. and Humboldt Current off west coast of South America. By knowing locations of streams, shipping interests could make substantial saving. Nimbus 5 would also provide information about El Nino— change in Humboldt Current. El Nino had been causing great economic damage by warming coastal waters, killing nutrients and fish. Nimbus 2 (launched May 15, 1966, with design life of 6 mos) had returned data for 32 mos, for detailed study of effect of water, carbon dioxide, and ozone on earth’s heat balance. Vertical temperature measurements of Nimbus 3 (launched April 14, 1969) had been termed by meteorologists as one of most significant events in meteorological history, providing worldwide atmospheric information. Six of nine experiments on Nimbus 4 (launched April 8, 1970) could still provide atmospheric data. Nimbus program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under NASA Office of Applications direction, (nasa proj off; gsfc proj off; NASA Release 72-234)

April 24, 1965
Second major Saturn V milestone this month: First five-engine ignition test of the Saturn V second stage, the S-II, was conducted at the Santa Susana, Calif., static test laboratory of North American Aviation, Inc., NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The five J—2 engines, built by naa’s Rocketdyne Div., would produce one million pounds thrust. Short-duration firings leading to full-duration tests of nearly 400 sec. would follow the ignition firing, (msfc Release 65-99)

July 21, 1993
Charles H. Vermillion, chief of the international data systems office at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was charged in a six-count indictment with violating federal conflict-of-interest laws and converting government property to his own use. Vermillion, who said he was innocent, was charged with taking NASA-developed plans for a programmable frame synchronizer, assembling the synchronizers at his own plant, and selling them privately. (W Post, Jul 23/93)

August 14, 1964
NASA announced Syncom C communications satellite would be assisted into proper orbit later this month by its sister satellite Syncom II, which would provide a reliable relay point in space for communications be« tween ground stations and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA Syncom Project Officer H. N. Stafford said: “As far as we know, this is the first time one satellite has been used to help in the launch of another. Tiros satellites have been used to help predict weather before manned space flights. The Relay satellite carried pictures of the Cooper flight. But this appears to be the first case of direct use of a satellite in an operational role during a launch.” (NASA Release 64-204)

February 4, 1983
NASA announced crew selections for STS-11 and STS-12, both to be commanded by veterans of earlier shuttle missions. The crew for STS-11 in January 1984, led by Vance D. Brand, who commanded STS-5 in November 1982, would include pilot Robert L. Gibson and mission specialists Bruce McCandless II, Robert L. Stewart, and Dr. Ronald E. McNair. STS-11 would be the fifth flight of Challenger, and its seven-day mission would launch an Indonesian communications satellite. The crew for STS-12, led by Henry W. Hartsfield, who commanded STS-4 in June 1982, would include pilot Michael L. Coats and mission specialists Dr. Judith A. Resnik, Dr. Steven A. Hawley, and Richard M. Mullane. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) said that a sixth crewman might be added later under a new NASA policy permitting major customers to send a payload specialist along. To be launched in March 1984, STS-12 would be the first flight of a new orbiter, Discovery; its 5-day mission would include deployment of the third tracking and data-relay satellite. (NASA Release 83-15; MSFC Release 83-6)

October 23, 1997
Representatives of NASA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services signed an agreement to enlist NASA technologies in the fight against breast cancer and other women’s illnesses, creating a cooperative framework for the exchange of research information between the two agencies. According to Carolyn A. Krebs of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, the technology allowing HST to map distant galaxies also had the potential to scan human tissue for malignant masses.(NASA, “NASA/Heath and Human Services To Join Forces To Fight Women’s Illnesses,” news release N97-74, 20 October 1997.)

July 17, 1973
Samples from three materials-processing experiments performed during the Skylab 2 mission (manning the Orbital Workshop May 25 to June 22) had been turned over to the principal investigators at Marshall Space Flight Center, msfc announced. The small metallic spheres and welding specimens represented the first effort to obtain basic engineering and scientific data for materials processing in space. The samples would be analyzed and the results compared with similar data from earth-processed samples to learn how to fabricate and repair structures in space, develop unique or improved materials for use on the earth, and provide new knowledge of material properties and performance. (msfc Release 73-96)

June 8, 1987
According to a news release from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, NASA would manage a major international experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, part of the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, would employ over 100 scientists from more than 25 institutions to study the interaction between the land system and climate system. Over 25 ground measurement stations would be set up on the Konza Prairie in Kansas for the experiment. Six research planes and five Earthorbiting satellites would also be used. (NASA Release 8795)

May 17, 1976
SPAR II, a Black Brant VC sounding rocket carrying materials-processing experiments, was launched from the White Sands Missile Range in the second of a series of 15 planned during the next 5 yr in the SPAR (space-processing applications rocket) program managed by Marshall Space Flight Center. The 225.7-kg payload consisted of 10 experiments, 6 similar to those carried on SPAR I launched 11 Dec. 1975; the rocket reached an altitude of 188 km, providing about 5 min of nearweightlessness during the coast phase, and the payload was recovered by parachute and delivered to the investigators for analysis. MSFC employees Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary Helen Johnston were principal investigators for 2 experiments, both on dendrite remelting and macrosegregation. Other experimenters were Robert B. Pond (Johns Hopkins University), 2 experiments on solidification of lead antimony eutectic; Dr. James W. Patten (Battelle-Northwest Research Institute), 2 experiments on producing closed-cell metal foams; Dr. S.H. Gelles (Battelle Memorial Institute), agglomeration in immiscible liquids; Dr. H. Ahlborn (University of Hamburg), behavior of aluminum alloys under zero gravity; and Dr. Louis Raymond (Aerospace Corp.), 2 experiments in casting thoria dispersion-strengthened composites at zero gravity. (MSFC Release 76-83, 76-94)

August 12, 1965
Meteoroids probably would not be unduly hazardous to spacecraft flying for short periods in the near-earth environment, a NASA report indicated. Based on data from explorer’s xvi and xxm and pegasus i and II, report was presented by Charles T. D’Auitolo, NASA Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology; William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center; and Robert J. Naumann, Marshall Space Flight Center, at the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust conducted in Cambridge, Mass., by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. EXPLORER XVI, launched Dec. 16, 1962, had registered 62 meteoroid penerations during its lifetime. explorer xxiii, launched Nov. 6, 1964,. had reported 103 penetrations, pegasus i, launched Feb. 16, 1965, carried three thicknesses of panels but mechanical malfunctions had destroyed the usefulness of data on the .008- and ,016-in.-thick panels; 104 penetrations had been reported from the .0015-in.-thick panels, pegasus ii, launched May 25, 1965, was returning useful data from all three thicknesses of panels and had registered 61 penetrations. The higher frequency of penetrations recorded by pegasus ii was thought to have been caused by a meteoroid shower, pegasus III, launched July 30, had not had time to return significant data, (nasa Release 65-205)

April 19, 1989
NASA rolled out a fullscale mockup of the proposed ShuttleC, a new heavy lift launch vehicle based on Space Shuttle technology. The 115foot mockup, constructed in a Hangar at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was put on display in an effort to gain support for funding of the $1.5 billion ShuttleC development program in the fiscal year 1991 Federal budget. The ShuttleC would be an untended launch vehicle that would fly "piggyback" on the standard Shuttle SRM and external tank assembly and would have a greater payload capacity than the current Shuttles. ShuttleC could substitute for the crewtended0*Shuttles in the launching of components for Space Station Freedom. AP, Apr 18/89; LA Times, Apr 19;/89)

September 10, 1975
The appearance of a supernova on 5 July 1054 had been recorded in primitive art by ancient Indians on the walls of a N. Mex. cave, the New York Times reported. Goddard Space Flight Center astronomer Dr. John C. Brandt, leader of the team of astronomers who had discovered the cave art, said that the date of the pictograph—a crescent moon with a nearby object variously described as a circle, cross, or asterisk—coincided with records of the Chinese Sung dynasty. The Chinese had reported that, on the morning of 5 July 1054, a minor star in the constellation Taurus appeared to explode into extraordinary brilliance. Ancient Chinese astronomers had described the event— which modem astronomers identified/as the supernova that had created the Crab Nebula—as visible in daylight for 23 days before fading and at night for another 633 days. Although the modern astronomers could not prove that the cave art depicted the Crab Nebula supernova, “What we have is circumstantial evidence that, to us, looks pretty good,” Dr. Brandt said. No other supernova of known date had been visible from North America near a crescent moon. The supernova pictographs were not the only evidence of astronomical observations by American Indians; Navajo gourd rattles and sand paintings often depicted the Pleiades and Orion constellations, and Hopi designs included representations of the Milky Way, constellations, sun, moon, and stars. Heaps of stones strategically placed centuries ago in Wyo. hills could have been used by Indians to sight stars and to predict and confirm the summer solstice. (Rensberger, ATT, 10 Sept 75, 39)

January 15, 1963
explorer xiv energetic particles satellite transmitted 38 sec. of complete data, and officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center were hopeful the satellite might eventually resume normal operations, explorer xiv developed transmission difficulty Jan. 10, after 100 days of nearly continuous transmission. Project Manager Paul G. Marcotte of Goddard reported explorer xiv received less than 10 per cent degradation from space radiation since its launch Oct. 2; project officials did not believe radiation damage to be cause of satellite’s transmission malfunction. (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)

October 19, 1988
Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)

October 10, 1975
The first of a series of 5 conferences on design requirements for Space Shuttle and Spacelab payloads had been held at Marshall Space Flight Center. About 50 scientists and engineers from government, industry, and universities had met to define functioned requirements for payload equipment to further NASA’s Space Processing Applications (SPA) program, including analysis of selected design approaches and recommendations for getting the most use out of SPA payloads for the materials science and technology community. The meeting would hear presentations on the two SPA competitive engineering designs by General Electric and TRW Systems, Inc. The next 2 days would be used by working groups to discuss their specialties—biological preparations; chemical processes and fluid phenomena; glasses and ceramics; and solidification of metals, alloys, composites, and electronic materials. The 5 scheduled meetings should define payloads that are compatible with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and that would meet the research needs of the industrial and scientific communities. (MSFC Release 75—218)

June 6, 1974
A solar energy recorder to evaluate the solar energy available in any area of the world with an ambient temperature range of 233 K (—40° F) to 325 K (125° F) was being developed by International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div. under contract to Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. The recorder would measure and store sunfall data while simultaneously measuring direct and total (direct plus diffuse) solar radiation. MSFC engineers said the measurements were vital to efficient development of solar energy converters before any large-scale construction, (msfc Release 74-98)

October 28, 1975
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Secretary of the Interior Thomas S. Kleppe announced the selection of Dr. William Nordberg, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Dr. Carlos Brockmann, director of the Landsat project in Bolivia, to receive the 1975 William T. Pecora Award. Dr. Nordberg was selected for his meteorological contributions to the Landsat program and for his management of day-to-day research operations using data from Landsat 1 and 2, launched (as Erts 1) on 23 July 1972 and on 22 Jan. 1975. Dr. Brockmann was selected for his leadership of a multidisciplinary team of Bolivian scientists responsible for the evaluation and application of Landsat images. Within 1 year, the team had produced evaluation reports covering geology, volcanology, forestry, hydrology, and land use of Bolivia; the group also published an improved national atlas of Bolivia. Given annually by NASA and the Dept, of Interior in recognition of “outstanding contributions of individuals or groups toward the understanding of the Earth by means of remote sensing,” the award would be presented at the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. 4-day symposium on earth resources at Sioux Falls, S. Dak., 28—31 Oct. (NASA Releases 75-283,-285)

June 27, 1985
The U.S. Senate passed by voice vote H.R. 1714, the NASA Authorization Bill for FY 86, NASA's Legislative Activities Report noted. As passed, the bill embraced the concept of a budget freeze at the FY 85 level of $7,510 billion; however, it also provided for three specific augmentations that totalled $142 million, accounting for a FY 86 growth of 1.9%. Among the authorizations for research and development were $200,000,000 for the space station, $477,200,000 for space transportation capability development, and $608,400,000 for physics and astronomy. Spaceflight, control, and data communications authorizations included $941,500,000 for Space Shuttle production and operational capability; $1,700,100,000 for space transportation operations; and $745,300,000 for space and ground network, communications, and data systems. Among the authorizations for space transportation facilities were $14,000,000 for construction of an orbiter modification and refurbishment facility at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), $3,600,000 for construction of a thermal protection system facility at KSC, and $6,500,000 for modification of enhanced life support systems testing at Marshall Space Flight Center. (NASA Legislative Activities Report, June 27/85, 1)

May 17, 1993
NASA announced that it had joined with American Bio-Technologies Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, in an attempt to arrive at a better understanding of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The goal was to use advanced x-ray technology and expertise developed by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, to advance knowledge of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and AIDS, to develop new therapeutic approaches for HIV and AIDS, and to develop superior biological materials for vaccine development and HIV detection. (NASA Release 93-88)

October 18, 1965
A gas turbine-powered tugboat, the first ever built, was delivered to NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility for use in the canal system there. The 69-ft.-long Clermont would perform a variety of chores in connection with future space rocket static firings at the Hancock County, Miss., facility, an element of Marshall Space Flight Center. Main duties would be to berth and tow space vehicle and cryogenic tanker barges in the inland canal system, (msfc Release 65-264; Marshall Star, 10/20/65,1)

May 27, 1994
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight center, Huntsville, Alabama, had discovered unusual gamma-ray flashes in the upper atmosphere high above thunderstorms. The heretofore unseen flashes were detected by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, a Marshall instrument aboard NASA's orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (NASA Release 94-86; W Post, May 30/94)

December 5, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations from industry for development of a flat conductor-cable wiring system suitable for use in residences and commercial establishments. Surface mounting, a feature of the flat cable System originated by NASA to reduce the size and weight of wiring harness in space capsules, would eliminate the need for routing wires in walls, ceilings, and floors because it could be covered by paneling, tile, or even wallpaper. Use of the flat wiring would reduce costs of wiring new construction and permit savings in renovating, remodeling, and rewiring of existing buildings. The successful proposer would develop a surface-mounted baseboard system using a cable 63.5 mm wide; total thickness of the baseboard—channel, airspace, and cover— would be about 11 mm, thickness of the thinnest lumber baseboard strips in use. (MSFC Release 75—257)

January 16, 1963
Biweekly Satellite Situation Report, by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, initiated practice of reporting only those objects launched by nasa, with no coverage in future of launchings by dod agencies or U.S.S.R. (Sat. Sit. Rpt., 1/16/63)

September 25, 1963
nasa launched two-stage Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with 185-lb. payload of U.S.-Japanese instrumentation to measure electron density and temperature in the ionosphere. Payload was lofted to 139-mi. altitude and no recovery operation was involved. Purpose of experiment was to compare simultaneous measurements made by two different methods: instruments supplied by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and radio-frequency resonance probe developed by Japan’s Radio Research Laboratory. (Wallops Release 63-85; nasa Release 63-211)

December 31, 1986
NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)

August 15, 1962
nasa announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded three three-month study contracts for design of an Advanced Oso (orbiting solar observatory) satellite, to be launched into polar orbit during 1965. Advanced Oso wollid aid development of method of predicting solar flares. Contractors were Republic Aviation Corp., Space Technology Laboratories, and Ball Brothers Research Corp.

October 17, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center requested bids on constructing an x-ray telescope test facility for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program. Bid opening was scheduled for 27 Nov. and contract award by 9 Dec. The facility was to be used for x-ray verification testing and calibration of x-ray mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments. (msfc Release 74-211)

January 9, 1975
Sea Satellite (SEASAT)—a new program, approved in the FY 1975 NASA authorization, to monitor the oceans and provide continuous weather and sea condition reports—was announced by NASA. SEASAT-A, a proof-of-concept mission scheduled for 1978 launch, would carry sensors to measure wave heights, current directions, surface wind directions, and surface temperatures. Objectives of the initial mission were to disseminate these data to users concerned about weather predictions; to route shipping to avoid storms, adverse currents, and ice fields; and to provide coastal disaster warnings. SEASAT—A would also accumulate scientific data on the curvature of the oceans; ocean circulation; transport of mass, heat, and nutrients by surface currents; and the interaction between air and sea. SEASAT would be managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory with Langley Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Center, and JPL each having responsibility for one of the four sensors-off-the-shelf NASA or Air Force spacecraft to which a sensor module would be attached. Existing tracking facilities and support hardware would also be used. Cost of the SEASAT—A mission, as currently planned, was $58.2 million. (NASA Release 75—1)

September 20, 1972
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced appointment of Dr. George H. Ludwig as Director of System Integration. Dr. Ludwig, who had assumed position in early September, had been Associate Director for Data Operations at Goddard Space Flight Center since 1971. (noaa Release 72-120)

May 6, 1965
Saturn V booster (s-ic stage) was static-fired for the second time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F-l engines were ignited in a 15-sec. test during which they generated 7.5 million lbs. thrust. Tests of this stage would gradually increase in duration until full-length firing of 2% min. was reached in late spring or early summer, (msfc Release 65-117)

October 1, 1975
NASA and the U.S. Coast Guard were jointly designing and developing a lightweight portable firefighting module to combat shipboard and dock fires, NASA announced. The module, a completely self-contained pumping system including pumps, hose, and firefighting suits, would pump sea water at a rate of up to 7300 liters per min (2000 gallons per min) for periods up to 3 hr. Marshall Space Flight Center was designing a prototype scheduled for construction early in 1976 and for testing 18 mos later. The Coast Guard had asked NASA to participate in the project because of its long experience with high-capacity lightweight fuel pumps developed for rocket engines. The project was being managed for NASA by MSFC’s Technology Utilization Office. (NASA Release 75—267)

August 31, 1964
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and aiaa Board Member, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial: “For some years past, it has been asked whether electric propulsion meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program. It may be well to remember that the airplane, the atomic submarine, the radio, and the first satellite were not developed in fulfillment of ‘requirements.’ An artificial atmosphere is certainly a requirement for an astronaut in space, and must Be developed for that reason. But the astronaut does not go into space because it is his requirement, but because our country has decided to excel in the exploration of outer space with the most appropriate means. Electric propulsion promises to be a very appropriate method of vastly expanding our exploration capability in space beyond that of chemical and nuclear systems. For that reason, its development should be pursued with high priority and great vigor.” (A&A, 8/64, 14—15)

June 1, 1978
NASA announced it had appointed two U.S. scientists to an international group of five seeking to become payload specialists on the first Spacelab mission scheduled for late 1980. One American and one European would be selected to fly on the laboratory to operate the science instruments. The investigators, working group (IWG), composed of scientists representing all investigators, had selected Dr. Michael Lampton of Berkeley, Calif., space physicist at the Univ. of Calif., and Byron Lichtenberg of Natrick, Mass., vestibular researcher at the Mass. Inst, of Technology. The three payload specialists not chosen to fly would be backup specialists and would particpate in ground-based mission activities at Johnson Space Center. In a similar screening program, ESA had selected its payload specialists from among thousands of applicants from its member states. The Spacelab 1 mission would investigate stratosphere and upper atmosphere physics, materials processing, space plasma physics, life sciences, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and space technology. Marshall Space Flight Center had been responsible for payload-specialists training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission; ESA’s Spacelab Payload Integration and Coordination in Europe (SPICE) had managed training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-76; JSC Roundup, June 1/78, 4; DRFC X-Press, June 1/78, 3)

February 1, 1973
Establishment of task team to focus on space tug activities was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. The team, under Manager William Teir and Deputy Manager William G. Huber, would direct early planning and design of the tug—a vehicle to supplement the space shuttle’s capabilities. The tug was to be shuttle payload and would become the shuttle 3rd stage after being deployed in earth orbit by the shuttle. Its rocket engine would propel payloads to different earth orbits or send payloads on planetary missions, (msfc Release 73-19)

March 19, 1965
NASA plan for use of syncom ii in the communications link between the Gemini 3 spacecraft and Cape Kennedy was successfully tested in a GT-3 mission simulation. Telemetry signals and voice messages would come from the spacecraft to a surface ship, the USNS Coastal Sentry, in the Indian Ocean. The Coastal Sentry would transmit the signals to the Syncom surface station, USNS Kingsport, which would then be a few miles away. From there the signals would be transmitted to syncom ii, 22,300 mi. above the Indian Ocean, down to a ground station at Clark afb in the Philippines, and by cable to a Nascom (nasa Communications Network) station near Honolulu. From Honolulu the transmission w ould go by cable to the U.S. and then by landline to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and on down to Cape Kennedy. Simultaneously the signals would be transmitted from the Coastal Sentry via high frequency radio to a Nascom station near Perth, Australia. Cable would carry it to the Nascom station at Honolulu. There, the better reception of the two transmissions would be sent to the Cape. ( nasa Release 65-93)

October 14, 1964
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced two firms would negotiate to provide three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (stars) : Beckman Instruments, Inc., and Electro Mechanical Research, Inc. Negotiations with the two firms would lead to final selection of single contractor for 82.5-million award, (gsfc Release G—30-64)

September 14, 1987
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)

September 16, 1965
France’s first satellite, FR-1, arrived from Paris at Dulles International Airport and was taken to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for testing. The satellite, to be launched for France by NASA in a joint project to study very low frequency radio waves and the distribution of ionization in the earth’s magnetosphere, would be sent to Ling-Temco-Vought, Texas, where it would be modified to fit a Scout-type rocket. Launching was scheduled for late 1965. Memorandum of understanding for the FR-1 program was signed Feb. 18, 1963, between nasa and the French Space Agency, Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (nasa Release 65-59; Wash. Post, 9/16/65)

September 3, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center was requesting proposals—due 22 Sept.—from the aerospace industry for a study leading to design and development of an Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) as a payload aboard Spacelab, MSFC announced. ACPL experiments would give scientists a knowledge of weather processes important for long-range weather prediction and weather modification. After evaluating the proposals, MSFC would award two parallel 12-mo firm-fixed price contracts. (MSFC Release 75—192)

March 22, 1973
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center magnetospheric physics experiment to a 233.2-km (144.9-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (GSFC proj off)

January 9, 1986
NASA reported that scientists observed Halley's comet from a University of Arizona telescope aboard NASA's Kuiper Airborne Observatory, a modified C141 aircraft operated by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. It was the first direct confirmation of water in a comet, and the discovery lent new support to astronomers' widely held theory that comets are "dirty snowballs" composed primarily of frozen water. The theory was conceived by Dr. Michael Mumma, head of the Planetary Systems Branch, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, who, together with Dr. Harold Weaver, an associate research scientist at the Center for Astrophysical0*Sciences at Johns Hopkins University, developed a theoretical model leading to this discovery. (NASA Release 864; W Post Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86; NY Times, Jan 10/86)

March 16, 2001
NASA commemorated the 75th anniversary of the first successful launch of a liquid-fueled rocket. On 26 March 1926, Robert H. Goddard had launched a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long) rocket fueled by gasoline and liquid oxygen. The rocket flew just over 40 feet (12 meters) high using the same technology that would one day launch massive rockets carrying Space Shuttles and other research craft into space. NASA had named Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) after Robert H. Goddard. At the anniversary celebration, NASA’s Chief Historian Roger D. Launius called Goddard the forefather of American space exploration: “Dr. Goddard was a true visionary, having already visualized flight in outer space by the time he was 21.” Goddard had turned 21 in 1903, some 50 years before space exploration began in earnest. Even 75 years after Goddard’s successful test, NASA continued to use liquid-propulsion systems to launch most of its spacecraft and satellites.(NASA, “March 16 Marks 75th Anniversary of First Liquid-Fueled Rocket Launch,” news release 01-35, 12 March 2001.)

April 9, 1965
NASA was negotiating with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for Oao program, to convert prototype Oao into flight-ready spacecraft. The contract was expected to exceed $8 million. The converted prototype, to be designated Oao A-2, would be the third spacecraft scheduled for launch in Oao program. First planned launch in the series was scheduled for late this year or early next year at Cape Kennedy. (nasa Release 65-115)

July 18, 1965
A new computer technique had been designed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to make repeated rapid checks of effects of a man-made radiation belt of high-energy “Starfish” electrons formed from a U.S. hydrogen bomb test over the Pacific Ocean in 1962, and subsequent tests conducted for Project Fish Bowl, a high-altitude weapon test. Starfish electrons were estimated to have a possible life of up to 20 yrs., during which time electrons in the belt would slowly decay to the energy level of ordinary electrons. E. G. Stassinopoulos, designer of the program, warned that increased solar activity in years ahead would greatly affect the lifetimes of the Starfish electrons, making the computer relatively useless after 1966. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 7/18/ 65, 27)

October 2, 1965
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center shipped the instrument unit for the first Saturn ib launch vehicle to Kennedy Space Center, NASA aboard the barge Palaemon. First Saturn ib was scheduled for launch from ksc early next year, (msfc Release)

May 19, 1965
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was named chairman of the International Sponsors Committee for Clark Univ.’s $5.4 million Robert Hutchings Goddard memorial library scheduled for completion by 1968. Several nuclear-powered, self-supporting lunar bases and a wide variety of space stations would be in operation by the year 2000, Dr. von Braun told the luncheon meeting of the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He made his predictions during the question and answer period following his speech on Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s contributions to American rocketry. The greatest activity in space 35 yrs. hence would be in earth orbits, von Braun felt, and space would provide a “tremendous military field.” This field would not be the science fiction concept of orbiting hydrogen bombs, but rather a broad program of military reconnaissance. Photography and direct observation of foreign military developments were cited. Space stations would be in a variety of orbits and many would be manned by scientists and repairmen shuttling back and forth in reusable vehicles. Scientists would spend up to six weeks at a time in the stations to make their observations. The use of reusable boosters would cut the cost of delivering payloads to orbit down to some 10% of today’s costs, von Braun added, (nsc Newsletter, 5/65, 6/65)

January 20, 1973
A Federal court in New York began hearing $2-million libel suit brought by Dr. W. Ross Adey, Univ. of California at Los Angeles brain research specialist, against the New York-based animal welfare organization United Action for Animals. Dr. Adey accused the organization of publishing “false, scandalous, defamatory statements” in an article in its bulletin on a NASA- and Air Force-funded Biosatellite 3 experiment (launched June 28, 1969). The organization had criticized Dr. Adey’s treatment of Bonny—an instrumented monkey that had been orbited to measure functions of central nervous, cardiovascular, and metabolic systems under weightlessness. Bonny had died shortly after its return to the earth. (Burks, NYT, 1/20/73, 27; 1/25/73, 45) January 23:	At a Marshall Space Flight Center Space Science Seminar, Dr. Maurice M. Shapiro, Naval Research Center chief scientist for cosmic ray physics, said studies had shown cosmic rays were fast atomic nuclei trapped in the Milky Way’s magnetic fields. After acceleration, the rays diffused into the interstellar medium, where many underwent violent collisions and transformations. Surviving particles leaked out of the galaxy, (msfc Release 73-3; nrl pio)

November 19, 1972
NASA launched Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test flight performance. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)

February 17, 1965
NASA and dod announced a memorandum of agreement to establish a Delta launch capability at the Western Test Range (wtr). Costs would be shared, based on the estimated use of the vehicle by each agency. Existing USAF Thor-Able-Star launch sites would be adapted for Delta use wherever practicable. Launch pads and blockhouses would be used on a shared basis, with each agency responsible for its own missions. NASA would exercise launch vehicle control over all wtr Delta launches. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and USAF Space Systems Division would be responsible for carrying out the agreement. NASA would be responsible for developing an improved Delta launch vehicle to meet both agencies’ mission requirements for use at both wtr and etr. DOD was planning to phase out the Thor-Able-Star and use the improved Delta for payloads carried by this vehicle class. (nasa Release 65-51)

August 16, 1974
Static test firings of a 6.4%-scale model of the space shuttle to gather acoustical data for design and development activities began at Marshall Space Flight Center. A series of 24 acoustic test firings would continue through November, with 7 additional tests later to study possible sound-suppression methods. The test model’s two solid-propellant engines, representing the shuttle vehicle’s solid-fueled-rocket boosters, were being tested first, to be followed by full system firings, including the three model liquid-propellant engines representing the main engines, which would use liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. On each firing, 60 acoustic measurements were taken by specialized microphones to monitor areas potentially sensitive to high sound-pressure levels: vehicle skin panels, thermal protection devices, electronic guidance components, and ground support and related structures, (msfc Release 74-154; msfc pio, interview, 15 July 75)

April 10, 1975
The first ground-test hardware for the Space Shuttle, a hydraulic actuator for the main engine, had arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center for functional checkout, MSFC announced. Each of the Orbiter’s three main engines would use two of the actuators to gimbal the engine for steering control. After checkout the actuator—one of 8 to be tested—would be sent to the National Space Technology Laboratories where the main engines would be tested. (MSFC Release 75— 68)

February 15, 1976
An around-the-world auto race planned for mid-1976 as part of the U.S. Bicentennial celebration would feature a 1914 Model T Ford, tracked by a NASA satellite from the starting point in Paris to its termination in New York City, NASA announced. The car, driven by Goddard Space Flight Center employee Robert H. Pickard, would carry a 13.6-kg electronics package that would transmit the car’s ground speed to the random-access measuring system (RAMS) carried on NASA’S Nimbus 6 meteorological satellite that covers the entire globe once every 12 hr. Nimbus 6 would relay information to GSFC through a ground station in Alaska. The auto race would demonstrate use of the RAMS system for ground tracking applications where transmissions could encounter various kinds of interference; normally, RAMS would collect data from instruments on moving platforms such as balloons or buoys to allow calculation of wind or sea-surface movements. Pickard, a car enthusiast, had worked in the space program since the Vanguard days and was presently project manager for the comsat-metesat system called GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellite). (NASA Release 76-23)

February 9, 1972
Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket, launched hy NASA from Wallops Station, carried 5.9-kg (130-lb) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 852-km (529.4mi) altitude to study upper atmosphere. Onboard instruments measured ion composition and concentration and solar-wind neutral hydrogen atoms during 16%-min flight. Data would be correlated with ground observations. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (WS Release 72-1)

July 7, 1977
NASA announced that a team of astronomers at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics using data from NASA’s Uhuru satellite had discovered what seemed to be “superclusters” of galaxies more than 150 million light-years in diameter, bounded by areas of extremely hot gas acting as x-ray sources. The mass of gas required to produce x-rays would be 5 to 10 times greater than all material seen at other wavelengths, and would suffice to bind the galaxies into superclusters. Primarily hydrogen and helium, the gas was thought to be “primordial material” from an explosion that created the universe. In the debate over origins, “open universe” theorists supported the idea of a big bang 20 billion yr ago expanding outward forever; “closed universe” advocates said gravitational collapse would halt expansion and the material would fall back on itself, perhaps to repeat the cycle. Traditional optical and radio techniques had not found enough material in space to supply the gravity needed to “close” the universe; the new data indicated the missing mass might exist as vast amounts of hot gas between galaxies. Uhuru, first of a series of small astronomical satellites (SAS) for studying cosmic x-rays, had been launched Dec. 12,1970, as Explorer 42. The astronomers had noted the x-ray emissions while compiling the fourth Uhuru catalog from observations in the early 1970s. The project was managed for NASA by Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Release 77-138)

March 8, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $26 923 contract to Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital to equip room with NASA-developed devices to test applications in aiding quadriplegics. When room was completed, immobile patient would be able to open and close doors and windows, control room temperature, change channels and control volume on TV set, dial telephone, adjust bed position, signal nurse at remote station, and turn pages in a book. Devices provided by msfc included sight switch operated by looking into sensor on eyeglass frame, panel switch operated by touching panel with head, foot switch, breath switch operated by blowing against small paddle, and pneumatic switch operated, by rolling head against pillow to depress airbag behind ear. Contract expenses would be shared, with msfc contributing $15 450 and hospital and Univ. of Alabama at Huntsville contributing balance. (msfc Release 72-25)

August 5, 1996
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Graham’s design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes,” news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)

November 8, 1962
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would conduct experiments using laser in tracking S-66 ionosphere beacon satellite, to be launched in polar orbit early next year. Laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) would be tested as “potentially vastly more accurate than current tracking methods and requiring no electrical power from the satellite.” Laser device, emitting beam ){6 of a degree wide, would be mounted on tracking telescope at nasa Wallops Station. Laser signals to satellite would be received on passive reflector and bounced back to earth.

October 25, 1994
In a press release, Jim Waterman, Boeing Space Station manufacturing manager, said that Boeing had built 18,700 pounds of hardware to date for the International Space Station and was on schedule to complete almost 50,000 pounds of hardware within the next year. Using the manufacturing facility at Marshall Space Flight Center originally built for fabricating Saturn rocket stages, it had made a good start on three pressurized modules for the Station as well as hatches and experiment racks. (Aerospace Daily, Oct 26/94)

April 3, 1968
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm’s Space Guidance Center $1,303,758 contract for spare parts and logistics support of instrument units that guided Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68—63)

June 4, 2000
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)

September 6, 1961
After a series of six static firings, the Saturn SA-T2 booster was removed from the static test tower at Marshall Space Flight Center.

October 10, 1997
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) selected Scientific and Commercial Systems Corporation of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide support services for its Huntsville, Alabama, facilities. The US$66 million contract included transportation and equipment services, as well as publishing, mail, and food support. MSFC arranged the contract as a cost-plus-incentive-fee, performance-based contract, to provide NASA with cost savings, as well as with flexibility to reorganize services as necessary.(NASA, “Virginia Firm Chosen To Provide NASA Institutional Services,” news release C97−r, 10 October 1997.)

March 16, 1976
The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn, Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site—now marked by a granite monument—and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar landing. The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of 56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen. By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over 110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about the Auburn flight ... In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the 1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to supersonic. Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass, ceremonies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the scheduled helicopter could not fly. (ATT, 16 Mar 76, 16; W Post, 17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar 76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club, 19 Mar 76)

November 9, 1991
The Baltimore Sun quoted Anne Thompson, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center with reference to the interconnectedness of the atmosphere's mounting problems: global warming, ozone depletion, and smog. As examples she pointed out that some hydroxyl-enhancing gases contributed to acid rain; others contributed to the greenhouse effect, while at the same time, hydroxyl played a vital role in stemming depletion of the Earth's ozone layer. (B Sun, Nov 9/91)

November 1, 1988
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)

September 11, 1962
President Kennedy toured nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., and Launch Operations Center, Cape Canaveral, Fla. At msfc, he inspected a mock-up of the F-l engine and a Saturn C-l launch vehicle, and later witnessed 30-sec. static-firing of 1.3-million-lb.-thrust S-l stage for Saturn SA-4 launch vehicle. At loc, he inspected launch complexes for Mercury-Atlas vehicle, Titan rocket, and Saturn C-l. He then flew to Houston, Tex., to visit nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on September 12. Addressing workers at Cape Canaveral, the President said: “I don’t think we can exaggerate the great advantage which the Soviet Union secured in the ’50s by being first in space. They were able to give prestige to their system, they were able to give force to their argument that they were an advancing society and that we were on the decline. “But I believe that we are an advancing society, and I believe that we are on the rise, and I believe that their system is as old as time. . . .” He said that, as long as the American system was to be judged in at least one degree by its achievements in space, the United States “might as well be first, and therefore, this country, both political parties, have determined that the United States shall be first.”

February 21, 1998
The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshall’s X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFC’s X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), “MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded,” 21 February 1998.)

June 2, 1961
Collapse of a lock in the Wheeler Dam below Huntsville on the Tennessee River interdicted the planned water route of the first Saturn space booster from Marshall Space Flight Center to Cape Canaveral on the barge Palaemon.

April 27, 1981
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported that Heao 2, NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory (Heao), had expended its control-gas supply and ended its mission. One of a family of three “highly successful” scientific satellites managed by MSFC, Heao 2 (like its predecessor, Heao I) had performed twice as long as its predicted design life; a third observatory was still operating. Launched November 13, 1978, Heao 2 carried the world’s largest focusing X-ray telescope and an array of astronomical instruments; it had provided data on X-ray output of normal stars, content of supernova remnants, distribution of mass in galaxies, and the origin of the extragalactic X-ray background. MSFC said that participating astronomers would need years to analyze all the data received. Unable to maintain attitude after exhausting its control fuel April 25, the spacecraft was powered down April 26. Reentry and burnup would probably occur early in 1982. (MSFC Release 81-52; NASA Release

May 28, 1991
Gerald Fishman, a NASA astrophysicist at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced at a conference of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle that the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) carried on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory was detecting gamma-ray bursts with greater sensitivity than previously. (NASA Release 91-81; UPI, May 28/91)

October 10, 1973
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, scheduled for Nov. 11 launch to crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), completed training in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator at Marshall Space Flight Center. The astronauts had spent 80 hrs since April 1972 performing 24 different exercises in the simulated weightless environment to prepare them for the three extravehicular activities scheduled for their mission. The backup crew —Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind—would complete their training at MSFC Oct. 12. (msfc Release 73-145)

July 26, 1973
Compendium of Meteorological Satellites and Instrumentation (nssdc 73— 02) was published by the National Space Science Data Center, Goddard Space Flight Center. Prepared by the U.S. Air Force Environmental and Technical Applications Center’s Air Weather Service, the book included an overview of programs and brief descriptions, orbital information, and operating status of 98 satellites launched or planned since 1959 by the U.S., U.S.S.R., France, and U.K., with some 200 experiments. (Text)

October 26, 1994
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)

December 8, 1964
A Saturn S-IVB stage began a 6,000-mi. land, sea, and river trip from the Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., Calif., to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. At msfc, the stage would be mated with a first stage of the Saturn IB, built by msfc and modified by the Chrysler Corp., and an Apollo spacecraft. Tests of the assembly would check the complete Saturn-Apollo vehicle for its ability to withstand vibrations and other stresses expected in flight. (Marshall Star, 12/9/64, 1-2)

February 2, 1965
A brightly illuminated object in the sky near Langley afb, Va., was widely reported as a Ufo but identified by usaf as a weather balloon with the sun reflecting off its surface. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/3/65) February 3; oso li I Oso R2), nasa*s Orbiting Solar Observatory, was successfully launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy by a three-stage Delta rocket. Preliminary orbital elements: apogee, 393 mi.; perigee, 343 mi.; period, 97 min.; inclination, 33°. The 545-lh. spacecraft included parts salvaged from the Oso B. damaged last April prior to launch, and components of a spacecraft built for prototype testing. The second of eight spacecraft planned by NASA for direct observation of the sun, oso II carried eight scientific experiments and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry, command, batteries, control electronics and gas spin-control arms, and live experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and solar-pointing experiments. For the first rime, the instruments, controlled by ground command, would scan the entire solar surface. Each scan required four minutes. February 3; NASA’s Orbiting Solar Observatory, OSO 11, was launched from Cape Kennedy, Fla. oso li experiments were intended to map the frequency and energy of solar emissions and represented a joint Govern meat-university-industry effort. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center managed the project. (NASA Press Kit Release 65-11: NASA Release 65-32; Goddard News. 2/3/65. 1-2)

February 3, 1972
Senate confirmed nominations of Kenneth Rush as Deputy Secretary of Defense and of Eberhardt Rechtin as Assistant Secretary of Defense (Telecommunications). {CR, 2/3/73; dod Directory, Spring 1973) February 4:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of one-month $l-million interim contract extension to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine. Contract was awarded pending completion of General Accounting Office review of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested by competing contractor, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., on Aug. 3, 1971. (msfc Release 72-9; A&A 1971)

August 26, 1985
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced today that it would open in September the microgravity materials science laboratory (MMSL) to help experimenters make better decisions about what is and is not feasible for science experiments in space. Such experiments are expected to provide knowledge leading to new materials, more efficient use of earth's nonrenewable fuel resources, new medicines, advanced computers and lasers, and better communications. Providing a capability that existed nowhere else in the world, the new laboratory would offer U.S. scientists and engineers a low-cost, low-risk way to test new ideas for materials science research in space. Initial research plans would support metal and alloy solidification and electronic crystal growth studies. The laboratory should give U.S. companies a competitive advantage in developing better ground-based materials and/or processing of materials through microgravity research. The laboratory, along with LeRC's assignment to develop the power system for the proposed space station, would put LeRC into the mainstream of the U.S.'s space research efforts. (LeRC Release 85-63) Marshall Space Flight Center

May 29, 1973
Receipt of proposals for design, development, test, and evaluation of the space shuttle external tank from McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Boeing Co., Martin Marietta Aerospace Corp.’s Aerospace Div., and Chrysler Corp.’s Space Div. was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. The contract, calling for three ground-test tanks and six developmental flight tanks in the development phase, was expected to be awarded by Aug. 1. (msfc Release 73-60)

February 25, 1994
NASA announced that the U.S. component of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) program, the Wind and Polar spacecraft, would experience launch delays to give NASA a chance to examine the materials and process used to build two power subsystem electronic boxes on each spacecraft similar in design to those determined to be the cause of the NOAA-13 spacecraft failure in 1993. The decision followed a GGS technical review at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Instead of launches occurring in April and June 1994, they probably would occur in the next fiscal year. (NASA Release 94-30; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)

February 28, 1963
Senator Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) introduced jointly sponsored resolution in the Senate to authorize presentation of an Air Force medal of recognition to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (ret.). General Foulois learned to fly from Wilbur Wright in 1909 and was Chief of the Army Air Corps when he retired in December 1935. In 1907, he wrote a thesis on “Tactical and Strategic Value of Aerodynamic Flying Machines,” using Jules Verne, the Bible, and Army Field Service Regulations as sources, one of the pioneering concepts of the military application of aeronautics. General Foulois served on the naca (1929-30, 1932-35), and is currently President of the Air Force Historical Foundation. (CR, 2/28/63, 2975) During February: nasa Goddard Space Flight Center plans for second-generation Oso satellite—known as Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory, or Helios—were outlined at Philadelphia technical meeting by Goddard’s A090 Project Manager A. J. Cervenka. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63,48)

August 24, 2000
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)

November 23, 1998
NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billion–light-year–long “corridor,” the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a “core sample” of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a “small patch of space near the Big Dipper.”(NASA, “The Universe ‘Down Under’ Is the Target of Hubble’s Latest Deep-View,” news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)

August 21, 1962
Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg, in telegram message, told unions involved in strike at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center it was “imperative” that union members “return to work immediately and remain at work.”

November 6, 1985
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)

August 31, 1964
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. received nine-month study contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to study methods of uprating Saturn IB space vehicle and S-IVB Saturn stage. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 23)

December 21, 1994
NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)

February 24, 1988
NASA announced that it would lease to the U.S. Government unassigned space aboard a commercially developed space facility. The leasing agreement would apply for five years beginning at the end of fiscal year 1993. At least 30 percent of the facility would be available for commercial use. The facility would be deployed, checked out, and serviced periodically on orbit by Space Shuttle crews. It would provide a crewtended, shirtsleeve workspace and would also be able to operate in an untended, freeflying mode, providing a microgravity environment for periods of four to six months. NASA would initiate an open competition to be managed by the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 8825)

December 2, 1990
Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)

June 20, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the formation of a solar heating and cooling task team to support requests made by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). The task team, under the leadership of Donald R. Bowden, would direct MSFC’s role in ERDA’s program to demonstrate heating and cooling applications of solar energy. The team would acquire examples of existing solar heating and cooling systems and would direct additional development of these systems to increase efficiency and lower costs. ERDA had authorized approximately $50 million to MSFC for work which would cover 5 yr ana use 100 persons at MSFC. (MSFC Release 75-130).

July 11, 1994
In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)

January 8, 1991
Whereas NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York plans to announce that 1990 was the hottest year ever recorded, NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, says 1990 was only the fourth hottest year since 1979. The difference is accounted for by the fact that Goddard uses ground-based thermometers to record local heat while Marshall uses satellites, which broadly measure atmospheric temperature world-wide. In addition to the global temperature analysis, the World Resources Institute released two related studies. One was by Richard Heim of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Global Climate Laboratory. (WSJ, Jan 8/91; W Post, Jan 10/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; LA Times, Jan 10/91; CSM, Jan 16/91; NY Times Magazine, Feb 3/91)

May 14, 1963
First flight test of inflatable meteoroid probe (paraglider), using Aerobee 150 launch vehicle, was conducted from White Sands Missile Range. Objective of experiment was to develop technique for determining penetration rates in thin structural materials. Preliminary results indicated Aerobee 150 followed nominal flight trajectory, but paraglider did not accomplish flight because canister in which it was contained failed to eject. Experiment was joint project of nasa Langley Research Center (paraglider) and Goddard Space Flight Center (vehicle) under direction of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 63-102; nasa OAirr/Levine)

September 8, 1962
RL-10 rocket engine successfully static-fired in second test at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Cluster of the liquid-hydrogen engines would power second stage (S-IV) of the Saturn C-l.

December 10, 1975
A long-duration free-flying manned space station in earth orbit appeared to be the most economical way of providing a continuing manned presence in space, according to “Manned Orbital Systems Concepts,” a study conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. A station that could significantly extend the time in space planned for the Space Shuttle would offer advantages for doing a given amount of work with fewer flights and reducing the number of turnarounds, checkouts, and similar operations. A permanent facility could offer maintenance and repair and even reconfiguration of payloads. The study envisioned development of four-man facilities that would serve as building blocks for growth into larger stations for 12 or 24 workers as needed; the four-man configuration would consist of a subsystems and habitability module carried into orbit by one Shuttle and joined with a logistics and payload module carried on a second mission. Several payload modules could be docked in tandem with the core vehicle, or in radial locations through use of a multiple-port docking adapter. The core vehicle would be left on station for a nominal lifetime of 5 yr, logistic and payload modules being replaced at 90-day intervals. Crew exchange and resupply would occur every 90 days. The study concluded that problems anticipated by the world in the 1990s should be solved in the 1980s, and that an extended-duration manned orbital facility could contribute significantly to those solutions. (MSFC Release 75— 26)

January 17, 1975
A request for proposals for integrated electronic assemblies (IEA) for the Space Shuttle’s solid-rocket boosters had been issued by Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. The proposals would be for design, development, test and evaluation, fabrication, and assembly of 33 IEAs. The Space Shuttle would carry two refurbishable IEAs, one forward and one aft, to route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system to release the nosecap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket motor nozzle, detach parachutes, and turn on the recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—11)

July 24, 1975
A terrestrial solar-energy recording system now installed at Marshall Space Flight Center would provide accurate data on sunfall for use in developing solar-energy measuring systems, MSFC announced. Designed and built by International Business Machines Corp. as part of the center’s earth-based solar-power activities, the monitor would use a sun tracker and stationary sensors to measure and record solar energy. The 203-cm by 178-cm instrument included a pyrheliometer to measure energy coming directly from the solar disc and 2 pyranom-eters to measure direct and scattered energy from any direction in its hemispheric field of view. The system could also evaluate the ability of developmental devices to convert or reflect solar energy. Collected data were recorded on tape for computer analysis. (MSFC Release 75-168)

October 8, 1964
Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said in address at centennial convocation luncheon, Worcester Polytechnic Institute:	* “The new era promised by the Space Age perhaps connotes a return to what was once called natural philosophy. The unifying element of these developments of the space program is a general spirit of inquiry into the nature of the external physical world. It represents a re-direction of interest away from the increasingly narrow specialization which has characterized the physical sciences in the last decades. “The second distinguishing feature of the scientific research in space is the fact that the various scientists have only been able to make their observations ... by virtue of the hardware developed by the engineer. This is in distinct contrast to the biologist who could invest in a good microscope and do research comparable with the best. . . . Generally, the engineer exploits and puts to practical use the knowledge acquired by the scientists. But in space, the scientist seems to be particularly dependent on the engineer to develop new devices and techniques. Engineering, in this context, has become a more creative and trail-blazing profession. “The third and possibly most imposing challenge of the space age is the potential feed-back of its developments into the civilian economy. In the long run, the justification of our space budget must stand on this ‘fall-out.’ . . .” (Text)

January 19, 1961
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded contract to Douglas and Chance Vought to study launching manned exploratory expedition into lunar and interplanetary space from Earth orbits.

February 6, 1965
Tabulations prepared by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center showed that more than 1,000 man-made objects—satellites, spacecraft, capsules, and assorted bits and pieces of them—had been placed in orbit since Oct. 4, 1957. Of these objects 243 were satellites launched by the United States or its allies and 94 were Soviet-launched satellites. 103 U.S.-sponsored satellites and 16 Soviet satellites were still in orbit. Of those no longer in orbit, 140 were U.S. and 78 Soviet. Many satellites had separated into two or more space objects or had broken apart accidentally or by design to produce space junk. GSFC records identified 469 hunks of junk of U.S. origin and 182 of Soviet as having orbited the earth at one time or another. Of these, 372 U.S. and 16 Soviet objects were still in orbit, (ap, NYT, 2/7/65, 80)

May 27, 1993
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it had selected NSI Technology Services Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for integration and test support services. The contract, which covered seven years, had an estimated value of $200 million and would provide services to all of Goddard and portions of NASA's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release C93-e)

February 9, 1965
Six of eight oso II experiments had been turned on and gave “excellent” data, NASA reported. The two experiments not yet operating were the ultraviolet scanning spectrometer provided by Harvard Univ. and the ultraviolet spectrophotometer provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Both had been turned on but were turned off to prevent damage to themselves or to the satellite when irregularities in the data received were noted. All other functions of the satellite— such as solar power supply, telemetry system, tape recorder, temperature control, and command system—were normal. (NASA Release 65-37)

May 6, 1965
NASA announced its agreement with the Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) to cooperate in scientific sounding rocket program to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere, emphasizing the effects of cosmic rays. NASA would provide and cnae would launch two sounding rockets from Natal, Brazil; scientific payloads would be constructed by Brazilian technicians at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA and CNAE would combine to provide ground support equipment, to analyze data, and to publish the results of the experiment. In addition, NASA would launch one instrumented sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., in a complementary experiment. The project would contribute to observance of 1965 as International Cooperation Year, (nasa Release 65—149)

February 22, 1985
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that on February 4 technical/scientific teams from Australia, India, Finland, and the U.S. had begun a six-week meeting at Wallops Flight Facility, Va., to compare radiosonde instruments used worldwide. Measuring only a few inches square and weighing less than 2 lb., the radiosonde was a low-cost, mass-produced instrument for measuring atmospheric pressure, temperature, relative humidity, and wind while ascending on a small balloon up to about 25 km (15 miles), or more frequently 30 km (18 miles), above earth. Worldwide weather services used radiosonde data for forecasts to aid aviation and for research. There were currently 17 radiosonde manufacturers in a number of countries, resulting in occasional differences in instrument measurements and the need to make periodic comparisons. A working group on the quality of meteorological data meeting in 1982 at the World Meteorological OrganizaPRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	71 JNIgHTlOKAUr BLANK tion's (WMO) headquarters, Geneva, Switz. had agreed that two phases of tests were required. The United Kingdom's Meteorological Office had hosted the 1st phase in 1984, when researchers released 106 ballons. Phase-2 participants at Wallops launched four balloons a day, five days a week, weather permitting, for an anticipated total of about 100 flights, each balloon carrying four or more instruments. Researchers would then correlate Phase-2 data with Phase-1 results. (GSFC Release 85—8)

May 18, 1991
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)

May 22, 1975
A giant 283 200-cu-m balloon carrying a Marshall Space Flight Center gamma ray detector was launched from Palestine, Tex., by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The balloon reached an altitude of 40 km and traveled 800 km before touching down near Ft. Stockton, Tex., 23 hrs later. The purpose of the flight was to detect the sources and determine the nature of sudden bursts of gamma rays coming from various directions in space. (MSFC Release 75100)

July 11, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $5 768 612 costplus-incentive-fee contract to Sperry Rand Corp. for design, development, test, and delivery of 37 multiplexer-demultiplexers (MDM) for the Space Shuttle rocket boosters. The MDM, an electronic device that permitted sending or receiving more than one message, signal, or unit of information on a single communication channel, was housed in the solid rocket boosters’ integrated electronics assembly. It would process signals for such functions as ignition, thrust vector control, release of nose cap and frustum, jettison of solid rocket motor nozzles, detachment of parachutes, and tum-on of recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—154)

February 20, 1973
A full-scale mockup of the Skylab Orbital Workshop— shipped from McDonnell Douglas, Huntington Beach, Calif.—arrived at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. It would be combined with other Skylab hardware and used for system engineering and integration support to Skylab earth orbital missions scheduled to begin in May. (msfc Release 73-14)

February 11, 1991
Wayne Littles, head of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center office charged with designing a heavy-lift launch vehicle for military and NASA purposes, commented on work underway. Still in the early stages, the heaviest lift models would carry at least 200,000 to 250,000 pounds. New advanced solid rocket boosters were planned as well as work on developing an unmanned version of the Shuttle, called Shuttle C. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 11/91)

September 16, 1964
oco I satellite probably would obtain 50%—and perhaps as much as 75%—of planned scientific data, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry J. Goett said at Washington news conference. The satellite was still not locked onto the earth but was spinning at rate of 5 rpm. All 20 experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, but only 17 were sending back useful information. Although oco I was “crippled,” Dr. Goett said, “we have quite a vigorous cripple.” For example, the satellite was transmitting 10 times more data bits than ever received from the most advanced Explorer-class scientific satellite. (NASA Transcript)

January 4, 1974
Goddard Space Flight Center launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range to study Comet Kohoutek’s ultraviolet rays. The rocket carried cameras, spectrometers, and other instruments to 232.6-km altitude to determine amounts of oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide in the comet. The flight was “highly successful,” Dr. Stephen P. Maran, gsfc Manager of Operation Kohoutek, said. The comet, discovered 5 May 1973 by Czechoslovak astronomer Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, was once predicted to be the “comet of the century” as it passed near the earth on its 75 000-yr journey around the sun. It was only twice as bright as nearby stars but reflected enough light to permit instruments to be aimed at it precisely. (Maran, interview, July _ 74; Watson, WPost, 5 Jan 74; Dilts, B Sun, 5 Jan 74, Al)

November 5, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director, Marshall Space Flight Center, addressing Chamber of Commerce, Charleston, West Virginia, said : “In support of Project Apollo major manufacturing, testing, and launching facilities are now under construction. Years of construction, personnel buildup, and training for activation will be necessary before they can be put to use. If Project Apollo should be short-changed, these unfinished buildings would stand as monuments to America’s folly. You simply cannot turn a complex project like Apollo off and on like a faucet.” (Text)

August 1, 1973
Marshall Space Flight Center announced receipt of proposals from five firms for a contract for design, procurement, fabrication, installation, and checkout of a data-acquisition system to support space shuttle structural testing. The firms were Avco Corp., Computer Science Corp., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Systems Engineering Laboratories, and Wyle Laboratories. The contract would be awarded in October, (msfc Release 73—107)

March 8, 1993
NASA announced that it had awarded Government Technology services Inc. of Chantilly a contract to provide Unix work station products to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland (W Times, Mar 4/93)

March 8, 1972
NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Wallops Station, carrying Univ. of New Hampshire energetic particle experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific requirements were not satisfied. (SR list)

March 8, 2002
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)

February 11, 1963
nasa Argo D-8 (Journeyman) rocket launched from Pt. Arguello, Calif., the four-stage sounding rocket carrying 104-lb. instrumented payload to probe hazards of the radiation belts. Designed by Univ. of Minnesota scientists, payload reached 990-mi. altitude and relayed valuable information during its 27-min. flight, then impacted in Pacific Ocean 1,250-mi. south of Pt. Arguello. Launch was conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with support by nasa Wallops Station personnel. (Wallops Release 63-12; AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 2/12/63)

March 3, 2009
NASA announced the selection of the members of the mishap board tasked with investigating the unsuccessful launch of the OCO, which had failed to reach orbit after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on 24 February 2009. NASA charged the board to identify the causes and contributing factors of the launch failure and to recommend measures that NASA should take to prevent a similar incident in future missions. NASA had named Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain, Deputy Director at NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the investigation, and now named four other voting members: Jose A. Caraballo, Safety Manager at NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia; Patricia M. Jones, Acting Chief of the Human Systems Integration Division in the Exploration Technology Directorate at NASA’s ARC in Moffett Field, California; Richard J. Lynch of Aerospace Systems Engineering at NASA’s GSFC; and David R. Sollberger, Deputy Chief Engineer of the NASA Launch Services Program at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. NASA named Ruth D. Jones, the Safety and Mission Assurance Manager at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), as the board’s ex officio member, charged with assuring that board activity conformed to NASA procedural requirements.

July 19, 1965
A newly-created Manpower Utilization and Administration Office, headed by Keith Wible, became operational at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Wible had been assistant manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility from November 1961 to February 1965. (msfc Release 65-181)

May 15, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center had requested proposals for two space tug studies, msfc announced. The first study was to develop schedules, controls, and planning data for the space tug program from initial flight readiness to long-term mission operations. The second study was to recommend a space tug avionics system, with emphasis on rendezvous and docking avionics and data-management-subsystem requirements and configuration. (msfc Release 74-79)

August 11, 1964
Echo, Relay, and Syncom communications satellites were presented to the Smithsonian Institution in ceremony at Museum of History and Technology. Among the NASA officials participating in the presentation were Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd Thompson, and Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry Goett. Carl T. Rowan, Director of U.S. Information Agency, said in address at the ceremony: “As we view the unfolding drama of the American space program it can be clearly seen that one of its most significant aspects is that it has been carried out in the full, open view of an interested and anxious world. When it was written into the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 that the activities of the new space agency were to be open to the widest practicable and appropriate spread of information, the Congress cast into law one of the deepest instincts of the American people. It was an act of faith to specify that this enterprise should be carried on openly before the gaze of those who wished us well and those who hoped otherwise; it was truly an expression of faith in freedom and the ability of Americans to meet the challenges and opportunities of an era when each day unfolds new perils and new promises. “If openness to public scrutiny was a basic concept in the entire space program, the decision to carry out a satellite program dedicated to freedom of communications on a global scale represented that concept converted into a highly meaningful fact. . . . “It is obvious that the over-riding quality of communications satellites is their internationalism. A practical system based on communication satellites is inherently universal, for it would be of little use if it did not mean communicating between the peoples of widely separated lands. Its basic premise involves the inclusion of as many countries as possible in the interchange that the system allows. “This presentation of communication satellites to our national museum of science and technology is, therefore, most truly an international occasion. For it is their international utility in the cause of world understanding, peace and progress which gives them their deepest meaning.” (Text)

September 28, 1972
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)

September 17, 1965
King Constantine of Greece invited Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), their wives, and other U.S. officials in Athens for the 16th International Astronautical Congress, to a royal palace banquet, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and JPL Director Dr. William H.	Pickering were among the guests, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/17/65)

November 29, 1972
Space Science Awareness Month was celebrated by City of St. Louis, Mo., at instigation of Mayor Alphonso Cervantes. More than 100 space science lectures and demonstrations were presented in area to provide opportunity for teachers, students, and general public to understand space technology and its benefits to society. Eugene Hanses, education director of McDonnell Planetarium, was chairman of activities which included talks by Marshall Space Flight Center officials and display of moon rocks, (msfc Release 72—145; NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 253)

July 22, 1972
Grove Webster, NASA Director of Personnel, died at age 48 after long illness. Webster had joined NASA in 1959 after working for Air Force and Civil Service Commission. (NASA Special Ann) The 941-kg (2075-lb), butterfly-shaped satellite carried RBV camera system, MSS subsystem, data-collection system (dcs), and two wideband video tape recorders (wbvtr). Launch was first step in merging space and remote sensing technology to manage earth resources more efficiently. Satellite would be able to cover earth with 500 pictures— 1000 times fewer than 500 000 needed to cover earth from high-altitude aircraft. Each picture would cover 34 000 sq km (13 000 sq mi). Satellite would view 185-km (115-mi) strip of earth with global coverage every 18 days, crossing equator daily at about 9:30 am local time. Solar array lock-on to sun and three-axis stabilization were achieved as planned. By July 25 instruments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Initial imagery from RBVC system and MSS was excellent and showed detail. Data were being transmitted to stations at Fairbanks, Alaska; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md.; and would be sent to data-processing facility at Goddard Space Flight Center. Ground station at Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, constructed and operated by Canadian government, would also receive data. Data would be distributed in form of high-quality film images or digitized data on computer-readable magnetic tape. Unlike previous unmanned programs where principal investigators had own instrumentation on board spacecraft and were responsible for own data analysis, all Erts 1 investigators had access to all data from onboard instruments. The 300 investigators from 43 states, District of Columbia, 31 foreign countries, and two international organizations would be assisted by 25 specialists assigned by NASA to analyze results. To carry out research required to evaluate satellite techniques, NASA was working with user agencies—including Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, and U.S. Corps of Engineers—and state and local organizations. Extensive cooperative earth resources projects had been established with Canada, Brazil, and Mexico, using Erts 1 and NASA earth observations aircraft. erts program was managed by gsfc. under direction of NASA Office of Applications, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-137)

August 4, 1991
According to AP, antennas on six major spacecraft had malfunctioned during the preceding 17 months, threatening the crucial flow of information from missions. Accordingly engineers conducted extra reviews of antennas on Atlantis. Henry Hoffman, guidance and control chief at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said part of the problem was that antennas were increasingly large and complex, requiring folding for launch and problems arose when they were extended or unfolded. (AP, Aug 4/91)

February 25, 1993
NASA scientists reported in the British journal Nature that a supernova may have caused a huge void known as the "Local Bubble" that envelopes the solar system and many nearby stars. Researchers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that evidence suggests that the bubble, an area about 300 light-years across, was formed by the supernova or explosion of a star about 340,000 years ago. The blast was strong enough that its radiation could have disrupted earth's protective ozone layer and caused extra sunburns on the ancestors of modern humans. (NASA Release 93-036; USA Today, Feb 25/93; NY Times, Feb 25; P Inq, Mar 5/93)

September 16, 1974
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, would receive the National Civil Service League’s Career Service Award for Sustained Excellence, NASA announced. Dr. Naugle had joined NASA in 1959 as head of the Nuclear Emulsion Section at Goddard Space Flight Center and, in 1967, had become Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Science at Headquarters. Under his leadership, scientists had mapped the entire surface of Mars, collected the first detailed information about Jupiter and its moons, and advanced the use of unmanned spacecraft as astronomical observatories. Dr. Naugle would receive the award, given to Federal officials with at least 10 yrs outstanding public service, on 9 Oct. Dr, Carolyn Huntoon, Johnson Space Center, would receive the League’s Special Achievement Award for her design of a Skylab experiment that had measured biochemical reactions to weightlessness. (NASA Release 74-252)

November 29, 1964
It was announced that a new ultraviolet radiation spectrograph had been developed at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in an effort to solve the mystery of “airglow.” The spectrograph would be carried aloft by a rocket and would be expected to reveal the constituents and mechanisms of the airglow. (nana, San Diego Union, 11/29/64)

April 30, 1974
NASA had selected Computer Sciences Corp., Falls Church, Va., to negotiate a three-year $6.2-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for central computing support at Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA announced. CSC would provide software support for manned and unmanned missions in real-time mission programs, network scheduling, and acquisition-data generation and transmission and would monitor and control display programs, (nasa Release 74—113) During April: Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider and the three Skylab crews had been selected as recipients of the 1973 Robert J. Collier Trophy for “proving beyond question the value of man in future explorations of space and the production of data of benefit to all the people on earth,” the National Aeronautic Association announced. The Collier Committee—while recognizing contributions to the Skylab program by the more than 26000 engineers, scientists, flight controllers, and technicians—also had unanimously agreed that the trophy should be presented to Schneider on behalf of the crews for his leadership in this “exceedingly complex enterprise.” The trophy was presented by Vice President Gerald R. Ford in Washington, D.C., ceremonies 4 June. (naa News, April 74)

April 9, 1963
In its first few days of operation, explorer xvii satellite had obtained data that more than tripled all previous direct measurements of the neutral gases in earth’s upper atmosphere, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Satellite was traveling. in elliptical orbit (578-mi. apogee, 153-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period) and was transmitting data of excellent quality and quantity. It had been commanded more than 75 times, and each time it responded with approximately four min. of data on density, pressure, composition, and temperature of upper atmosphere gases. New communications system, utilizing special data readout station at gsfc, was providing scientific and technical data from the satellite within minutes of its transmission, (gsfc Release)

October 12, 1964
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Gatlinburg, Tenn., speech to nasa-aec—usaf symposium on radiation protection that “not too far in the future huge nuclear-propelled spacecraft will take crews of men on long voyages deep into space. . . . “The problems of man-made radiation connected with these space ships will prove far more challenging in the long run than those of the natural radiation in space. . . .”	(NYT, 10/13/64, 18)

June 21, 1999
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)

June 11, 1965
Saturn V booster (s-ic—T stage) was successfully static-fired for 90 sec. at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. During the test, longest to date, the five F-l engines developed 7.5 million lbs. thrust and all four outer engines were gimbaled to simulate the motion required to control the vehicle in flight, (msfc Release 65-148; Marshall Star, 5/16/65, 1)

April 24, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had designed and built compact shower assembly for use on Skylab earth-orbital missions beginning in 1973. Astronauts would step inside ring on floor and raise fireproof beta cloth curtain on hoop and attach it to ceiling. Flexible hose with push-button shower nozzle could spray 2.8 liters (3 quarts) of water from personal hygiene tank during each bath. Used water would be vacuumed from shower enclosure into disposable bag and deposited in waste tank, (msfc Release 72-38)

April 5, 1991
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, has selected Hughes/Santa Barbara Research Center, Goleta, California as its contractor for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir (MODIS-N) instrument for the Earth Observing System (EOS) program. EOS is central to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Program. MODIS-N is the key research instrument to fly on a series of EOS unmanned polar spacecraft. Over a 15-year period, it would measure terrestrial, oceanographic, and atmospheric parameters to assess environmental changes. (NASA Release C91-1)

February 27, 1996
Continuing its efforts to cut costs by using private contractors, NASA awarded McDonnell Douglas Aerospace a US$500 million, eight-year contract to provide “fixed-price medium-light (Med-Lite) class expendable launch vehicle services.”31 NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program, and the Orbital Sciences Corporation served as the major subcontractor. At the time of the agreement, NASA had planned three Med-Lite missions launching from both the East Coast and the West Coast.

August 20, 1964
syncom ill communications satellite, high above Sumatra in the Indian Ocean, was boosted into near-circular orbit above the equator by its apogee motor. The motor burned for 19.6 sec. at the command of ground station at Salisbury, Australia, which based its command on computer calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The satellite was now in orbit of 23,550-mi. apogee; 21,235-mi. perigee; 14° inclination; and 1,449-min. (24 hr. and 9 min.) period. It was drifting westward at rate of about 3(4° Per day. (NASA Press Conf. Transcript; nasa Release 64-193)

December 8, 1964
nimbus I meteorological satellite, which had lost its electric power and stopped functioning Sept. 23, revived and was returning useful engineering data. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center said the solar paddles, which had been locked, had apparently directed themselves at the sun long enough to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries but the gas for stabilization had been exhausted and the craft was tumbling at about 15 rpm. This caused photographs to be fuzzy and useless, (gsfc Release G-64-34)

December 24, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced preliminary scientific results from Spacelab 3 flown on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-B launched April 29, 1985. Researchers and participants in the seven-day flight gathered in December at the Center to present their initial findings. "The mission has made some major contributions in the physical and life sciences," said Dr. George Fichtl of MSFC's Systems Dynamics Laboratory. "We have gained a lot of insight for future Spacelab and space station research. And I think we can now say that space research is becoming routine." Initial results from the three Spacelab 3 crystal growth experiments were very promising, Ficthl noted. The two triglycine sulfate crystals and the single mercuric iodide crystal grown in the space laboratory were at least as good as the best crystals grown to date on earth. And they might actually be better, although additional testing was necessary to confirm this, Fichtl said. "This is of major significance, because normally we must grow between one and two thousand crystals on earth to get just one crystal that is equal to the quality of those grown on Spacelab 3. Mercuric iodide crystals have application in X-ray detectors, and triglycine sulfate crystals are used in infrared detectors," he said. In addition, the flight proved the reliability of the methods used to grow the crystals. Triglycine sulfate crystals were grown from a solution as part of an experiment provided by Alabama A&M University. The mercuric iodide crystal grew using a vapor transport process in an experiment provided by EG&G Energy Measurements Inc. The third crystal growth experiment, provided by France and which also used mercuric iodide, performed as expected and added to researchers knowledge about the process of crystal nucleation, a process difficult to study on earth because of gravity-induced convection. The Drop Dynamics Module, a fluid physics experiment developed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, enabled researchers to do some experiments not possible on earth. Results confirmed some of the theories on how drops behaved when rotated, the first opportunity to test theories posed centuries ago including those by Isaac Newton. The experiment also proved that using sound waves was a viable technique for manipulating liquids in a microgravity environment, which had direct application to containerless materials processing in space. The technique allowed processing of materials without incurring the contaminating effects of the container. The experiment showed that the "acoustic bottle" or "crucible of sound" containing the droplet had much better characteristics than originally theorized. Drop dynamics experiments confirmed theories on how drops behaved when rotated slowly; however, experiment data showed violation of some basic theories relating to the behavior of drops rotated at higher rates. It was found, for example, that drops tended to transition (change) to a new shape at rotation rates lower than predicted. "All this tends to indicate that some of our theories may need to be modified," Fichtl said. Researchers for the Geophysical Fluid Flow Cell Experiment reported that all 102 hours of data looked good, confirming existing theories of convection, and were expected to lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of stellar interiors and planetary atmosphere. However, the research team noted that at higher heating rates—such as those that might be found on the sun— the data showed some significant departures from that anticipated. After the mission, researchers developed computer models of some of this new information. The Atmospheric Trace Molecules Spectroscopy (ATMOS) experiment, sponsored by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, for the first time simultaneously measured the concentrations of chemical compounds associated with carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and other chemical cycles in the atmosphere. This would provide better insight into the chemical processes that governed the distribution of minor and trace gases in the atmosphere between 10 and 100 kilometers. The instrument recorded concentrations of gases as low as parts per 100 billion, the first time such sensitive measurements were made, and detected and measured traces of nitrogen pentoxide, a compound previously undetected in the atmosphere. Results from the Research Animal Holding Facility showed that the apparent case of space adaptation syndrome in one of the monkeys supported the contention that this species would be a good model for future studies of vestibular adaptation in microgravity. Results from studies of the largest group of rats flown aboard a single spacecraft showed their hind muscles became 11 to 36% smaller and the bones were less strong after their flight. (MSFC Release 85-73) UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

March 4, 1992
A press briefing was scheduled to be held by a science team for the ATLAS-1 mission on March 23, 1992, at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama. The briefing was to discuss the mission's science activities and was to consist of two panels. (NASA Note N92-18)

March 19, 1998
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)

May 14, 1973
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado and Marshall Space Flight Center payload to a 267.0-km (165.9-mi) altitude. The primary objective was to check out the reliability and performance of subsystems of the CALROC rocket configuration which would be used during Skylab missions after a manned crew joined the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop launched May 14 [see April 18]. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)

April 11, 1991
Four Israeli high school students paid a two-week visit to the United States after winning an astrophysics contest in Israel. The competition was sponsored by the National Museum of Science, Planning, and Technology in Haifa to encourage Israeli youth to focus on technology and the sciences.  The students visited Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and NASA's headquarters. (Washington Jewish Week, Apr 11/91)

March 19, 1972
Shuttle Program Office, managed by Roy E. Godfrey, was formed at Marshall Space Flight Center. Office would be staffed by Shuttle Task Team until July 1, when team would be abolished and some members assigned permanently to office. (Marshall Star, 5/17/72, 1; msfc pao)

August 24, 1964
NASA announced it would purchase 102 additional J—2 rocket engines for Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles at cost of about $165 million. Contract would be negotiated by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center with Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Release 64-211)

June 25, 1976
NASA announced it would use starlight that left the surface of a nearby star 200 yr ago to signal the lighting of a giant 200-candle Bicentennial birthday cake at the new Superdome stadium in New Orleans just before midnight on 3 July. Photons of light that left Gamma Bootes just before midnight 3 July 1776—when the signers of the Declaration of Independence were officially witnessing the birth of the U.S.—would arrive on earth to activate a 1000-cycle tone at the Goddard Space Flight Center. The tone, transmitted to New Orleans on commercial telephone lines, would signal the lighting of the cake. GSFC’s orbiting astronomical observatory Copernicus, passing over Hawaii in its 740-km orbit, would receive the photons on its star detector and transmit a digital signal to the NASA ground station in Hawaii; this signal, retransmitted to the West Coast and via microwave to GSFC, would activate a relay connecting the tone to New Orleans, where it would be heard on the stadium’s public address system for 1 min before the candles would be lighted. Astronaut Story Musgrave would participate in the Superdome activities. (NASA Release 76-121)

July 1, 1965
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of six firms for contract negotiations to provide nonpersonal scientific and engineering support services for GSFC. Final negotiations were expected to result in cost-plus-award-fee contracts for two years at a total cost of about $16 million. Contracts would cover requirements for ten divisions at GSFC; although requirements of a single division would be fulfilled through a single contract, one contractor might service more than one division in several cases. Firms selected: Fairchild Hiller Corp.; Vitro Corp. of America; Electro-Mechanical Research, Inc.; Consultants and Designers, Inc.; Lockheed Electronics Co.; and Melpar, Inc. (nasa Release 65-216; gsfc Release 15-65)

September 2, 1976
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that a team of fishermen, engineers, physicists, oceanographers, biologists, and computer specialists had used a satellite to find fish off the coast of Louisiana in a government-industry cooperative program begun by NOAA last year. Water turbidity, measured by Landsat sensors as variations in color, would reflect the distribution of fish; the fishing vessels, working with spotter aircraft, confirmed the presence of fish in most areas predicted by the Landsat data. This technique of locating concentrations of fish would aid in better understanding of coastal fishery ecology and better resources assessment and management, NOAA said. On 19 July, Landsat 1 had passed over a selected study area, sending multispectral scanner data to Goddard Space Flight Center; the data tapes were hand-carried to NASA’s Earth Resources Laboratory in La. for processing. Less than 21 hr after the scan, the spotter pilots and fishing-vessel captains were being called to check their findings with predicted locations. The satellite reports were valid, NOAA said. Installation of an operational system would require 3 to 5 yr to develop special computer programs and facilities. (NOAA Release 76-196; JSC Release 76—50; JSC Roundup, 10 Sept 76, 4)

September 23, 1991
Gerald Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center at a press conference spoke of the findings of the Gamma Ray Observatory to date. He said that an instrument called the Burst and Transient Source Experiment had detected 117 gamma ray bursts since launching. Thse bursts were randomly scattered, not from the center of the Milky Way Galaxy as previously thought. (AP, Sep 23/91; P Inq, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; W Post, Sep 24/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)

December 14, 1977
Marshall Space Flight Center reported it had coped with the threat of a serious power shortage when maintenance and emergency shutdowns dropped the Tennessee Valley Authority’s generating capacity by a third at the same time that severe cold weather moved into the area. On Friday, Dec. 9, TVA had asked NASA and the U.S. Army to reduce power use by half, as it expected the shortage to continue for some time. C. Horton Webb, director of MSFC’s facilities office, said the plant maintenance division had worked around the clock turning heat on and off to keep buildings from freezing, and had asked employees to help in minimizing use of electrical equipment. Security guards helped by closing blinds and turning off lights and equipment wherever possible. Webb said the combined effort had reduced power use by 50% on Saturday and 65% by Sunday morning. (Marshall Star, Dec 14/77, 1)

June 12, 1975
NASA launched Nimbus 6 on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster from the Western Test Range at 1:12 am PDT after a 6-min delay to clear a ship from the jettison trajectory of the Delta’s solid rockets. The spacecraft entered sun-synchronous polar orbit with a 1103-km apogee, 1094-km perigee, 107-min period, and 99.96° inclination. Separation of the spacecraft from the launch vehicle was normal, at 59 min into the flight. The solar panels were deployed and the attitude-control system quickly acquired earth. A wheel control provided three-axis stabilization. Checkout of the power system, telemetry, command links, and tape recorder was completed on the first day of operation. At 7 hr after launch, a cryogenic vent valve associated with the limb-radiance inversion radiometer was pyrotechnically actuated as planned. This caused unexpected high torques and excessive control-gas usage. Nimbus 6 was put into a safe wideband gravity-gradient mode to conserve gas, and an investigation was begun to find the cause of the problem and determine possible remedies. By 24 June the 9 experiments and all spacecraft systems had been checked out and all instrumentation, except for 2 tape recorders, was working normally. The primary objective of the Nimbus 6 mission was to contribute to the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) by refining and extending the capability of vertically sounding the temperature and moisture of the atmosphere, with particular regard to altitude resolution and interference effects of clouds. GARP, a cooperative worldwide weather program, was established to improve understanding of meteorological atmospheric processes in the tropics and to improve observation and computing systems for weather prediction and analysis. Nimbus 6 would also monitor environmental conditions such as sea ice and rainfall and would measure the earth’s radiation budget with a precision never before attained. Secondary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the ability to track and relay data from a low-altitude polar-orbiting spacecraft using a geosynchronous satellite as a communications relay. Ats 6, the Applications Technology Satellite launched on 30 May 1974, would be the relay comsat. A data-collection, processing, and relay-to-earth system was also on board to collect data from approximately 300 balloon-borne platforms, designed to float at an altitude of 20 km, and a large number of earth- and sea-based data platforms. Nimbus 6, unlike previous spacecraft, could receive and process up to eight incoming signals at a time. The satellite carried nine new instruments to extend measurements of atmospheric parameters to significantly higher altitudes than had previously been possible: the tracking and data-relay (T&DR) experiment; a high-resolution temperature sounder (HIRS) and a scanning microwave spectrometer (SCAMS) to take temperature soundings in the atmosphere outside the tropics; a tropical wind-energy conversion and reference level experiment (TWERLE) to provide data on tropical areas; a limb-radiance inversion radiometer (LRIR) and a pressure-modulated radiometer (PMR) to provide high-altitude temperature soundings; an earth radiation budget (ERR) experiment to establish the earth’s atmospheric radiation balance; an electrically scanning microwave radiometer (ESMR) to map the liquid-water content of the clouds, ocean rainfall,, and distribution and variation of sea-ice cover; and a temperature/humidity infrared radiometer (THIR) to provide data on cloud cover, ground temperatures, and water-vapor distribution. Nimbus 6 was next to last in a planned series of seven experimental meteorological satellites. Nimbus 1 (launched 28 Aug. 1964) and Nimbus 2 (launched 15 May 1966) achieved all their objectives. Launch of the third Nimbus, on 19 May 1968, failed when the launch vehicle malfunctioned; an identical spacecraft launched 14 April 1969 successfully functioned as Nimbus 3. Nimbus 4 and 5 (launched 8 April 1970 and 10 Dec. 1972) had both completed all mission objectives and were still operating. General Electric Co. was the prime contractor responsible for Nimbus 6 integration and test, stabilization control, control-subsystem integration, and spacecraft structures and antennas. Seven U.S. and two British companies, in addition to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, provided the nine instruments. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the Nimbus program under the direction of the NASA Office of Applications and was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs 21 May 74,12 June 75, 24 June 75; NASA Release 75-145)

June 7, 1985
Two groups of scientists, who were making observations at infrared and radio wavelengths, reported the strongest evidence so far of a supermassive black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy, the NY Times reported, strengthening the theory that very massive black holes existed in the cores of all galaxies. Astrophysicists had already deduced that black holes might be at the cores of some distant galaxies. Eight physicists and astronomers from the University of California, Berkeley, reported in the British journal Nature their infrared observations showing gas whipping around a core at 100,000 to 400,000 miles per hour. They concluded the gas was in the grip of a black hole four million times the mass of the sun. The group measured the velocities near the center of the core with sufficient precision to show that they decreased further out in a way to be expected if controlled by gravity from a single central object. They believed this ruled out a dense cluster of stars, proposed by some astronomers, because that gravity field would be more uniform. Radio astronomers using coordinated observations with antennas in West-ford, Massachusetts; Green Bank, West Virginia; Fort Davis, Texas; and Gold-stone, Hat Creek, and Owens Valley, California; and the 27 antennas of the very large array in New Mexico aimed the antennas at a radio source, a suspected black hole, almost directly in the center of the Milky Way called Sagittarius A (in the constellation Sagittarius). The results indicated that the source, despite its enormous mass and output of energy, was smaller than the orbit of Saturn. Donald Lyndon-Bell of Britain's Royal Greenswich Observatory and Martin Fees of Cambridge University had proposed 14 years before that there might be such an object there. Astronomers using improved radio and infrared techniques had mapped in more and more detail the Milky Way core, which was 30,000 light years from earth. They could not see the core with visible light because of dense clouds of dust and gases. (NVTJune 7/85, A15) June 22\ NASA announced that the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) observed for the first time the comet Giacobini-Zinner while the comet was approximately 87 million miles from earth on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. IUE would continue observations of the comet as it moved closer and ultimately became the target of the world's first intercept, on September 11, 1985, of a comet by a satellite, the International Cometary Explorer (/Cf) spacecraft. The June 22 IUE observations of Giacobini-Zinner produced ultraviolet spectrograms—graphic depictions of the intensity of light over a range of ultraviolet wavelengths—revealing emissions of two molecules, carbon monosulfide and another known as the hydroxyl radical. Preliminary evaluation indicated that the ultraviolet emissions from both molecules were somewhat brighter than expected at this stage of the comet's development. The IUE had taken the ultraviolet "pulse" of not only nearby solar system objects such as comets and planets, but also extragalactic objects such as quasars, providing research data to more than 1,000 astronomers around the world. Scientists, engineers, and technicians at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center designed and integrated the spacecraft, which was launched in 1978 as a cooperative venture of the British Science Research Council, the European Space Agency, and NASA. (NASA Release 85-103)

July 28, 1973
l/c Harold E. Turner (usaf, Ret.), the first commanding officer of White Sands Proving Ground (which became White Sands Missile Range in 1958) died in El Paso, Tex., at age 75. He had been transferred from White Sands to Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., where a proving ground was to be built on Cape Canaveral. There Col. Turner supervised the firing of Cape Canaveral’s first rocket, the two-stage Bumper 8 (a V-2 first stage with a Wac Corporal 2nd stage) July 24, 1950. He was later medically retired after suffering cerebral damage during an accident at the Cape. (AP, W Post, 9/29/73, Dl; A&A 1915-60) September 28:	Processed samples from Skylab 3 experiments carried on the 59-day mission (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop, launched May 14) were returned to Marshall Space Flight Center. They were opened, x-rayed, and photographed before being delivered to principal investigators who would report within six months. Among the samples were 11 of solidification (crystal growth performed in the M-518 multipurpose electrical furnace system) and the remains of spiders Anita and Arabella, who died after spinning webs in zero g for the first time. The spiders’ bodies would be given to the Smithsonian Institution for display later in the week, following examination by a student experimenter. Preliminary examination had shown that Arabella died of malnutrition. Anita had died in space of probably the same cause Sept. 15. (msfc Release 73-146)

September 10, 1975
Engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center were completing tests seeking to refine the means of towing to shore for refurbishment and reuse recovered solid rocket boosters from Space Shuttle launches. These tests explored the question of whether the parachute recovery lines and riser lines on the three recovery parachutes to be attached to each booster would, when under tension during descent, stretch enough to develop sufficient latent energy to deploy the 52-mm-dia by 15-m long tow rope from a tray located in the booster’s forward skirt. The tests employed a 10-m Saturn S—II-stage adapter ring, to which the parachute lines were attached. A crane hoisted the adapter ring until the stress on the rings was 12 000 kg, about one-half the stress expected on the parachutes lowering the booster. An explosive bolt was detonated, abruptly freeing the parachute lines; they contracted and the lines and fitting to which they were attached were yanked upward more than 60 m, quite enough energy to deploy the tow line. The recovery system parachutes would be fitted with flotation devices so they could be recovered. On the first six Shuttle developmental flights, the set of parachutes would be cut free from one booster in each set of two and both would be tested to determine which configuration made it easier to retrieve and tow the booster. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)

August 19, 1964
Lockheed-Califomia Co. engineers disclosed concept for a reusable rocket plane to transport 10 passengers between earth and orbiting space station. Prepared in a study for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, the design concept was a winged, two-stage carrier with two-man crew in each stage and capable of hauling three tons of cargo in addition to the passengers. Lockheed engineers said if the vehicle system development program were begun in 1967, the transport could be operational in 1975.	(Huntsville Times, 8/19/64)

June 5, 1985
NASA announced that flight controllers for its International Cometary Explorer (ICE) performed the first and largest of four midcourse corrections to direct the spacecraft toward a September 11 intercept of Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Conducted from ICE mission control at Goddard Space Flight Center, these corrections used two thousand pulses of the spacecraft's two-lb. hydrazine thrusters to change its heading so it would fly through the comet's tail 16,200 miles from the comet's nucleus. The thruster burns lasted four-and-a-half hours. In 1982, NASA redirected the International Sun-Earth Explorer, which was launched in 1978, toward the comet for what would be the first satellite/ comet encounter in history. This encounter would provide scientists with their first look at the makeup and dynamics of a comet's tail. The ICE trajectory adjustment would place the satellite/comet encounter within the coverage window of the world's largest single dish radio astronomy telescope located at the Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico. The 300-m dish, managed by the National Science Foundation, would supplement coverage by three NASA deep space network stations at Goldstone, California; Madrid, Spain; Canberra, Australia; and the recently completed 64-m antenna of the Japanese Space Agency at Usuda, Japan. NASA based ICE's course adjustment on telescopic observations of Giacobini-Zinner as the comet emerged in April from behind the sun, the first observation since July 1984. The comet was approximately 149 million miles from the sun on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. NASA would direct three smaller orbit maneuvers as ICE approached the comet, the last scheduled for three days prior to encounter. Course corrections were necessary because material spontaneously outgassed from the comet's core, acting as jet thrusters on the comet's body, slightly altered the its orbital path. Astronomers in 1900 discovered Giacobini-Zinner, which returned to earth's neighborhood every six-and-one-half years. It would not be visible to the naked eye, but amateur astronomers with small telescopes would be able to see it. (NASA Release 85-86)

July 21, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Martin Marietta’s Denver division of a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract for $9 282 667 to deliver parachute decelerator subsystems for recovery of 12 solid-fuel rocket boosters from 6 Space Shuttle flights. The contract, effective through Dec. 1980, covers design, development, manufacture, and refurbishment of the subsystems. Work was authorized to start 6 July at Martin’s plant in Colorado and at Pioneer Parachute Co. of Manchester, Conn., subcontractor. (MSFC Release 76-135)

October 2, 1994
A photograph was featured of the first node of NASA's international laboratory designed as part of the International Space Station. It was being manufactured by Boeing at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. (Fla Today, Oct 2/94)

February 20, 1964
Prime contractors of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center were assuming additional responsibilities in Saturn launch vehicles program, MSFC Director Dr, Wemher von Braun announced. Principal contractors immediately affected would be Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., ibm Corp., and General Electric Co. Dr. von Braun said this was “a continuation of the Marshall policy to transfer research and developmental work, as well as fabrication, from ‘in house’ to contractor plants as soon as practical. Not only has this been our philosophy but prime contracts in most cases have spelled out the eventual taking over by industry of full responsibility for major elements and stages of the vehicles. . . .” MSFC would retain overall systems management responsibility for the three Saturn launch vehicles and continue to “maintain a technical and managerial competence in our own organization. Without it we cannot monitor the work of our contractors to insure that we are getting the quality and reliability that a manned space program demands. . . .” (Marshall Star, 2/26/64,10)

January 2, 1992
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)

August 28, 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center had negotiated a restructured contract with TRW Inc. for the first of three High Energy Astronomy Observatory spacecraft to be launched between 1977 and 1979, NASA announced. Modifications had increased the original contract value by $9 451139, to a new total of $86 397 579. The contract covered design, development, manufacture, test, checkout, and delivery of the spacecraft. Period of performance was from 1 July 1974 through 15 April 1980. The original heao program, approved in 1971 and suspended in 1973 because of budget cuts, had called for two large unmanned observatories. The new contract called for a series of smaller scale missions using three satellites in circular orbits at an altitude of 416 km to obtain data on high-energy radiation from space—celestial x-rays, gamma-rays, and cosmic rays. Contracts totaling $23 332 700 had also been signed for five experiments to be carried by the second spacecraft, heao-b. The awards included $1 350 000 to American Science and Engineering, Inc., to design and build the x-ray telescope, (nasa Release 74-240; m§fc Release 74179)

July 1, 1985
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that July 1 marked the center's 25th anniversary. MSFC currently managed a budget of about $2 billion annually and employed some 3,300 people, while thousands more worked with numerous aerospace and other high-tech organizations in the Huntsville, Alabama, area to support the center's projects. During the 25 years, MSFC had moved beyond its initial role as NASA's developer of launch vehicles and propulsion systems to that of a scientific and engineering organization also responsible for spacecraft and scientific experiments. The center was currently responsible for a number of NASA programs including the Space Shuttle's engines, propellant tank, and booster rockets; the Hubble Space Telescope; Spacelab orbiting research laboratories; the Space Shuttle upper stage systems; and a significant portion of the proposed space station. (MSFC Release 85-31)

August 27, 1962
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center (gsfc) announced it was training Italian scientists and engineers for the launching of Italy’s first satellite. The 165-lb. satellite would be launched by 1965 from platform in Indian Ocean off eastern coast of Africa.

November 30, 1964
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2,017,400 contract to Granite Construction Co., Houston, Tex., for construction of a vehicle component supply building and a hazardous materials storage building at its Saturn rocket production plant (NASA Michoud Operations) in New Orleans. (Marshall Star, 11/18/64, 4)

June 10, 1964
Nike-Apache launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 90.6-mi. altitude, in flight to detect quiet-day ionospheric electric currents using for first time a very small rubidium vapor magnetometer designed for use in small rockets. Experiment was project of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Rpt. SRL)

July 15, 1965
A contract for about $60 million would be signed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with Republic Aviation Corp. for Phase II development of the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso), NASA announced. Republic would furnish two flight spacecraft and a prototype; work would also include final development and design, checkout, experiment integration, and launch support services. The Phase I portion of the project was completed in July 1965. Launching of the 1,250-lb. Aoso, planned for the late 1960’s, would be from Vandenberg afb by a thrust-augmented Thor-Agena rocket; the observatory would provide a constant search for isolated or unusual solar activity, (nasa Release 65-234)

December 7, 1961
Preproposal conference on the contract for design, research, development, fabrication, and testing of the reactor-in-flight-test (Rift) vehicle was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. This vehicle would test-fly the Nerva nuclear engine now under development. Twenty-nine firms were invited to attend this preliminary conference at which they were furnished general information on the project. Interested firms would then have 30 days to file information on their capabilities and experience. Then a smaller number of firms would be invited to submit detailed bids. Purpose of the two-step evaluation was to enable firms not in a competitive position to avoid the expense of entering detailed proposals.

July 29, 1993
NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)

October 31, 1962
explorer xiv had transmitted 589 hours of data to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, which had released about 240 hours of data to the various experimenters.

August 15, 1963
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, announced appointment of Robert B. Young as msfc Director of Projects and Industry Operations. Presently Vice President and General Manager of Aerojet General Corp.’s Sacramento Plant, Young would assume his msfc position Nov. 1. (nasa Release 63-184)

July 21, 1975
Cosmic rays—the most energetic particles in the universe—probably originated in supernovas within our own galaxy, Dr. Floyd W. Stecker, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, wrote in an article in Physical Review Letters. Dr. Stecker had based his conclusions on data from NASA’s Explorer 48 (Small Astronomy Satellite—B, launched 16 Nov. 1972). Scientists had been speculating on the source of cosmic radiation since its discovery at the turn of the century, when it was thought to be identical with gamma rays. With the advent of radio astronomy and the rapid development of new experimental techniques and instrumentation, supernovas had been considered a possible source of cosmic rays; however, other scientists believed cosmic radiation had extragalactic origins, such as quasars. Explorer 48, measuring cosmic-ray intensity without interference from earth’s atmosphere, had been able to obtain the gamma-ray information needed to complement ground-based radio-astronomy data. The SAS-B scientific team at GSFC had measured a large amount of gamma radiation coming from the Milky Way galaxy, the most intense coming from the center of the galaxy. As gamma rays resulted primarily from collisions of cosmic rays with interstellar gas, and the detailed Explorer 48 data had identified the direction from which most of the gamma rays came, Dr. Stecker could pinpoint an area of intense activity midway between the galactic center and the earth. The active area was a region containing numerous interstellar gas clouds—but not enough to account for all the gamma-ray production—as well as a large number of supernova remnants. Dr. Stecker deduced that cosmic rays were to be found in the same regions as supernova remnants and in proportion to their number. (Stecker, Physical Review Letters, 21 July 75, 188—90; NASA Release 75—221)

April 13, 1989
President George Bush announced the selection of Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, a former astronaut and head of the Space Shuttle program, to succeed Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator. The White House also announced that J.R. Thompson, Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, would be appointed NASA Deputy Administrator. Truly, a veteran of two Shuttle flights, was named to head the Shuttle program by Administrator Fletcher following the 1986 Challenger0*accident. Truly was credited with helping to restore safety and reliability to Shuttlerelated activities. (FBISSov89070, Apr 13/89; AP, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 12/89; NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89; WSJ, Apr 13/89; USA Today, Apr 13/89; W Times, Apr

July 15, 1974
Federal support to universities and colleges had declined 7%, to $3823 million, during FY 1973 in the first decline since 1970, the National Science Foundation reported. The drop had been largely the result of a $267-million decrease in funds from the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare but other significant decreases were posted by nsf, down $40 million; Dept, of Defense, down $11 million; and NASA, down $8 million. Federal funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million, 5% below 1972. Two science fields had shown an increase in Federal r&d support between 1972 and 1973'. Life sciences’ $934 million was a 4% increase; engineering’s $204 million was up 6%. (nsf Highlights, 15 July 74) 15— 16 July: Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1—first U.S. domestic communications satellite, launched by NASA 13 April—began operations during inaugural ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. McFall, Chairman of the Board and President of Western Union Corp. transmitted the first message, from New York to Los Angeles, using the original Morse key to tap “What hath God wrought!” It was the same message sent by inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24 May 1844 over the first experimental telegraph, a 65-km line between the Capitol in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md. Regular commercial operations began 16 July, providing services for Westar J’s first two commercial customers, American Can Co. and Bank of America. (Westar Inaugural Transmission press kit, 15 July 74) 16— 29 July: NASA launched Aeros 2 (Aeros-B) aeronomy satellite for West Germany from Western Test Range at 4:51 am pdt on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle into polar orbit with an 879.0-km apogee, 221.3km perigee, 95.65-min period, and 97.44° inclination. The NASA mission objective—to place the Aeros 2 satellite in an earth orbit permitting successful achievement of the scientific objectives—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 26 July. The scientific objective was to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of the main absorption. The long-range objective of the satellite, which carried one Goddard Space Flight Center and four West German experiments, was to provide a model of the ionosphere from which upper atmospheric conditions could be predicted. By 29 July the vehicle and experiments were performing satisfactorily and the West Germans were initiating spacecraft operations. A July 1965 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany had provided for a series of cooperative satellite projects. The Aeros program, the second in the series, was authorized by a 10 June 1969 agreement and Aeros 1 was launched 16 Dec. 1972. The 1974 contract between NASA and the West Germany Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) for the Aeros 2 launch provided for reimbursement of NASA for launch vehicle and services. NASA would also provide one experiment, tracking, and backup for data acquisition, bmft was responsible for development of spacecraft and instrumentation operation and control of the satellite after launch, and data reduction and analysis except for the gsfc experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. (nasa mors, 30 Nov 72, 8 & 29 July 74; NASA Releases 69-91, 74-183; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 75) The 1969 launch of Apollo 11 was commemorated 16 July by ceremonies at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. At 9:32 am edt, the moment of launch, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., unveiled a plaque designating the site a National Historical Landmark. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the thousands of guests: “No matter our achievements, ... we cannot relax our pursuit of knowledge, for we must face the coming crises of our time. Every effort must be made to see that the opportunity which our technology presents is not lost. We may be sure that the opportunity will not occur soon again, if ever. To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources— a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no return.” Unless “we continuously restore the fund of basic knowledge, we shall ultimately exhaust it. . . . “Some day we will establish scientific outposts on the Moon, and even tap its mineral resources. And in the not-too-distant future astronauts may tread the surface of Mars and the glaciers of the moons of Jupiter in search of extraterrestrial life. . . . The future began here at 9:32 a.m. on July 16, 1969. At that moment on July 16 in the year 2069, launch windows to Mars, Neptune, and Pluto will be open. Will we fly through those windows? I think we will.” In 19 July ceremonies at the San Clemente, Calif., Western White House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names of each astronaut who had represented “this country in a flight above the surface of the Earth.” President Nixon told Armstrong the greatest contribution to the space program was not the exploration or technology but the “spirit you and your colleagues . . . have had the opportunity to demonstrate.” The Smithsonian Institution hosted 20 July activities marking the day of the landing. Speaking on the Mall in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks said Apollo 11 had been a “dramatic demonstration . . . that progress in human affairs does not spring full blown from the efforts of one man or group of men. What we saw was the culmination of the efforts of hundreds of scientists and engineers from Leonardo da Vinci ... to the Apollo 11 astronauts. Each built on what his predecessors had accomplished until the accumulation of knowledge made possible the kind of quantum leap forward represented by the Apollo Program.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, called the day of the landing “the day man ended an era of one-planet civilization and began a new age as traveler and colonizer of the universe.” Despite difficulties, men would “make more of these steps into the vast but exciting reaches of the solar system.” A 21 July service at the Washington Cathedral in Washington, D.C., dedicated the Space Window donated by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator at the time of the landing. The window, designed by Rodney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory, representing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. During the ceremony, Armstrong presented a 7.18-g, 3.6-billion-yr-old lunar rock, brought from the moon by Apollo 11, to the Cathedral. The rock would be inserted into a hydrogen-filled plexiglass container embedded as the centerpiece of the window. (PD, 22 July 74, 815; NASA Activities, 15 Aug 74, 5-14; transcript; program)

January 31, 1961
An eight-engine static test firing of the Saturn test booster (SA-Tl) for 113 seconds was completed at Marshall Space Flight Center. During January: International Committee on Geophysics, successor organization to the IGY, meeting in Paris, endorsed proposal for Quiet Sun Year during 1964-65. (IGY had been selected for its intense sunspot activity.)

August 23, 1961
Saturn H-l engine drop-tested into salt water at Cape Canaveral, then returned to Marshall Space Flight Center for inspecting, cleaning, and static firing.

May 4, 1977
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded to the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti., a contract modification for additional work and services to the Space Shuttle main engine program, covering long leadtime hardware and material procurement to provide follow-on engines. Each engine, designed for use up to 50 times before overhaul, would be capable of 1 668 075 newtons (375K lb) of thrust at sea level and 2 090 654 newtons (470K lb) at altitude. (MSFC Release 77-78)

April 16, 1976
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of 2 contracts totaling $486 388 for fabrication and installation of 2 test towers to be used in structural load tests of the Space Shuttle external tank. One contract, awarded to the Lucey Boiler Co. of Chattanooga for $344 660, was for pickup from MSFC of government-furnished construction materials and fabrication and delivery by July 1976 of all sections and components of the towers. The other contract, awarded to Teledyne Brown Engineering of Huntsville for $141 728, was for installation of the towers by 30 Sept. (MSFC Release 76-69)

May 1, 1990
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, awarded Jackson and Tull of Washington, D.C. a $19 million contract to support the Applied Engineering Division in automation and robotics and thermal and data systems. The firm was selected under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act; the potential for the contract over a fiveyear period was $63 million. (NASA Release C90q)

June 4, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of Bendix Corp. Guidance Systems Div. for negotiations leading to a contract for integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of assemblies and assorted test equipment for the first 6 Shuttle flights. The initial contract would call for 33 units, including flight articles, spares, and development and test versions, with delivery to begin in 1976. Each solid rocket booster would have two assembly units, one forward and one aft. Ignition commands would route from the Orbiter through the aft assembly to the forward assembly. During launch, the aft assembly would route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system. The forward assembly would release the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid rocket nozzle, detach the parachutes from the solid rocket booster, and turn on recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—106)

December 3, 1964
Eighteen top business leaders accompanied by NASA officials toured NASA Michoud Operations as part of a Life magazine-sponsored visit of space facilities across the country. They were briefed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, and Dr. G. N. Constan, Michoud manager. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/4/64)

October 27, 1961
Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corp. launched Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station with 60-pound payload that reached 90-mile altitude in a study of electron density and temperature in the upper level of the atmosphere.

November 28, 1962
Rodney D. Steward was named RL-10 rocket engine program manager at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Steward replaced William D. Brown, who resumed full-time duties as deputy chief, Engine Management Office, msfc.

March 16, 1962
First anniversary of the dedication of the Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa. During that year, seven Goddard satellites were orbited, the Center successfully operated the new 18-station world tracking network for the Glenn flight, began expansion of the 13-station scientific satellite tracking and data network, saw some 70 of its sounding rocket payloads launched from Wallops Station, established the Institute for Space Studies in New York, and added three buildings and 700 persons to the Goddard staff.

August 22, 1962
U.S. District Judge Clarence W. Allgood ordered striking electricians back to work at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. President of the afl-cio International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Gordon Freeman, also directed the workers to return to their jobs.

July 5, 1990
The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of Investigation created by NASA met for the first time in Washington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for the telescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allen said, "The board now has a good base of information from which to0*proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)

January 1, 1973
The Air Force announced issuance of a $1 358 695, firm-fixed-price contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for special tooling for F-4 jet fighter aircraft, (dod Release 20-73) January 10—12:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 11th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in Washington, D.C. The Dry-den Research Award winner for 1973, Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Laboratory Space Sciences Div., delivered the Dryden Lecture “High Energy Astronomy.” The lecture, which carried $1000 honorarium, had been named in 1967 in honor of the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first nasa Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. Dr. Friedman said high-energy astronomy was “almost exclusively the subject of space research.” X-ray astronomy to date had revealed about 125 discrete sources and a “diffuse background which spans the energy range from 100 ev to tens of Mev.” X-ray sources revealed included supernova remnants, pulsars, and binary systems in the galaxy. Extragalactic sources included radio galaxies, quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and clusters of galaxies. Gamma ray astronomy had shown “no evidence for antimatter within the universe.” (Program; Text) A committee established by aiaa to evaluate NASA’s space shuttle program reported its conclusion that a shuttle system, including both manned and unmanned flight, ought to be built. The committee recommended a research and applications module system with interchangeable modules that could be removed in space to become part of an orbiting laboratory. Other nations should be encouraged to participate in shuttle development, the committee said. (Tech Rev, 5/73, 55) Advanced applications of the shuttle were discussed by J. E. Blahnik of Science Applications, Inc., and D. R. Davis of ITT Research Institute. An exploratory study had concluded that use of the shuttle orbiter for advanced, manned, high-energy missions from low earth orbit should be competitive with other proposed concepts, if orbital and refueling requirements were satisfied by using normal shuttle missions to deliver propellant in addition to their payload. (Program) January 10—13:	The American Astronomical Society met in Las Cruces, N. Mex. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. Robert Howard said six-year observations through the 46-m (150-ft) solar telescope at Mt. Wilson Observatory had shown sections of the sun’s outer atmosphere to be in motion with respect to time. Movements had extended to 259 000 sq km (100 000 sq mi) of photosphere—the sun’s gassy surface—and had appeared to be east-west or west-east. Some motions had been calculated at 6257 km per hr (3888 mph) ; others, at 7300 km per hr (4536 mph). Cause and significance of the motion were unknown. At a press interview Dr. John C. Brandt, chief of the Goddard Space Flight Center Solar Physics Laboratory, said Indians in New Mexico, Arizona, and California nine centuries ago might have recorded a star explosion. Drawings on walls and ceilings of a cave at Chaco Canyon National Monument, N. Mex., closely resembled an explosion of July 4, 1054, as recorded by the Chinese. Similar drawings had been found in Arizona and California. (Alexander, LA Times, 1/11/73; AP, W Post, 1/14/73, A13) January 11:	Cosmos 543 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 309-km (192.0-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 24. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; SBD, 1/12/73, 54)

July 23, 1985
In its postlaunch report dated July 23, 1986, NASA announced that it had launched on September 9, 1980, GOES-D (subsequently designated GOES-4) from KSC by a Delta 3914 launch vehicle. The GOES (Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite) satellites provided near-continuous high-quality day and night observations of earth and its environment, including cloud cover; weather; proton, electron, and solar X-ray fluxes; and magnetic fields. During placement of GOES-4 and its apogee boost motor (ABM) into transfer orbit, NASA observed lower than expected temperatures for the ABM and decided to fire the motor at second apogee in lieu of the nominal third apogee. Performance of the ABM was nominal and resulted in placement of the spacecraft in desired drift orbit. GOES-4 arrived September 20, 1980, on-station at the 98° west longitude checkout position. On February 26, 1981, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) moved GOES-4 to the GOES-west operational position at 135° west longitude, replacing the ailing GOES-3 spacecraft. NASA modified the ABM thermal design for follow-on spacecraft to avoid recurrence of the low temperature problem. On May 22, 1981, NASA launched GOES-E (subsequently designated GOES-5) from KSC on the Delta 3914. Spacecraft performance during transfer orbit maneuvers was nominal, and NASA fired the ABM on the third apogee of the transfer orbit. GOES-5 arrived on-station June 5, 1981, at the predetermined checkout position of 85° west longitude. On August 5, 1981, NOAA placed GOES-5 at 75° west longitude where it became the operational GOES-east satellite. An additional mission objective for both GOES-4 and 5 was demonstration and assessment of the temperature and moisture soundings from the VISSR Atmospheric Sounder (VAS); Goddard Space Flight Center initiated a VAS demonstration project to achieve this objective. In 1981 the VAS demonstration project conducted a ground truth field experiment that provided four days of simultaneous, high-density ground-based observations and satellite data. This data showed VAS to be a versatile and valuable instrument with potential applications beyond the severe local storm discipline. Some of these additional areas included hurricane and tropical cyclone research, cloud climatology, and diagnosis of moisture patterns and upper-air circulation. As a result of the VAS demonstration project, NOAA made provision for geosynchronous soundings a requirement for the next generation of GOES satellites. Under a 1973 basic agreement, NASA had the responsibility under NOAA reimbursable funding to design, engineer, procure, and launch polar and geosynchronous weather satellites to implement the U.S.'s operational meteorological satellite program. After on-orbit checkout, NASA handed over the spacecraft to NOAA for routine operations. (NASA MOR E-612-80-02 [postlaunch] July 23/85, E-612-81-03 [postlaunch] July 23/85)

July 21, 1965
Hopper,” a versatile rocket-propelled Lunar Flying Vehicle (Lfv) to transport Apollo astronauts on exploration flights of the moon’s surface, had been designed by Bell Aerosystems Co. as a result of a 12-month study conducted for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Bell announced. The 400-lb., four-legged, rectangular Lfv would be desk size and propelled by a cluster of five 100-lb-thrust rocket engines; it could fly 50 mi. nonstop. Bell also disclosed receipt of a $489,898 follow-on nasa contract to design a Manned Flying System (Mfs) capable of carrying one astronaut-scientist and 300 lbs. of equipment or two astronauts. Intended primarily as an exploratory device, the Mfs would be able to fly 15 mi. round trip without fueling. (Bell Aerosystems Co. Release)

September 13, 1973
nasa launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)

October 4, 1964
NASA explorer xxi scientific earth satellite (imp b) was launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy with a Thor-Delta rocket booster. Onboard instrumentation was working excellently, but the satellite’s orbit (59,400-mi. apogee; 120-mi. perigee; 34-hr., 57-min. period; 33°53' inclination to the equator) fell far short of the intended deep-space path which would have enabled the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform to measure magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and solar winds in interplanetary space. Planned apogee was 161,000 mi. Robert H. Gray, Director of Goddard Launch Operations, said minimum apogee required for mission success was about 97,750 mi. As in launch of explorer xviii (imf a), the Delta rocket used higher-thrust third-stage motor, the X—258, to give the satellite its final boost into orbital injection. Preliminary tracking data indicated this stage had not provided the required thrust. Designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xxi contained nine experiments. Five of these were provided by GSFC researchers and four by experimenters at Univ. of Chicago, Univ. of California, NASA Ames Research Center, and mit respectively. (nasa Release 64-242; AP, Balt. Sun, 10/5/64; upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64; M&R, 10/12/64, 24)

April 8, 1974
An omnidirectional wheel that could change a vehicle’s direction of movement without changing the direction it was facing had been developed by Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Josef F. Blumrich, MSEC announced. The rim of the wheel consisted of several barrel-shaped segments that rotated independently when in contact with the ground. The wheel, which would be strong enough to negotiate rough terrain, could be used on a planetary explorer vehicle or on wheelchairs, (msfc Release 74-53) _

May 20, 1994
NASA announced that it had assumed the satellite-development contract for Landsat 7 from the Department of Defense. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was to manage the contract with Martin Marietta Astro Space, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Landsat 7 was to provide essential land remote-sensing data critical to understanding environmental change. (NASA Release 94-78)

February 3, 1975
A 9.6-gram finely powdered lunar sample arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center where scientists would measure in a vacuum the sample’s thermal conductivity, a fundamental property governing heat flow through the surface of the moon. The data, correlated with data obtained from previous studies on simulated lunar samples, would be used to develop a thermophysical model of the moon, helping scientists better to understand the moon’s origin, history, and relationship to the earth. (MSFC Release 75—41)

July 11, 1973
Janet Lee, 17-yr-old representative of the Republic of China (Taiwan) on the December 1972 NASA-conducted International Youth Science Tour of America, had written to tour coordinator Mrs. Lillian Levy saying she could sometimes see Skylab “flying over my head like a little sparkling star in the evening,” NASA Activities reported. Mrs. Levy also had heard from tour participant Karl Muller of Mbabane, Swaziland: “It is very pleasing to see that Swaziland is enlisting the aid of satellites in agriculture. The idea of using satellites for detecting forest fires is particularly interesting, since Swaziland has the world’s largest man-made forest.” (NASA Activities, 7/15/73, 116) July 16:	itos-e Improved Tiros Operational Satellite, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, failed to reach orbit after a 10:10 am pdt liftoff from Western Test Range on a two-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Early flight data indicated that abrupt cessation of the hydraulic pump output 270 sec after 2nd-stage ignition had caused loss of hydraulic pressure and thrust vector control. The spacecraft tumbled and failed to achieve orbital velocity. Investigation was begun immediately at Goddard Space Flight Center. The meteorological spacecraft had been intended for sun-synchronous orbit to make day and night cloud-cover observations, to make continuous observations of weather features from its synchronous altitude, and to obtain global-scale quantitative measurements of the earth’s atmospheric structure. ITOS-E, which was to have been christened Noaa 3, was the fourth spacecraft in a series of second-generation meteorological satellites. Noaa 1 (itos-a) was launched Dec. 11, 1970, and was operational for nine months. ITOS—B was launched Oct. 21, 1971, but did not achieve orbit because of a Delta 2nd-stage failure. Noaa 2 (itos-d) was launched successfully Oct. 15, 1972, and had been NOAA’s primary operational spacecraft. (NASA prog off)

September 18, 1995
Childbirth is expected to be made safer and easier with the space-age forceps being developed by Marshall Space Flight Center with the Collins Clinic in Slidell, Louisiana. Using space program instrumentation technology, fiber optic sensors in the forceps will enable the physician to monitor forces on the infant throughout the delivery. The use of composite materials will help ensure a safer distribution of pressure on the infant. Additionally, the instrumented forceps will allow obstetrical students to learn to use forceps within safe limits before entering practice. (NASA Release 95-153)

February 15, 1964
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in press conference preceding address at Texas a&m Univ. that a geologist would be in crew of second Apollo lunar landing mission. Geologists probably would be sought when NASA recruited astronaut trainees for subsequent Apollo lunar flights. In his address, Dr. von Braun advised that U.S. must protect itself from any hostile force that attempts to “use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64; Houston Chron., 2/16/64)

July 9, 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for 356 aluminum hand forgings for Space Shuttle solid-rocket boosters. A $465 935 contract went to Aluminum Co. of America and $62 900 went to Weber Metals & Supply Co. for forward-skirt thrust post fittings, inboard aft-skirt actuator support brackets, aft-skirt splice fittings, and aft-skirt holddown posts. (MSFC Release 75—151)

November 21, 1972
Marshall Space Flight Center announced issuance of requests for proposals on space tug systems. Tug—space shuttle 3rd stage—would extend capability of shuttle booster and orbital stages by adding propulsion for higher orbit. Propulsion would be provided by temporary use of existing rocket stage adapted for launch from shuttle cargo bay or by use of interim tug. Studies of rocket stage use were under way. rfps had been issued for possible interim tug development. Three $750 000 contracts would be awarded—two for work on cryogenic tug using liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants and one for study of tug using storable propellants. Proposals were due Dec. 22, with contracts to be awarded during first quarter of 1973. Air Force would assist in funding cryogenic tug studies and in selection of contractors and study management. Interim tug would be developed for use in space shuttle’s first flight scheduled for late 1970s. (msfc Release 72-155)

March 1, 1965
Louis Walter, geochemist at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that of the 400 specimens received from “Operation Moon Harvest” none analyzed was a meteor or other non-earth fragment. It had been theorized that because of the low gravity of the moon, meteoroids striking the moon might dislodge fragments which would be attracted by earth’s gravity, and that analysis of the fragments would provide important clues to composition of the moon.	(Des Moines Register,

October 6, 1973
The Nippon Electric Co. of Tokyo had won a contract to design and install the antenna and communications equipment for the first Swiss communications satellite station, the New York Times reported. The station was being built above the Rhone Valley in the Valais canton. (Lusinchi, NYT, 10/6/73) October 7—13:	The International Astronautical Federation (iaf) held its 24th Congress in Baku, U.S.S.R. In a message of greeting, the Soviet Council of Ministers said: “Nowadays, when important positive changes take place in international situations, ever more favourable opportunities for development of scientific communication, exchange of experience and uses of scientific achievements for practical needs of mankind open to scientists.” Academician Sergey Vernov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said Soviet artificial satellites, placed simultaneously in different orbits, had facilitated studies of many regions of earth’s radiation belts, including those where no space station had been before. He hypothesized the existence of an “unstable radiation zone” beyond the outer radiation belt where Soviet Electron satellites had recorded a flux of electrons with energies over 150 000 ev. He believed the zone to be a necessary link in the formation of the earth’s radiation belts. Honorary guests Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander, and Soviet Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy, Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, and Vladimir A. Shatalov participated in an open discussion. Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. could be good and equal partners in conquering space. Stafford said cooperation in astp had already solved colossal technical problems. “And if we can solve problems in space we can, consequently, solve considerable problems on earth.” Soviet scientists reported on a man-plant interaction experiment in which four researchers spent six months in a closed biological environment simulating the earth’s biosphere. The Siberian test project, sponsored by the Krasnoyarsk Institute of Physics, had demonstrated that man could live in an artificial atmosphere created by green algae, fastgrowing wheat, and a variety of vegetables. The plants had been irrigated with sewage waste and with condensed moisture from the atmosphere. The researchers had breathed oxygen released by the plants, eaten the vegetables, and baked bread from the wheat during a simulated space trip in an underground chamber. A paper by Soviet specialists reported that an electric field might divert a flux of charged particles from a spacecraft. The spacecraft’s exterior surface might act as one of the field’s electrodes while the vacuum of outer space acted as an insulating medium, providing an effective radiation shield. Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Marshall Space Flight Center Associate Director for Science, cochaired two sessions on scientific spacecraft systems. The 7th International History of Astronautics Symposium included the papers “From Back Fire to Explorer I” by Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, Kennedy Space Center; “R. H. Goddard: Accomplishments of the Roswell Years (1930-1941)” by Frederick C. Durant III, Assistant Director for Astronautics, National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution; “High Energy Propulsion at naca Lewis Engine Research Laboratory” by John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; and “Early Photography from Rockets” by Frank H. Winter of the Air and Space Museum. Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Johnson Space Center Director of Engineering and Development, received the 1973 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for “playing a major role in developing the basic ideas and original design concepts that have been incorporated into all the manned spacecraft flown by the United States. . . . An expert on vehicles suitable for reentering the Earth’s atmosphere, he is particularly noted for his contributions to the basic configuration of the command module and to the development of the pressure-fed hypergolic engines used on the Apollo modules.” The meeting, attended by 1500 scientists from 29 countries, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper, Director of the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, iaf President. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/8/73; msfc Release 73-137; nasa Release 73-200; nasa Hist Off; Agence France-Presse, W Post, 10/12/73, A30) October 8:	Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists began to measure stratospheric constituents up to 24 km (80 000 ft) using a Fourier interferometer aboard the British prototype of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft. Eight scheduled flights from Fairford, England, sponsored by the U.S. Dept, of Transportation, were to obtain information on the potential pollution effect of supersonic transports on the atmosphere. In earlier flights the interferometer had detected nitric oxide between 12 and 24 km (39 000 and 80 000 ft) at less than one part per billion. Nitric oxide was believed to be vital in maintaining ozone balance in the stratosphere, (jpl Release 670; JPL pio)

