First full-scale research model of an inflatable space station was displayed at nasa Lewis Research Center. Developed by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for nasa, the doughnut-shaped, three-story-high structure was made of rubberized fabric and equipped to accommodate three to ten astronauts.
nasa management meeting held to brief key officials on a manned space station program and to discuss possible FY 1964 funding.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing the Air Force Association in Las Vegas, said: “The United States, in keeping with our motivations in freedom and peace, has embarked upon a space program aimed at peace building, constructive exploitation of space—second to none. “In the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the nation has mobilized an effort unprecedented in history, nasa is making progress, because it has imaginative leadership, a competent staff, extensive facilities, and wholehearted support from all elements of industry and government which can contribute, especially the Air Force. “In addition to our contribution to the success of the nasa program, the Air Force is required by its own mission to put its energies into a different kind of space effort. We are reaching a clearer definition of that mission as it relates to space. . . . “The United States is dedicated as a matter of national policy to the peaceful exploitation of the space medium. The United States does not intend to extend the arms race into space. “We are, however, taking the step to enable us to protect ourselves in the event the Soviets or any other nation were to undertake missions in space that would endanger our security. . .. “The dual-vehicle orbital experiment of the Soviets, when coupled with their previous claims, seems to indicate that the need for protection against possible threats to our security will be in the near orbital stage of space, rather than farther out. One possible instrument of security that might be useful at this level in space may be found in extending the X-15 and X-20 technology, leading to craft which could operate from surface to orbit and back, and perform defense missions at the edge of the atmosphere. Another might be the permanently manned orbital space station designed for military purposes. Progress toward utilization of such a vehicle for security and protection would be speeded by capitalizing upon the nasa program to acquire knowledge and competence in manned orbital flight. . . . “These are the principles on which Air Force space program must be based: (a) Ample preparation to utilize the space medium; (b) Ample preparation to defend ourselves in case others choose to extend the threat of aggression to outer space; (c) Concentration on the really important tasks, including today’s job and not just tomorrow’s, and finally, (d) An organizationally disciplined space program—well planned and specific—which fits into overall national plans and objectives. “We in America have no choice but to extend our defenses as far as they need to be extended to save freedom on earth. . . .”
In meeting at nasa Langley Research Center, Langley and msc personnel presented reports on space station studies to officials from nasa Hq. and other interested agencies.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in first annual Theodore von K arm an Lecture of the American Rocket Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include the development of a [manned] space station now without still larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally believe that the next large manned space flight project [after Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth. “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather arbitrary subdivisions of our program will coalesce, for the manned space station wlli be useful for both manned and unmanned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .”
Decision on whether nasa or usaf would be assigned development of orbital space stations was reported in process within the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
nasa announced selection of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to build lunar excursion module (lem) of the three-man Apollo spacecraft. In announcing the selection, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We are affirming our tentative decision of last July . . . using lunar orbit rendezvous as the prime mission mode to accomplish initial manned lunar flight. . . . Studies [of alternate approaches], now completed, along with a great deal of related analyses . . . during the intervening months, make us confident that our present course is the proper one.” D. Brainerd Holmes, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa and Director of Manned Space Flight added that more than 1,000,000 man-hours of some 700 scientists, engineers, and researchers had been devoted to studies of the Apollo mission. “. . . The results of these studies added up to the conclusion that lunar orbit rendezvous is the preferable mode to undertake.” Apollo lunar spacecraft will be composed of command module, service module, and lunar excursion module.
Aerojet-General Corp. reported first successful firing of development engine for Apollo spacecraft’s service module, full-scale prototype engine with ablative thrust chamber assembly fired for checkout runs up to 50 sec.
First details of an orbital space station underjfeasibility study, one shaped like a doughnut and inflated once in orbit, revealed at Langley Research Center. Design of space stations had begun in November 1960 at Langley. Paul Hill, chief of the Applied Materials and Physics Division, stated that structures were now under study which could hold from four to thirty people.
Tropical storm developed 420 mi. east of Puerto Rico, traveling on path that would cross impact area for Astronaut Schirra’s third orbit, nasa flight officials were closely watching the storm to determine whether it would necessitate postponing Schirra’s MA-8 flight scheduled for Oct. 3. During September: Conclusion that wheel-shaped space station was technically feasible and identification of problems that still exist were revealed in nasa Technical Note D-1504, compilation of 11 papers by nasa Langley Research Center staff. Selection of this 150-ft.-diameter, 171,000-lb. structure was result of studies by Langley for more than 2 years and detailed analyses by North American Aviation, Inc., for past 6 months. The report indicated the space station primarily would provide a means of learning to live in space, where zero-gravity and variable-gravity experiments could be performed, closed life-support systems could be qualified, and rendezvous techniques and systems developed. Chosen model could support up to 38-man crew.
