Under Secretary of the Air Force Brockway McMillan said in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Our assessment of the nasa programs in the light of your questions has strengthened our conviction that the potential joint value of the nasa and Defense Department programs can be more fully realized by closer collaboration in the early conceptual phases, to insure that the objectives of each agency are clearly recognized at each successive stage of program evolution. Our point is illustrated by recent experience in developing experiments to be sponsored by the Defense Department on the Gemini flights. Although the concerted joint effort, under the guidance of the Gemini program planning board, has been fruitful, it has become obvious that an earlier beginning of intensive collaboration might well have allowed greater results. Looking to the future, we hope to apply this lesson in the establishment of an orbital space station program. We view a space station as an essential preliminary to an operational space defense system, and as a valuable source of experience which will apply to nasa objectives. As this program is in the early conceptual phase, we think it possible to begin now to fully exploit its high potential to serve both civilian and military needs. As you know, the Defense Department has proposed to nasa that there be collaboration in studies leading to the definition of the space station program. . . .” (Letter, CR, 8/9/63,13900)
At 39th annual joint meeting of Virginia Engineering and Technical Societies Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of Langley Research Center, announced that whenever the U.S. decided to go ahead with a manned orbiting laboratory, Lane would be ready. “Although there is no nasa approved flight project for a manned space station at the present time, Langley will be in a position through its studies to provide many of the answers to design and operational problems when such a program is given the go signal.” (Newport News Daily Press, 6/22/63)
Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Cdr. of afssd, reported to ias that AF Systems Command considered three fundamental projects as “space programs of prime military necessity: rendezvous and inspection, space station development, and communications satellites.” (Av. IF*., 1/28/63,26f) 741-623 O—64-3 Chemist Harold C. Urey said that only about three per cent (about $15 billion) of this country’s gnp was spent on education, and that amount “should be doubled.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/24/63, A4)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced signing of definitive contract valued at $7,658,000 with Kollsman Instrument Corp. for guidance and navigation equipment for Apollo spacecraft’s command and service module, (msc Release 63-147)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Director of White House Office of Science and Technology, testified before the House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development on the nasa-dod agreement on joint study and recommendations on National Orbital Space Station (noss) : “We have finally made a good start. Now, we are going in the right direction.” He also said that mucb of nasa’s r&d was work that dod would have to do for itself if not done by nasa, that dod’s r&d budget was leveling off and would continue to do so because the U.S. was no longer behind U.S.S.R. in weapon systems such as the icbm. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/25/63, 145)
usaf announced issuing Requests for Proposals for studies of manned orbital space station. From the bidding industries usaf will select three contractors to conduct parallel four-month studies “to define characteristics from which a space station could be designed to demonstrate and assess quantitatively the utility of man in space for military purposes.” (dod Release 1261-63)
Houston Chronicle reported nasa Manned Spacecraft Center was planning 30-man space station that could stay in orbit for five years; msc had solicited contractors’ proposals for electrical power system capable of producing 40,000 watts. (Houston Chron. in upi. Boston Sunday Advertiser, 1/13/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $100,000 contract to Boeing Co. for six-month study of logistics spacecraft to be used for ferrying men and equipment to and from orbiting space station. Studies would be of two wingless lifting bodies: M-2, developed by nasa Ames Research Center, and HL-10, originated at nasa Langley Research Center, (msc Space News Roundup, 7/24/63, 8)
Dr. James E. Roberts, usaf scientist, told aerospace medicine conference at sam that permanent five-man space station could be established “in the late 1965 or early 1966 time period.” Such a station, called “Mark I,” could be placed in orbit by Saturn I or Titan III vehicle, he said. Mark II station, three times as big as Mark I, could replace the initial station by the end of the decade. The space stations discussed by Dr. Roberts would be primarily for scientific and engineering research. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/63, A3)
usaf fired Minuteman icbm from underground silo at Vandenberg afb “with complete success,” fourth successful firing of Minute-man from West Coast in past four weeks, (dod Release 616-63; upi, Wash. Post, 5/1/63) During April: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center issued requests for proposals for preliminary study contracts on (1) rotating manned space station to house 18 crewmen; (2) non-rotating, zero-gravity station to house 25-30 crewmen; (3) reusable logistics vehicle. (M&R, 4/29/63, 18)	_
Georg von Tiesenhausen, chief of future studies for nasa Launch Operations Center, told ias meeting in New York that by 1970 U.S. would need an orbiting space station to launch and repair spacecraft; space station could double as a manned scientific laboratory. Describing station 300-ft. long and 33-ft. in diameter, von Tiesenhausen said it could be launched in two sections by Saturn C-5 vehicles and joined together in space rendezvous. (L.A. Herald-Examiner, 1/22/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center proposal to establish manned orbital space station which stressed that such a station and associated equipment could be established using rockets, equipment, and materials under development now for Project Apollo. Plan called for (1) orbiting space station with capacity for 18 crewmen; (2) sending six men in adapted Apollo-type spacecraft to board the orbiting station; and (3) sending two more such crews within a month of each other to staff the station, docking the shuttle spacecraft at the station’s three arms. Report said space station would be a national laboratory for studv of space. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/2/63)	'	_	_
General Electric Co. said four men would spend one month inside full-scale model of space station at GE’s Space Technology Center, in test of man’s reactions and performance in simulated space-flight conditions. Experiment would begin in September. (AP, NYT, 7/8/63,25)
National Aeronautics and Space Council considered nasa-dod coordination in Project Gemini and space stations. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, nasc Chairman, said after the meeting: “Coordination is a natural and effective enemy of duplication .... I am encouraged by the coordination already being exhibited between these two agencies in these important fields, but continuing attention is required if this country is to fulfill its destiny as the leading space-faring nation.” (nasc Release)
Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, chief Soviet space scientist, quoted as saying he “believes” that by 1968 there would be 100-ton space stations and an automatic scientific station on the moon. {Space Bus. Daily, 12/16/63, 400)
Design for 216-ft. nuclear-powered space station had been awarded patent by U.S. Patent Office, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. announced. Invented by S. B. Kramer and E. H. Visscher of Lockheed, prefabricated station would be assembled in orbit from cylindrical and spherical subsections. Lockheed said it would be useful as a manned space station and observation platform. (NYT, 4/9/63,10)
Project Mercury officially ended. Initiated in autumn of 1958, Mercury had achieved its goal of placing manned spacecraft, in orbital flight around earth, investigating man’s survival ability and performance capabilities in space, and recovering man and spacecraft. Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights paved the way toward ultimate goal, with Astronaut Alan B. Shepard becoming first U.S. man in space in freedom 7 (May 5, 1961), followed by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom in liberty bell 7 (July 21,1961). First U.S. manned orbital space flight was achieved with Mercury-Atlas MA-6 flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn in friendship 7 (Feb. 20, 1962). This three-orbit space flight was followed by: MA-7, three-orbit flight of Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter in aurora 7 (May 24, 1962); MA-8, six-orbit flight of Astronaut Walter Schirra in sigma 7 (Oct. 3, 1962); and MA-9, 22-orbit space flight of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in faith 7 (May 15-16, 1963). Project Mercuiy logged 34 orbits of manned space flight with 52 hrs. 23 min. of flight tune. Jwne 12: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of six-month study contract to Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for establishment of environmental control and life support requirements for manned earth-orbiting space station. Duration of 24-man station would be from one to five years, (msc Release 63-100)
Five men entered Boeing Co. space chamber, simulating quarters in manned space station or manned lunar base, for 30-day engineering test of integrated life-support system. Designed and built for nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, system included all elements of life support necessary for 150 man-day space mission. Associated with life-support equipment were specific crew tests simulating problems of space flight. Members of test crew: R. H. Lowry, Boeing Chief of Bioastronautics; Maj. Edward Westlake (usaf) of Air Force Systems Cmd.; Roger Barnicki, nasa Flight Research Center X-15 personnel equipment specialist; Charles Proctor, Boeing biochemist and food specialist; and Richard Farrell, Boeing psychologist. ( nasa Release 63-155)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $30,500 contract to Whirlpool Corp. for design and development of feeding system for four astronauts for long periods of time, first hardware fabrication for space station simulation facility. (M&R, 9/9/63, 9)
Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by International Academy of Astronautics to succeed the late Dr. Theodore von Karman as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Director since 1961. (iaa Release No. 14) During May: Paul D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, permanent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,” replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and because, being much closer, we can send back information and samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space station, the moon has the advantage of providing a large, stable platform with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a stratigraphic record of its history and of meteoritic material which has accumulated on it. These advantages are in a sense a one-way street. We can make many of the observations proposed for the space station from the moon as well, because the moon has essentially a space environment. But we cannot examine the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release) During May: nasa awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of F-l engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which had initiated F-l development. {M&R, 5/6/63,13)
President Johnson’s active leadership in space program since early 1958 was reviewed in Missiles and Rockets by Hal Taylor, who predicted the new President would give the space program even greater support than did President Kennedy. Added support could mean growth of military space projects, Taylor said, possibly including assignment of manned space station development to usaf. But FY 1965 budget estimates would be virtually unchanged. Article in Aviation Week and Space Technology indicated President Johnson was likely to “play a more direct role than his predecessor in the nation’s military space and supersonic transport programs after the current transitional period, during which the emphasis is on showing the nation and the world that President Kennedy’s commitments will be fulfilled.” (M&R, 12/2/63,14-15; Av. Wk., 12/2/63,26-27)
Plans for modular Mars spacecraft as presented by D. M. Hammock, Assistant Chief of Spacecraft Technology Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, were described in Missiles and Rockets. Six-man crew would undertake 400-day expedition to Mars in three-module spacecraft—Mars mission module, Mars excursion module, and earth entiy module. Hammock said nasa was evaluating merits of manned space stations, permanent lunar bases, and Mars expedition as follow-on to Project Apollo, and that technology needed for Mars spacecraft would be simpler in many ways than that required for lunar base or space station. (M&R, 5/13/63,34)
Proposed nasa-usn program of high-altitude, long-duration balloon flights was outlined m Missiles and Rockets. Pending dod approval, program would be conducted by nasa oart and usn BuWeps and would call for three types of flights: three-man, three-day flight using basic gondola and existing balloon of 10-million-cu.-ft. class; 14-day flight, possibly with larger crew and expanded equipment; and 30-day nights with six- or seven-man crew. Program objectives: to check out space station equipment and components and to study biomedical and psychological factors. (M&R, 5/27/63,18)
A working experimental model of a one-man space scooter was successfully flight-tested at naa’s Space and Information Division. The jet-powered platform was designed by Jack Bell, director of Lunar and Planetary Systems, who made the first flight, and John W. Sandford, research specialist in Advanced Systems. According to Bell, “precision control of platforms can be learned in a few minutes’ flight time.” The vehicle hovers, rotates, or moves in any direction desired. An extremely versatile piece of equipment, the lunar scooter could permit moon explorers to traverse flat, rough terrain where walking is difficult and where surface vehicles would stall; as a “crater hopper,” it would permit a space-suited moon explorer to span or descend into fissures or crevasses; as a “lunescape climber,” it would serve as a vehicle to scale steep cliffs. As a “shuttle bus,” it would transport crew members between orbiting space vehicles, or it might be used to support man in assembling advanced space stations in earth orbit. Finally, its potential for use in military maneuvers on earth is considerable, (said Skywriter, 6/28/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced two types of orbital manned space stations would be studied to compare concepts for 24-man operational station—one concept by Lockheed Co. California Div. and the other by Douglas Aircraft Missiles and Space Systems Div. Each station would be designed to remain in orbit at 200- to 300-mi. altitude for about three years, with resupply and crew changes every three months. {L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 7/6/63)
Dr. L. R. Shepherd, President of British Interplanetary Society, urged European Space Research Organization (esro) and European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) combine to form a European space agency to “develop the technology and logistics of an economically viable space transportation system.” Suggesting it would be wasting time and money for Europe to attempt to duplicate U.S. communications satellite systems, he said European agency should concentrate on advancement of transportation techniques—including construction of orbital stations and establishment of lunar base capable of constructing and supplying space vehicles. (Wilcke, NYT, 5/22/63, 37; M&R, 5/27/63,14-15) Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau, Special Assistant for Space, dod ddr&e, said: “None of us harbors any illusions about the expense of developing and operating military space systems. Any and all military efforts in tins field will be costly. Of the two, development costs may well prove to be the relatively minor one. Building and supporting an operational military space force may involve costs far out-distancing the investment in its research and development. Military mission capabilities in space will not ipso facto evolve merely 'because we are able to attain an experimental capability in the medium. The fundamental point here is that military needs, by definition, require the capacity to conduct reliable repetitive space operations .... “One of the important aspects of the [nasa-dod] Gemini agreement is the stipulation that neither agency will initiate any major new programs or projects in the field of near-earth orbit manned space flight without the consent of the other. That paragraph was inserted for a specific purpose. The concept of a Manned Orbital Space Station, Manned Orbital Development System, or similar names by which such a facility has been called has been proposed and considered in the Department of Defense for at least five years ... a limited space station project need not represent a national commitment as far-reaching and as large in scope as the manned lunar landing program. It Should, nevertheless, require a national, rather than a single agency decision, to get it under way. There is no question that, if a decision is made to proceed, the Department of Defense should be a full partner in this enterprise all the way, and may even qualify for management of the national project to satisfy both nasa and dod needs. This, of course, requires a Presidential decision if and when the project is approved.” (Text, dod Release 718-63) Col. James W. Little, Director of Pilot Training, usaf Air Training Command, said: “We envision that the basic preparation for space flight taught now by the Edwards afb Aerospace Research Test Pilot Course will be taught eventually to all pilot trainees in the Air Training Command. Student training will be conducted into the suborbital area above 200,000 feet instead of below 50,000 feet as it is at present . . . .” {A-N-AF Joum. & Reg., 6/1/63,2)	.... William Littlewood, American Airlines vice president, said: “The United States is woefully deficient in funds and efforts to solve the essential research problems, to gain the basic knowledge, to develop the potentials of atmospheric flight, as to safety, comfort. and efficiency, or to compete successfully and for long with +|io foreign s.d.v&.ntsges in tins field .... “Whereas all efforts and expenditures of naca were devoted to aeronautic research, including large assignments in safety and reliability, we now find aeronautic research relegated to a fifth echelon level in nasa and reduced to a negligible portion of the total budget and to a fraction of the former naca effort.” (AP, NYT, 5/22/63,65)
A “flying carpet” escape system from orbital space stations has been advanced by Douglas Aircraft Co. The escape system would be a saucer shape that would expand into a blunt-nosed, cone-shaped vehicle 25 ft. across at its base. Passing through the atmosphere, the vehicle would act as its own brake. Re-entry heating problems would be met by using fabrics woven with filaments of nickel-based alloys that can withstand 1,600-degree temperatures. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/9/63, 52)
