Soviet Union announced that the spacecraft, zond ii, headed for Mars in an apparent race with mariner iv, had run into difficulties. The Soviet report said that in the first few radio contacts between zond ii and the ground “the power supply on board the space station was about half of the expected level.” Position information indicated the probe was 25,000 mi. from earth. (Witkin, NYT, 12/2/64, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64)
Lockheed-CaUfornia Co. released details of its recommendations to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on a scientific space station program. Lockheed study concluded manned station with crew of 24 could be orbiting the earth in 1968. Total cost of program—including logistics spacecraft and ground support—for five years’ operation was estimated at $2.6 billion. Study recommended launching the unmanned station into orbit with a Saturn V launch vehicle, then launching manned logistics vehicle to rendezvous and dock at the station. (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/27/64; msc Roundup, 3/4/64,8)
NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston divulged that its post-Apollo study emphasis would be on a Y-shaped 36-man National Multipurpose Space Station that could be launched by Saturn V and be the primary space scientific and technical experimental center for at least five years in the mid-1970’s.	(Av. Wk., 11/16/64, 51)
Researchers reported the centrifugal experiment conducted for the Air Force by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. indicated that a centrifuge device in a space station could help to recondition astronauts living for prolonged periods in a weightless condition. Tests in which five college students spent 42 days in a horizontal position showed that tendency to faint on standing diminished after periodic centrifuge rides. (NYT, 12/20/64, 42)
In an editorial in Astronautics and Aeronautics, H. H. Koelle said: “Suppose . . . that a space station could be made available with working area in the station and a round-trip ticket purchased by individual countries for their scientists, and that an advanced aerospace transportation system will be developed anyway as part of the U.S. space program. Analysis of such an operation indicates that an international research station of this kind could be built in the late 1970s, and that the price of a three-month field trip to the station might well be kept in the order of a million dollars a person. Many countries . . . would be able to pay this price and would enthusiastically participate in the project. During the 1980s, . . . the charges should be reduced considerably, thus increasing international participation.” (A&A, 11/64, 20-21)
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $9.2 million increase to contract with North American Aviation, Inc., calling for construction at Downey, Calif., of seven new buildings and modifications to existing structures to permit expansion of naa’s research and development. Naa is prime contractor for Apollo command and service module under contract signed with msc Aug. 14, 1963. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 1/24/64)	_
Goodyear Aerospace Corp. developed solar collector for usaf. The 4-story-high mirror, to be used in tests of electricity sources for manned space station, was capable of setting fire to buildings or blinding people with a single flash of sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/64)
Engine for Apollo service module fired for one second in programed 10-sec. test. Automatic cutoff device shut down the engine because of excess vibration due to unstable combustion. NASA spokesman called the test a “minimal success,” said results were “not entirely unexpected. The engine had been fired three times previously in acceptance tests, but it wasn’t fired in as complete a form as it was today.” (AP, L.A. Times, 9/23/64)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. proposed 100-ton space station that would support up to 24 men on long-duration earth-orbiting missions. Known as Olympus, the station would be 63 ft. long and 118 ft. in diameter with central hub and three radiating spokes. Each of spokes would carry cylindrical module 18 ft. in diameter and 40 ft. long. (Tulsa Daily World, 7/12/64)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., predicted that assignment of Manned Orbiting Laboratory to dod was “an ominous harbinger of a reversal in trend, an indication that the military services may play a more prominent role in future space exploration at nasa’s expense. . . . “mol is a starting point. Whether you label it development platform, satellite or laboratory, it is clearly intended as a beginning for space station technology. It is also clearly the intent of this Administration that, at least in the initial stages, space station development shall be under military rather than civil, cognizance. . . .” (A—N—AF J&R, 1/11/64, 10)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Missiles and Rockets interview that NASA was tentatively planning to initiate program definition of Apollo-X spacecraft in FY 1965. He stressed, however, that NASA manned space station of from six-months to one-year lifetime would receive no hardware funding until the 1970’s. He also said NASA’s Apollo-X study did not compete with usae Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program: “mol is important for the military as a method of determining what opportunities there are for men in space. It is not suitable to fulfill NASA requirements to gain scientific knowledge.” {M&R, 10/26/64,14)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
Lockheed-Califomia Co. engineers disclosed concept for a reusable rocket plane to transport 10 passengers between earth and orbiting space station. Prepared in a study for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, the design concept was a winged, two-stage carrier with two-man crew in each stage and capable of hauling three tons of cargo in addition to the passengers. Lockheed engineers said if the vehicle system development program were begun in 1967, the transport could be operational in 1975.	(Huntsville Times, 8/19/64)
NASA position paper on DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, embodying eight principles of NASA policy toward the mol, was made public. The paper stated: “The dod Manned Orbital Laboratory is a single military project (a specific goal; not a broad program) within the overall National Space Program. . . . “The mol should not be construed as the national space station, a separate program currently under joint study by NASA and the DOD. Such a space station project would be considered under the terms of the Webb/McNamara agreement on manned orbital research and development systems larger than Gemini and Apollo. The mol is, rather, a specific experimental test bed utilizing NASA’s Gemini project and the Titan III for certain potential military space applications not within the scope of NASA’s activities. . . .” (Text; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/2/64,1; A&A, 2/64,90; AF Mag., 74)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, recommended in letter to President Johnson that USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs be merged. Jointly operated national space station program would best utilize U.S. resources, according to his letter which Aviation Week cited in its Dec. 7 issue. Senator Anderson argued that $1 billion could be saved over* five-year period if mol were canceled and usaf funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; nasa Archives)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Aviation Week & Space Technology that U.S. space program had “entered a whole new period,” in which U.S. was faced with exploring all the practical applications of knowledge suddenly gained through the space effort. “My view is to create stability, and the satellite may be one of the most important tools yet developed to create stability ill the world. ... In this effort, modern technology is going to play a very important role. The balance of technological power may be more important than any other form of power balance in the next decades ahead.” He said NASA was developing a broad technological capability to conduct missions with vast international application. “This will enable our nation to say to other nations of the world, ‘Join with us and we will undertake these missions together.’ ” “Overt expression” of this new focus of national space program planning would be expressed in forecast report NASA was completing for President Johnson, the article continued. Report would emphasize broad range of general space capabilities available in the future and describe specific possible post-Apollo missions—such as manned lunar base, earth-orbiting space stations, Mars probes—stressing that selection of such a goal should be a national decision. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64, 22)
22,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine for Project Apollo service module, to return Apollo astronauts from the moon, was test-fired twice at Las Cruces, N. Mex. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/16/64)
Douglas Aircraft Co. was awarded follow-on study contract for Manned Orbital Research Laboratory by NASA Langley Research Center, to refine the NASA concept and examine the feasibility of cylindrical six-man space station using equipment providing intermittent artificial gravity. Selection of Douglas for contract negotiation was announced last December. (larc Release)
Edward Z. Gray, Director of Advanced Studies in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that when NASA builds a manned space station it would be “more sophisticated” than the dod Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), nasa now has 13 studies dealing with concepts leading toward development of an orbiting manned space station; when these studies are completed, NASA would be able to appraise “the space station requirements and what will be the best method of pursuing the development of a manned orbiting space station system.” (SBD, 1/8/64, 34)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported on a letter (dated Nov. 9, 1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, to President Johnson in which he recommended a merger of the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program and NASA’s Apollo X program. He argued that $1 billion could be saved over a five-year period if mol were to be cancelled and the Air Force funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. A jointly operated national space station program would, according to Anderson, best utilize U.S. space resources. Sen. Anderson felt that mol lacked growth potential because it could not progress beyond its two-man, 30-day mission without development of a resupply system. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
Patent for manned space station design was awarded to its inventor Emanuel Schnitzer, technical assistant at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The space station was designed to erect itself in space after being lofted into orbit. Crewmen could be sent up in an auxiliary spacecraft or launched to it later in a ballistic “ferry.” Until two weeks ago, Schnitzer was at NASA Hq. in Advanced Manned Missions Program Office. (Justice, Houston Post, 8/15/64; nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8/15/64)
USAF announced selection of Douglas Aircraft Co., Martin Marietta Corp., and General Electric Co. for orbital space station study-contracts. The studies would aid in defining tests and experiments for usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), (dod Release 148-64)
Aerojet General Corp. successfully test fired Apollo service module engine in long duration test at Sacramento, Calif. The multiple-restart, 22,000-lb.-thrust engine was activated four times for total of 421 sec. (upi, Houston Chron., 4/29/64)
NASA and dod established the National Space Station Planning SubPanel of the NASA—dod Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board ( aacb ), charged with studying and then making recommendations to aacb on the best configuration for follow-on manned space station to the mol. Co-chairmen were Dr. Michael I. Yarymovych of NASA Advanced Manned Missions Office and Col. Kenneth Schultz, Deputy Director of Development Planning for Space, Hq. usaf. (M&R, 3/9/64, 13; SBD, 3/11/64,383)
In an interview with U.S. News & World, Report, Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, defended the U.S. program to land a man on the moon by 1970 and stated that it was his belief that at the present time the chances were “better than 50%” that the project would be successful by the target date. In commenting on reports that the Russians had forsaken a race to the moon, von Braun ventured that it was possible that the Russians had “picked another focusing point besides the moon for their manned spaceflight program” such as the development of a large manned space station orbiting earth. In addition, he commented: “I don’t think the Russians have ever said they aren’t going to the moon. But, even if we are going alone, this would not hurt one bit. The purpose is not so much to race the Russians—or, for that matter, even to land on the moon—but to design a hard-hitting program to develop an American space-flying capability.” (U.S. News, 6/1/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), usaf Space Systems Div. Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, said at AIAA space station symposium in Pasadena that USAF planned to assign to a single contractor the task of integrating the Gemini spacecraft and the manned orbiting laboratory (mol). He said astronaut transfer from the Gemini to the mol was a major problem and described several alternative methods of transfer being studied. (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 39)
Large manned space station design was described before Orange County, Calif., Section of AAIA >by Edward H. Oiling, head of MSC Space Station Program Office. The 24-man station would be 150 ft. in diameter with three radial modules, rotate at maximum speed of 4 rpm. Lifetime would he from one to five years. Saturn V could launch it into orbit and Saturn IB would launch logistics vehicles. (M&R, 4/20/64, 22)
USAF fired advanced Minuteman icbm down the Atlantic Missile Range and 30 seconds later followed it with a Nike-Javelin sounding rocket to study the Minuteman’s exhaust. This was first in 16-test series, (upi, NYT, 4/1/64,60; M&R, 4/6/64,10)	. During March: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received design recommendations for 24-man Large Orbital Research Laboratory (lorl) that could be operational by 1968—the six-month study conducted by Douglas Aircraft’s Missile & Space Div. and IBM’s Federal Systems Div. The cylindrical space station would operate under zero gravity conditions in a 260-mi.-high orbit. (Maloney, Houston Post, 3/21/64)
Lt. Col. Robert S. Buchanan (USAF) of Aerospace Research Pilots School, Edwards afb, told space medicine conference at Brooks afb that the greatest potential dangers to large scientific space station with crew of 15 or more men would be fire and collision with a meteoroid or space debris. Studies were considering possibility of separating space stations into individual compartments that could be sealed off in case of catastrophes such as fire. (AP, Houston Post, 2/6/64)
Discussing mol’s growth potential in testimony before House Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on R&d, Director of dod Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown said: “I want to make a distinction between its ultimate capability and what is in the program. . . . What is in the program is not a space station in that sense. It is an experimental laboratory. But . . . this could grow to be a space station, if and after ... we conclude . . . that a man can have a substantial military purpose [in space].” Dr. Brown said dod should “move more aggressively into the manned space flight arena in order to explore more fully man’s utility for the performance of military space missions and to develop . . . his full capabilities in any area where potential exists.” (SBD, 2/17/64, 260; M&R, 2/24/64, 15)
The last in a series of 11 tests of the F—2 Apollo service module engine was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The engine was fired for 20 sec. and then shut down for a five-min. “purge” before a 100-sec. test firing. The F—2 rocket engine would be expected to bring astronauts back to earth from the moon. (Lee, Houston Post, 12/10/64)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. summarized study on Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (morl) made for NASA Langley Research Center. Douglas said it would be possible for U.S. to have a six-man operational space station within the next five years. MORL would be launched with Saturn IB, would remain in orbit just over one year. (Houston Post, 5/25/64)
NASA announced requesting from industry proposals for feasibility and design study of possible payloads for manned lunar exploration with an Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) . One of the payloads was a mobile laboratory capable of supporting and transporting two Apollo astronauts for about 14 days; the other payload concept included both a stationary base and a smaller vehicle. The ALSS concept, making maximum use of Apollo-developed systems, provided for Saturn V launch vehicle to launch into earth-moon trajectory a manned Apollo command module, service module, and lunar excursion module modified for landing equipment rather than men on the. moon and called the lem Truck. Following alss landing, astronauts would land nearby in unmodified Apollo lem. MSFC would manage the nine-month study. (NASA Release 64-62)
Thomas E. Dolan, nasc staff member, proposed at aiaa Symposium on Space Stations and Their Logistics Support in Pasadena that “saddlebags” be attached to lem to increase its carrying capacity for use in equipping a lunar base. 3,000-5,000 lbs. of supplies would be attached to manned Lunar Excursion Module. Hie system would make it possible to set up a lunar base with a 7- to 10-day staytime. He said saddlebags mode would increase total Apollo spacecraft weight by 15,000 lbs., but Saturn V/Apollo system theoretically had growth option of 100% and 15—20% growth was entirely possible. “The LEM saddlebag concept would avoid multiple launches, hardware development programs for unmanned landing systems, dependence on successful unmanned landing system performance prior to manned landings, and dependence on surface rendezvous. As such, the post-Apollo exploration phase could be carried on with higher mission success and with less total investment than that estimated for the other systems.” (M&R, 4/20/64,15; SBD, 4/17/64, 98)
