proton I, a scientific space station, was orbited by the U.S.S.R. with a “powerful new booster,” Tass announced. The 26,880-lb. payload—claimed to be heaviest ever launched—was placed into an orbit with the following initial parameters: apogee, 627 km. (389.4 mi); perigee, 190 km. (118 mi.) ; period 92 min.; and inclination, 63.5°. In addition to scientific and measuring instruments, the space station was equipped with special equipment for the study of cosmic particles of super-high energies and a radio transmitter. Tass said: “In order to insure realization of the planned space research program, a powerful new booster rocket has been developed in the Soviet Union.” Commenting on the Soviet launching, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said he was “impressed but not astonished” by the Russian accomplishment. “W’e have been predicting for some Lime that they would develop into the space station field,” he said. “We have anticipated that they would practice rendezvous and docking before they developed what they said was a space station, but they haven’t followed that particular line.” (Tass, 7/16/65; NYT, 7/17/65, 6; Wash. Post, 7/17/65, Al)
U.S. News and World Report commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory: “President Johnson has now committed this country to a vital and far-reaching race against Russia for military supremacy in space. “It is a strategic decision regarded as important as any since World War II. “The race actually has started. At this point it is largely silent and secret. But both powers are known to be conducting military missions with unmanned satellites, and results are described as striking and enormous. “Next, both countries will make major strategic moves by putting up space stations with military crews. Beyond that, plans are being readied for armadas of orbiting platforms and fleets of space planes— and, in case of hostilities, possible confrontation in space. “The U.S. goal: to make certain Russia is denied control of space that might enable it to tip the balance of power here on earth. . . .”	(U.S. News, 9/13/65, 10)
PROTON I space station, launched July 16 by the U.S.S.R., had, for the first time, trapped particles with energy of 100 trillion electron volts and a measured energy spectrum of cosmic rays containing such particles, Nikolai I. Grigorov, head of Cosmic Ray Laboratory at Moscow Univ. Institute of Nuclear Physics, told Pravda. He said that precise measurements of high-energy particles required the use of a heavy ionizing calorimeter which could not have been orbited without the lifting capacity of Russia’s new large rockets. Prof. Grigorov explained that high-energy particles never reached earthbound registering devices because they were absorbed and transformed as they collided with atoms of earth’s atmosphere. (Pravda, 8/20/65, atss-t Trans.; Shabad, NYT, 8/22/65, 72)
Apollo Spacecraft 009, first Apollo flight spacecraft of the type that would carry three U.S. astronauts to the moon and back, was accepted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center during informal ceremonies at North American Aviation, Inc.’s, Downey, Calif., facility. Largest U.S. manned spacecraft built to date, Spacecraft 009 included a command module, service module, launch escape system, and adapter. {Marshall Star, 10/27/65, 1, 10; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/22/65, 1)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was named chairman of the International Sponsors Committee for Clark Univ.’s $5.4 million Robert Hutchings Goddard memorial library scheduled for completion by 1968. Several nuclear-powered, self-supporting lunar bases and a wide variety of space stations would be in operation by the year 2000, Dr. von Braun told the luncheon meeting of the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He made his predictions during the question and answer period following his speech on Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s contributions to American rocketry. The greatest activity in space 35 yrs. hence would be in earth orbits, von Braun felt, and space would provide a “tremendous military field.” This field would not be the science fiction concept of orbiting hydrogen bombs, but rather a broad program of military reconnaissance. Photography and direct observation of foreign military developments were cited. Space stations would be in a variety of orbits and many would be manned by scientists and repairmen shuttling back and forth in reusable vehicles. Scientists would spend up to six weeks at a time in the stations to make their observations. The use of reusable boosters would cut the cost of delivering payloads to orbit down to some 10% of today’s costs, von Braun added, (nsc Newsletter, 5/65, 6/65)
PEGASUS ill meteoroid detection satellite was launched into orbit from Eastern Test Range, with a Saturn I booster—last(sA-lO) in a series of ten launch vehicle test flights. Initial orbital data: apogee, 336 mi. (541.9 km.); perigee, 324 mi. (522.6 km.); period, 95.5 min.; inclination, 28.9°. Main assignment of the 3,200-lb. spacecraft with wing-like panels was to add information on the frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment, for use in the design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft. Eight of its detachable panels carried 352 thermal surface samples collected from the aerospace industry. If NASA should program an astronaut-PEGASUS III rendezvous, the astronaut would detach as many panels as possible and return them to earth for study. Also orbited was Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-9), which served as shroud for PEGASUS III. Apollo launch escape system was jettisoned during launch vehicle’s ascent. PEGASUS ill—expected to return meteoroid data to ground stations for at least one year—was identical to PEGASUS II, in orbit since May 25, 1965. pegasus I was sent into orbit Feb. 16, 1965. (nasa Release 65-232; msfc Release 65-185; msfc Release 65-190)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
Announcement by Soviet Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov at the 16th International Astronautical Congress in Athens that the U.S.S.R. planned to orbit a permanent manned space station as the next major project in its space program received editorial comment in the Philadelphia Inquirer: “To be sure, Cosmonaut Leonov adds that after ‘many space laboratories’ have been established, ‘with crews being periodically changed,’ his country expects to give attention to ‘a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon.’ It has been understood all along, of course, that this was the method Russia would use in sending men to the moon. The emphasis on many permanent manned space stations orbiting close to earth, however, shows all too plainly that the real concern of the generals running the Communist space program is in the military advantages that lie in control of the space immediately beyond the atmosphere and over the heads of free nations around the world.” (Phil. Inq., 9/19/65)
Service module of Apollo spacecraft 009 was delivered to KSC from North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant aboard the Pregnant Guppy aircraft. (KSC Historical Office)
Tass released a picture of what was described as a working model of an orbiting space station. Six hermetically sealed compartments branched out from a central stem. The compartments included a control desk, a laboratory, a garden, an orientation system, radar section, and a heliostation with a system for carrying on conversation with incoming spaceships. (Tass, ap, Wash. Post, 7/8/65, D5)
A full-scale aluminum model of a 1,400-lb. telescoping space structure had been fabricated to verify design theory and manufacturing techniques, afsc announced. Built by Martin-Denver, the 15-by-8-ft. expandable structure could be launched into space in a compact package and then, like a telescope, opened to full size after reaching orbit. Several of the expandable structures stacked on a booster’s upper stage could be sent into space and expanded to form a rotating space station. (afsc Release 4.64)
proton ii 26,900-lb. unmanned scientific space station was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit: apogee, 638.7 km. (396 mi.); perigee, 191.9 km. (119 mi.); period, 92.6 min.; inclination, 63.5°. Tass said that instrumentation on proton ii would study cosmic particles of superhigh energies, cosmic rays and their radiation danger, and the nuclear interaction of cosmic particles with super-high energies up to 1,000	billion electron volts. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. (NYT, 11/3/65, 5; ap, Balt. Sun, 11/3/65, 4; upi, Wash. Post, 11/3/65, A21)
Dr. Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Lunar and Planetary Mission Studies, told Twin Cities aiaa Chapter in Minneapolis that NASA was “investigating and planning manned missions and experiments beyond the presently approved Gemini and Apollo programs. . . . “A logical sequence for future NASA manned space flight programs . . . begins with the Gemini and Apollo program base. The next logical development is the Apollo F.xtension System ( aes ) which is a stepping stone to advanced Earth-orbital operations, to lunar-orbital surveys, and to lunar surface exploration. The AES Earth-orbital activities are a development phase for an orbital research laboratory or early space station as well as a lunar exploration station. Based on the Apollo Command and Service module technology, we can also develop advanced logistic systems for larger orbiting space stations of indefinite life or for greater expansion of lunar exploration if desired. The advanced orbiting space station can likewise lead to an orbiting launch complex for planetary missions such as Martian flyby and exploration shelters or a lunar base for potential exploitation of the lunar environment. ... In Earth orbit, the AES can provide for experimental operations in the three major fundamental areas . . . : (1) flights to conduct scientific research in space requiring man’s presence; (2) Earth-oriented applications to increase the nation’s strength, and (3) development of advanced technology for support of both manned and unmanned space operations. ... In the field of Earth-oriented applications of manned space operations, NASA has been conducting studies and investigations jointly with the Departments of Commerce, Agriculture, Interior and Defense to determine how we might apply Apollo’s unique capabilities to improve our ability to forecast weather, to communicate globally at high data rates, to make an up-to-date inventory of the world’s resources, to monitor air and sea traffic on a global scale, to support a world-wide air-sea rescue service, to make better forecasts of food production and to provide a data-gathering system on a global scale. Experiments are also being evaluated to enhance over-all development of space operations. Biomedical, behavioral and other medical studies would be conducted as well as the development of advanced subsystems and technology for spacecraft. . . .” (Text)
Caption under a photograph in East German newspaper Berliner Zeitung read: “A model of a future Soviet space station envisages six hermetically grouped sections around a central core. These are: the control station, a laboratory and a garden, an orientation system, the radar equipment, and a heliostation. In addition, the station has facilities for voice communications with space ships.” (Berliner Zeitung, 7/25/65, 4)
nasa bioscience programs were discussed in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications by nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell: “Results recently submitted by the U.S. and U.S.S.R. from flights up to five days in length indicate that long term space flight may have several important and serious physiological and behavior effects upon the performance and well being of man that need to be investigated further. There were changes in the circulation system, in the biochemical characteristics of the blood and urine, and in the electroencephalogram indices, all pointing to a need for more detailed investigations. The results from the Biosatellite studies will have broad application to long term, manned space flight, including manned space stations and lunar and planetary bases. “Prolonged manned flights may involve changes similar to those observed after 10 days of strict bed rest on the ground. These are moderate losses of bone minerals such as calcium, particularly in the vertebrae; loss of muscle tone and physical capability; certain cardiovascular changes; and metabolism in general. The effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Biosatellite experiments are of both scientific and practical importance and extremely profitable to investigate. We do not presently have sound theoretical bases for making precise quantitative (and in some cases qualitative) predictions of what we expect to happen. It is, therefore, important to carry out Biosatellite studies of suitable duration to critically demonstrate and test the effects of weightlessness on living organisms.” Outlining approaches to the search for extra-terrestrial life in nasa’s bioscience programs, Dr. Newell testified: “(a) An attempt is being made to synthesize models of primitive single-celled organisms in the laboratory. . . . “(b) The physical environments of the planets are being studied and characterized by instruments from the Earth, from high altitude balloons and from planetary fly-bys. . . . “(c) Living Earth organisms are being grown under simulated planetary environmental conditions. . . . “(d) Plans are being made for both unmanned and manned direct exploration of planets. . . .” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 806-41)
zond III automatic space station was launched into a heliocentric orbit by U.S.S.R. from a heavy artificial satellite placed in a parking orbit around the earth by a multistage carrier rocket, Tass announced. Tass said that the “trajectory of the automatic station is close to the expected one,” that communications were stable, and that all systems were functioning normally. The purpose of the launch was to “check the station’s systems in conditions of prolonged space flight and the holding of scientific studies in interplanetary space,” Tass said. Pictures of the farside of the moon taken by ZOND ill were later released on Aug. 20. (Tass, 7/18/65; Grose, NYT, 7/19/65, 1, 31; Loory, Wash. Post, 7/19/65)
Soviet Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov was quoted by Zolnierz Wolnosci on the future Soviet space program: spacecraft would remain in orbit much longer and their crews would be larger; highly trained teams would assemble permanent orbital space stations, orbital laboratories, and interplanetary spacecraft while the remainder of the crews would work inside the craft. Spacecraft participating in these flights would rendezvous and dock, using a flexible concertina-like passageway. Leonov said problems still to be solved included transfer of crews for interplanetary flights, accomplishment of engineering work in space, and return of spacecraft to earth. (Badowski, Zolnierz Wolnosci, 9/7/65,1)
First major piece of flight-type hardware for the Apollo program, Service Module 001, successfully underwent a 10-sec. shakedown static test firing at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s White Sands Operations. Service Module 001 was unlike previous boilerplate models in that it was constructed primarily of aluminum alloy and had an outside skin of honeycomb bonded between two aluminum sheets. Made by Aerojet-General, the service propulsion system engine had 22,000 lbs. of thrust. It would slow down the Apollo for entry into lunar orbit and speed up the spacecraft for escape from lunar orbit and the return to earth. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 8; naa S&ID Skywriter, 2/12/65, 1, 3)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
Pegasus B, second of the “winged” micro meteoroid detection satellites, arrived at Cape Kennedy to he readied for launch during the next two months. Similar to pegasus i, Pegasus B would occupy a simulated Apollo service module aboard the sa-8 vehicle. A boilerplate model of the Apollo command module would be placed above the Pegasus; in orbit, the Apollo modules would be jettisoned and the satellite exposed. Preliminary data from PEGASUS I indicated it was confirming current theory on micrometeoroid density, (msfc Release 65-85; Marshall Star, 4/21/65, 1, 2)
“The space station relayed to the earth comprehensive data on the interplanetary magnetic field, cosmic radio emission, interplanetary ionized plasma, longwave cosmic radio emission, and micrometeorite particles. . . . During the flight around the moon, data were also obtained on the spectrum of its infrared and ultraviolet radiation.” (Tass, 9/18/65; Pravda, 9/19/65, 2)
We must use a completely different approach. We must get away from this launching from pads, which costs millions and billions of dollars, to the more conventional way of taking off from a runway.’ ” Witze continued: “He predicts that after we have gone to the moon we will start over again. Project Apollo cannot be turned back, he says, but the next time ‘we must create an environment in space that can be used by men, not only for research but for commercial and military purposes.’ “This environment he is talking about is a permanent space station, one that will never come back into the atmosphere. This will require a logistics system—a recoverable, reusable space transporter to carry people and supplies back and forth to space. The Dyna-Soar was a crude but necessary step in this direction, replaced today by the concept of the aerospace plane. . . . “The Dornberger thesis is that a manned station in near space is as practical as a military base on Okinawa, a laboratory at the South Pole, or an aircraft parts and maintenance depot in Chateauroux. Once established, all that is needed is a logistics system to keep it going. From such a space station, expeditions can be sent to the moon, or many other places in space, with engines that give a thrust of only 20,000 pounds, instead of the millions of pounds required on one-way booster trips. . . .” Quoting Dr. Dornberger: “ ‘It took mankind hundreds of years to learn to use the sea, but only fifty years to use the air. Space can be used in twenty-five years, if we get started. I doubt that the use of space vehicles will be more hazardous than the use of submarines.’ ” (AF Mag., 10/65, 80-88)
Saturn I (sa—S> launch vehicle, launched from Eastern Test Range, orbited a 23.0004b. payload of which 3,200 lbs. was the PEGASUS U meteoroid detection satellite and 9.700 lbs. was Apollo boilerplate command and service modules (bp-26(. This was the ninth successful test in nine flights for Saturn I, At launch. Apollo command and service module boilerplate spacecraft and launch escape system I Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with PEGASUS II folded inside the service module. After second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. After injection into orbit, the Apollo boilerplate was jettisoned into a separate orbit and a motor-driven device extended 96 X 14-ft. winglike panels on fecasus n, exposing 2,300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface. The satellite was attached to the Saturn’s s-iv second stage and would remain so during its lifetime. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and providing mountings for a total of 208 detector panels. As particles collided with this surface, the penetrations would be registered and reported to earth. Orbital data: apogee. 460 mi. (741 km.); perigee, 316 mi. (509 km.); period, 97 min.; inclination, 31.8°. Primary purpose of the flight was to gather information on frequency of meteoroids encountered in the near-earth environment for use in design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft, pecasus n, an improved version of pegasus r launched Feb. 16, 1965, would be visible to the naked eye under favorable conditions near dawn and dusk. (NASA Release 65-151; msec Release 65-121; Marshall Star, 5/26/65, 1: ap, NYT, 5/26/65. 10; V.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 143)
proton i, unmanned space station launched by U.S.S.R. July 16 with instrumentation for studying high-speed cosmic particles, was functioning normally, Tass reported. (Tass, 7/29/65)
Saturn I (sa-9) two-stage launch vehicle, launched by NASA from Cape Kennedy, orbited a 33,000-lb. multiple payload, of which 3,200 lbs. was the pegasus i meteoroid detection satellite. Orbital data:	apogee, 745 km. (462 mi.); perigee, 496 km. (308 mi.) ; period, 97 min.; and inclination, 31.7°. This was the eighth successful test in eight flights for Saturn I; pegasus i was the first active payload launched in the Saturn tests. At launch, an Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-16) and launch escape system (Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with pegasus I folded inside the service module. After first-stage separation and second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. When second stage (s-iv) attained orbit, the 10,000-lb. Apollo boilerplate command and service modules were jettisoned into a separate orbit. Then a motor-driven device extended winglike panels on the Pegasus satellite to a span of 96 ft. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and made up of 208 panels, pegasus i remained attached to Saturn I’s second stage as planned. A television camera, mounted on the interior of the service module adapter, provided pictures of the satellite deploying in space. PEGASUS I exposed more than 2.300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface, with thicknesses varying up to 16/1000 in. As meteoroid particles collided with the surface of the panels, they would be registered electronically and reported to earth. Exposure of the large panel area over a long period would give designers of manned and unmanned spacecraft a good sample of meteoroid data. pegasus I would be visible from the earth without the aid of telescope on clear nights. (NASA Release 65-38; Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 1, 5; ap, Houston Chron., 2/16/65; Clark, NYT, 2/17/65; ap, Benedict. Wash. Post, 2/17/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/17/65; Sehlstedt. Balt. Sun, 2/17/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 133-134) February 16: On the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) commented upon the successful Saturn I launch: “ . . . this morning the United States took another giant stride in the exploration of space. At 9:37 a.m. a Saturn rocket . . . with its 1,500,000 pounds of thrust, lifted off the launch pad at Cape Kennedy, Fla., on a mission to place in orbit around the earth the Pegasus satellite. “This was the eighth launch of the Saturn rocket out of eight attempts, a truly outstanding scientific and engineering accomplishment of the men of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and of the many contractors who worked so long and hard to make this event a success. “I may say that the gratifying success of the Saturn booster has been matched in other programs as well. “I need only point to the Tiros weather satellite. “Nine have been launched out of nine attempts. “I think we have every right to be proud of our space team on this day of outstanding achievement.” (NASA LAR iv/30-32; CR, 2/16/65, 2630)
usaf awarded General Electric Co. a $1,494,000 increment to a $33,552,224 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for flight testing of the Maneuvering Ballistic Re-entry Vehicle, (dod Release 536-65) “Before the end of this decade, man will have set foot on the Moon’s surface. This will be an event of historical magnitude. “By 1970, manned satellite stations will be circling the Earth for a month or more. A crew of three or four will be on board, performing many kinds of scientific experiments, ranging from astronomy to zoology. Much larger manned space stations could become a reality in future years.	_ “Before the end of the next 5 years, world-wide communication by means of satellites will be a routine accomplished fact, as will detailed observation of weather patterns and collection of meteorological data around the globe. “Radio and TV broadcasting to large areas of the Earth from satellites could become a reality in the next 10 years. “Before 1975 unmanned vehicles from Earth will be circling Mars and Venus and sending exploratory probes to the planets’ surfaces. “To look into the future beyond 1975 is much more uncertain, but experts judge that if Man has the desire and will, he can have gone, by 1985, a long way toward the goal of sending a manned expedition to Mars, perhaps with the aid of some kind of nuclear propulsion. . . .” (Text) Leonard Jaffe, Director of NASA Communication and Navigation Programs, told the Conference that recent announcement that DOD’s navigation satellite system was operational demonstrated the great potential of artificial earth satellites for providing position determinations to the maritime industry. He said NASA had under study a number of techniques, different from those employed in the DOD system, by which satellites located in medium or synchronous orbits could provide position fixes to ships and aircraft. Techniques whereby the craft’s position would be determined at ground computer stations might make the satellite system attractive to U.S. industry, he said. For the future Jaffe foresaw the combination of a position determination method and a communications system integrated into a single satellite to provide capability of aiding in air traffic control. He said: “Accurate position data and reliable communications readily available to air traffic controllers by use of satellites may provide the answer to the acute problem of safely reducing the present separation standard of aircraft flying across the crowded Atlantic Ocean region. Similar data supplied to a maritime regulatory agency may provide a means for preventing marine collisions.” (Text) “Space has at least four unique characteristics which offer advantages for military operations. These are: first, extremely high altitudes which offer line of sight to large areas of the earth’s surface; second, very high speeds; third, almost infinite flight duration; and fourth, highly predictable flight paths. “These recognized advantages have led to the development of a number of space systems which provide support to military land, sea, and air operations. These include satellite systems for communications, weather, and navigation. The capabilities they provide are either unique or represent a distinct improvement over other means of accomplishing the same task . . . “On the other hand, the advantages of space are frequently offset by several disadvantages. The first of these is the cost of launching payloads into space. Presently this amounts to about $1000 a pound in low earth orbit, although it is estimated that the Titan ill will reduce this figure to about $500 a pound, and we foresee methods of reducing the cost to the neighborhood of $100 a pound. The second is the requirement for extremely high reliability—the need to build satellites that will operate for long periods without maintenance and repair. Third is the absence of a demonstrated method of returning from space to a controlled landing at a specified point. And fourth is the environment of space itself—the problems associated with hard vacuum, temperature extremes, and intense radiation. “The need to overcome these disadvantages leads to consideration of the second way in which space may be regarded—not merely as a place, but as a primary focus for man’s scientific and technological efforts in the years ahead. The success of these efforts will determine the practical use that can be made of space for a variety of purposes, including military purposes.” (Text)
Picketing over a contract dispute by Las Cruces, N. Mex., Carpenters Union Loca 1 1962 of White Sands Missile Range construction project resulted in a partial temporary shutdown of the $133,900 project to build an addition to NASA Warehouse No. 1. Activities on the site included testing Apollo service module engines and preparation of test equipment for the Lunar Excursion Module. (Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/23/65)
Commenting on the U.S. need for a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in the San Antonio Express: “The nearly simultaneous launch of NASA’s Gemini and Air Force’s Titan ill—c caused some commentators to suggest that there is competition and rivalry in the space effort. Investigation convinces me that there is complete collaboration and accord between NASA and the military in the space program. “There is now little reason to doubt that NASA will succeed with Apollo, the Moon mission. Our continued leadership in the exploration of the peaceful uses of space seems assured. “It is now time to survey where we stand in the military implications and dangers from space. . . . “The first step in a needed military space program, which the Air Force earnestly and urgently proposes, is a manned orbiting laboratory (mol). It is visualized as an experimental space station in low orbit to determine what man can profitably do in space. “The anti-MOL advocates have suggested that the fall-out from the NASA space program will provide all the building blocks to produce military space vehicles quickly when the need is more clearly evident. Fall-out from the automobile industry did not provide the Patton tank. It was necessary to cut and try, build and test many experimental tanks over a period of 25 years. “Building blocks from civil air transports did not produce the b-52 bomber. We had to build and test 51 earlier bomber models. Effective space weapons will never come solely from the fall-out from the NASA program. “mol is said to be held up until the Air Force can precisely define and defend a military mission which MOL can be certain to accomplish. To require anyone to visualize and indicate definitely and in detail now, all that man may ultimately do in space, would be like having asked the Wright brothers in 1910 to lay down the specifications for a supersonic transport.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/14/65, 18)
NASA successfully conducted the first tethered test firing of the Apollo 009 Service Module propulsion system at Kennedy Space Center. Test was marred by failure in the master countdown clock, which—a split second after ignition-—recycled to T minus 99 sec., throwing the count out of real time. The ground computer, which operated in plus time only, was thus unable to send the signal to shut off the engine. Instead of the two planned 15-sec. firings, the system was fired only once for a total of 20 sec. and shut off with a signal from the blockhouse. For the same reason, the ground computer was unable to send the signal to gimbal the engine and this apparatus was not tested, (upi, NYT, 11/20/65, 21; M&R, 11/29/65, 28)
