U.S.S.R. launched 3,608-lb. luna xi space station toward moon for "further testing of systems of an artificial moon sputnik and scientific explorations of near lunar space.” Preliminary data indicated that spacecraft was traveling close to calculated trajectory and equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 8/24/66)
nasa Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968 at ieee conference in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain; or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee /., 10/25/66)
Proposed further reduction in NASA FY 1967 appropriation because of Vietnam war would amount to "national disaster,” Ira C. Eaker wrote in San Antonio Express: "Such desertion of our present space program would give the Soviets an advantage they are now striving mightily to achieve. The U.S.S.R. is now spending about twice what the U.S. is spending for space research.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 10/24/66) October 25: Propellant tank rupture occurred on Apollo spacecraft 017 service module during proof pressure test at 240 psi conducted by naa at Downey, Calif.; inflight operating pressure would be 180 psi. No test personnel were injured. NASA had established board of inquiry to investigate, (nasa Release 66-285; naa s&id Skywriter, 10/28/66, 4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/28/66, D18)
NASA had canceled hardware development and fabrication of Apollo experiments pallet whifch was designed to hold modular experiments and to fit into a section of the Apollo service module. Four firms selected in November 1965 for four-month Phase 1A design studies had been advised of decision: Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Martin Co.; McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; and Northrop Space Laboratories. (nasa Release 66-224)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-202 mission was successfully launched from etr’s Complex 34 at 1:16 p.m. edt: 56,000-lb. unmanned Apollo spacecraft (Oil) was boosted into suborbital flight by Uprated Saturn I launch vehicle generating 1,600,000 lbs. thrust in second flight test of major spacecraft systems; second performance check of command module (Cm) heatshielding; and third flight test of Uprated Saturn I. Liftoff and powered flight were as programed. After spacecraft separation, 21,500-lb.-thrust service module (Sm) propulsion engine burned 3 min. 35 sec. to boost spacecraft to 706-mi. (1,128.6-km.) altitude. Sm’s engines ignited three more times to test rapid restart capabilities, with last burn separating Sm. Cm reentered earth’s atmosphere at more than 19,900 mph. Maximum temperature of spacecraft’s surface was calculated to be about 2,700°F; temperature inside Cm was 70°F. Main parachutes deployed at 23,850-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown in Pacific Ocean some 500 mi. southeast of Wake Island—200 mi. from target—at 2:49 p.m. edt. Recovery was by aircraft carrier U.S.S. Hornet. Apollo heatshield well withstood high heat-load test, and the spacecraft was in "stable condition 1.” Officials said that during flight, minor problem developed in unit which was to cool drinking water and various electrical components. They did not consider problem serious. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told postflight press conference that "the results of today’s flight—once examined—will provide us with the information necessary” to make a final decision whether to commit the next Apollo flight to a manned mission, (nasa Release 66-213; NASA Proj. Off.; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/26/66, A4; AP, Wash. Post, 8/26/66, A3; Wilford, NYT, 8/26/66, 1)
proton hi unmanned scientific space station was launched by U.S.S.R. into earth orbit with 630-km. (391-mi.) apogee; 190-km. (118-mi.) perigee; 92.5-min. period; and 63.5° inclination. Instruments —including "special scientific apparatus” for continuing complex investigations of cosmic rays—were functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/8/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
nasa ApoUo Service Module (Sm) propulsion engine test phase was completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh spoke at the dedication of Boeing Co.’s Industrial Research Center in Huntsville, Ala. "I believe that the next decade will find us marrying more closely the major features of aeronautics and astronautics so that manned spacecraft will take off and return to spaceports with reusable propulsion systems and reusable spacecraft. The near future will find us engaged in the exploration of the lunar surface, the development of manned earth orbiting permanent space stations, unmanned and then possibly manned travel to the planets, as well as in the progressive utilization of space technology in such fields as communications, navigation, meteorology, and observation. "In addition, I believe the next decade holds great promise for the utilization of space systems technology in the solution of many of the economic and social problems of this complex civilization. . . .” (Text)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-201 mission was successfully launched from etr at 11:12 a.m. est. Unmanned Apollo spacecraft (009) was boosted into suborbital flight by two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle (SA-201) to qualify command module (Cm) heatshielding and service module (Sm) of spacecraft-launch vehicle combination and major spacecraft systems. Liftoff and powered flight events were as programed. After ignition of liquid-hydrogen-powered 2nd stage (S-IVB), launch escape tower was jettisoned and recoverable cameras ejected. After seven-minute burn, 2nd stage and instrument unit separated from spacecraft; spacecraft reached 310-mi. (499-km.) altitude. Descending, service module performed ullage maneuver, firing reaction-control system rockets for 30 sec. to increase spacecraft’s reentry speed; Sm’s main propulsion engine was fired twice—once for 100 sec. and once for 10 sec. Sm was jettisoned and Cm reentered at 27,500 fps—2,000 fps faster than Apollo reentry from earth orbit—testing ability of spacecraft’s ablative heat shield to withstand reentry heat of about 4,000° F. Three main parachutes deployed at 12,000-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown in Atlantic at 11:51 a.m. est within 35 mi. of target. Recovery was by helicopter from carrier U.S.S. Boxer. Spacecraft was in "good” condition. Mission was first launch of Saturn IB and Apollo spacecraft. Saturn IB, uprated version of Saturn I, was being developed under direction of msfc and Apollo spacecraft, under direction of msc. (nasa Release 66-32; nasa Proj. Off.; msc Roundup, 3/4/66, 1-2; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/27/66, Al, A8; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 2/27/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, 1, 60)	.. >/, 3/1/66, 32)
usaf selected Martin Co. to develop SV-5P manned lifting-body vehicle to explore flight characteristics and atmospheric maneuverability of wingless lifting bodies. Initially, the 5,000-lb., 24-ft. wingless vehicle would be dropped from a B-52 bomber at 40,000- to 50,000-ft. altitude at 500 mph for powerless, gliding flight, landing at Edwards afb at 120 to 150 mph; in later powered tests, it would accelerate to mach 2 speeds at 100,000-ft. altitude and then maneuver to landing. Airfoil shape of vehicle, which resembled "a delta shaped porpoise with vertical fins,” provided lift normally derived from wings. Future vehicles, developed as part of afsc’s Piloted Low Speed Test (Pilot) project, would be launched to ferry supplies and crews between earth and orbiting space stations, (dod Release 343-66; Wilford, NYT, 4/27/66, 22)
Possible space developments in 1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight: (1) improved propulsion, including nuclear; (2) merging of aeronautics and astronautics in development of lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry capability; (3) lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of lunar bases; (4) manned earth-orbiting space stations; (5) unmanned probes within solar system and manned expeditions to planets "whenever that becomes promising and practicable”; (6) voice and TV direct communications from satellites to home receivers "throughout large sections of the world,” and advances in operations and research on other applied satellites. (Text)
Commenting on success of Project Gemini in developing techniques and experience vital for manned lunar landing, William J. Coughlin said in Technology Week: "Gemini technology will ... be applied to the manned scientific space stations still to come. This fanning out of technology from the direct-line effort to effect a manned lunar landing is a dramatic demonstration of the rapid maturing of the national space program.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 50)
Apollo spacecraft—command module, service module, and adapter section— is raised up the gantry for mating to Saturn IB launch vehicle at Launch Complex 34, Eastern Test Range.
Use of personal radar units by astronauts to counteract optical illusions which they might encounter while assembling a space station or exploring the moon was recommended by Cambridge Univ. Prof. Richard L. Gregory, author of Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing, in a New York press interview. Gregory believed astronauts might experience spatial distortion when seeing spacecraft’s structural elements gleaming luminously in sunlight or sharply etched against a jet black background. In addition, he thought they might experience reversed depth perception which would cause distorted images. Gregory recommended aiding astronauts with tones, heard through earphones, of a variable pitch which would be determined by a beam from radar unit each man would wear. Variations in pitch would indicate distance to different objects and astronaut’s rate of approach or retreat from them. Gregory was conducting his research at New York Univ. on a senior foreign scientist fellowship financed in part by NASA. (Osmundsen, NYT,	31; Houston Chron., 2/16/66)
