Apollo Applications (aa) briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented most detailed statement to date on the program. He said plans were to form an “embryonic space station” in 1968-69 by clustering four aa payloads launched with Uprated Saturn I boosters. First mission would be launch of manned spacecraft, followed several days later by launch of spent S-IVB stage converted into a workshop. After two spacecraft had docked, crew would enter workshop through an airlock. They would prepare workshop for storage and return to earth in their spacecraft 28 days later. In three to six months, second manned capsule would be launched on 56-day mission to deliver resupply module to workshop and rendezvous with unmanned Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), fourth and last launch in series. Cluster would be joined with multiple docking launched on S—IVB workshop. Emphasizing the importance of manning the atm, Dr. Mueller said: “. . . if there is one thing the scientific community is agreed on it is that when you want to have a major telescope instrument in space it needs to be manned. “First of all you need him to point it. Second, you need him to be able to change the films and so on. Thirdly, you need him to maintain it so when something goes wrong he can fix it instead of having to sit here on the ground and be frustrated by the fact that some little gadget didn’t quite trip when it should have. . . .” Dr. Mueller said principal areas toward which $454.7 million FY 1968 post-Apollo effort would be directed were “development of extended flight capability, the conduct of manned astronomical and Earth observations from space, and continued exploration of the Moon.” (Transcript; Marshall Star, 2/1/67, 7-8; Clark, NYT, 1/30/67, 2; Reistrup, W Post, 1/27/67, A7)
msc awarded SI million in six-month study contracts to General Dynamics, Boeing Co., and McDonnell Co. for space station facilities that could be assembled in orbit early in the 1970s. General Dynamics would study engine room module, a separately launched unit to furnish electrical power and life-support equipment for space station. Boeing would study space station design to include a 38-in optical telescope that would be launched with the space station by a Saturn V booster. McDonnell would study logistics/ferry spacecraft to provide ground landing capability for astronauts. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 23-4)
usaf Space and Missiles Systems Div. had awarded a contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., for $1.2 million for Agena launch services at Vandenberg afb Oct. 1, 1967, through Sept. 30, 1968. (dod Release 896-67) Detailing systems engineering activities of U.S. manned space flight program, nasa Saturn Apollo Applications Director Charles W. Mathews said that efforts had encompassed three flight systems—Mercury, Gemini, 324-801 0—69and Apollo—and included many other aspects, worldwide instrumentation and communications networks, control centers, recovery support elements, and scientific and technical experimental equipment. Thus, systems engineering had had to be all inclusive in providing for logical development of flight hardware, successful conduct of flight operations, and achievement of maximum benefits from each mission. (Text) T. J. Gordon, L. M. Dicke, and J. S. Nieroski of McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. (mssd) presented “Economics of Commercial Space Stations.” Space station would pay its own way by taking a share of increased customer profits. According to mssd representatives, customers would be “those enterprises who, by virtue of their use of the orbital services, can offer new or higher quality profits or services, or lower operating costs for existing products or services.” Possible space station uses were described as locating fish, reducing ocean shipping transit time and hazards, locating petroleum and mineral reserves, controlling and routing air traffic, reducing air and water pollution by detecting sources, improving fresh water reserves by surveying sources, and improving agricultural and forest productivity by use of detectors of disease, damage, and other factors. (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 11/25/67, 9) Soviet Academician L. I. Sedov described “Ten Years of Space Exploration in the Soviet Union” and said: “Cosmic systems have become necessary not only for the study of fundamental problems of physics and the Universe, but also for various practical purposes of importance to national economies [and] there is no doubt that cooperation will favourably affect many sides of international life. We hope that this cooperation and its benefits will grow deeper in the future.” (Text) Worldwide cooperation in space was urged by msfc’s former advanced mission planner, Dr. H. H. Koelle, now professor of space technology at Technical Univ. of Berlin. To get around tremendous costs and avoid reduction in space activity in all countries, he urged “international organizations to plan and coordinate advanced manned missions in the 1980s.” He said space powers should begin by increasing coordination of mission objectives in their national space programs. For a cooperative concept, he called for annual investment of $4 billion and work force of 350,000 persons, with 200,000 persons from U.S., 60,000 from U.S.S.R., 60,000 from Western Europe, and 30,000 from rest of world. (Fink, Av Wk, 10/2/67, 21-2; Van Osten, Aero Tech, 10/9/67, 43-7)
msfc used aedc facilities to investigate preparation of spent rocket stage for human occupancy in space by dumping. 840 gal of super-cold liquid nitroeen through “dead” or inactive J-2 rocket engine. Simulating 100,000-ft altitude, dumping experiment would pave way for astronauts to move inside orbiting stage and use tanks as living quarters for space station, (msfc Release 67-203)
U.S. could have a permanent manned space station in orbit by 1970, predicted Charles W. Mathews, Director of Saturn/Apollo Applications, NASA Hq. omsf, in Space Business Daily interview. Mathews said that by clustering various modules, instrument packages, and spacecraft in orbit for reuse and utilizing resupply of expendables and crew replacement, it would be possible to extend capabilities of hardware currently under development to the point where such a space station could be permanently manned in about three years. (SBD, 1/16/67, 63)
First flight test of Saturn V, designated Apollo 4, was scheduled no earlier than Nov. 7, announced m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director. “This is a target date,” he said. “We are in a very complex learning process and we are going to take all the time we need on this first launch.” Launch vehicle and Apollo spacecraft combination was 363 ft tall and weighed 6 million lbs. Thrust of Saturn V’s first stage was 7.5 million lbs. Key objective of flight planned for Nov. 7 would be evaluation of Apollo command module heat shield under conditions encountered on return from moon mission. Flight would also test thermal seals for use in new quick-release spacecraft hatch which would be installed on all manned Apollo missions. Apollo 4 flight plan would call for Saturn V to place spacecraft and launch yehicle 3rd stage (S-IVB) into 117-mi circular orbit. After completing two orbits, 3rd stage would he re-ignited to place spacecraft into orbit with apogee of 10,800 mi. After separation from 3rd stage, service module propulsion system would be fired to rafee spacecraft apogee to 11,400 mi. During descent the service module motor would fire again, boosting velocity of spacecraft to about 25,000 mph, the reentry speed of a lunar return flight, (nasa Release 67-274; B Sun, 10/26/67, A6) • GSFC officials completed week of checkout of Oso IV and turned on last of nine experiments. All experiments were performing well and spacecraft was transmitting satisfactory data. The 599-lb spacecraft, launched from etr Oct. 18, had received 1,500 commands. It was 3,000th object in orbit since Sputnik I in 1957; 100th satellite orbited in 1967; and 50th satellite orbited by Delta launch vehicle in 53 attempts. (NASA Release 67-273)
The Washington Post commented on NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Exploration of the moon. Giant orbiting space stations, with as many as a dozen men living and working in them for as long as a year. Unmanned landings on Mars. “These are the goals the United States has set for itself in outer space in the 1970s. With a budget request for fiscal 1968 of $5.05 billion, more than $500 million of it for dramatic new programs to carry us beyond a manned landing on the moon, President Johnson has made it clear that the United States is in space to stay, no matter what the Soviet Union does or does not do. ...” (W Post, 1/25/67, A18)
Lifting-body vehicles, with their ability to maneuver and land on conventional runways, might become the spacecraft of the future, J. V. Reistrup suggested in the Washington Post. Because a naval recovery fleet would not be required, space missions could become a day-to-day operation; crews might use the vehicles to inspect foreign spacecraft, repair U.S. satellites, make reconnaissance flights, fly in search and rescue operations, or take replacement crews and supplies up to manned space stations. NASA and USAF had been testing various types of lifting-body vehicles: M2-F2 and HL-10 in piloted glide tests, and a small automated model of SV-5 as part of Prime—Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry—program. (Reistrup, W Post, 1/22/67)
Low-orbit space operations from a manned orbital base “has the potential to reduce operating costs by a factor of two” for the mission traffic anticipated for post-1970, G. A. Sears of the rand Corp. had concluded. His papier, Orbital Baaing: Key to Low Cost Space Operations?, compared present earth-based manned spaceflight program with concept of basing spacecraft at manned space station. Spacecraft would be injected into mission orbits as required and later rejuvenated for reuse by rendezvous with station. Spacecraft would have to operate nearly coplanar with base, a constraint acceptable to many but not all low-orbit missions; however, as method of reducing costs, orbital basing “deserves attention on a par with recovery-to-earth and reuse and extended-life concepts,” Sears stated. (Text)
NASA was negotiating nine-month, $275,000 contract with Planning Research Corp. to identify, analyze, and evaluate potential economic returns from possible space station activities in mid-1970’s. Earth-oriented application areas such as natural resources, meteorology, and communications would be considered as they might affect both the national and world economy. Univ. of Michigan would be major subcontractor to Planning Research in technical feasibility of remote sensing. Contract would be managed by omsf Advanced Manned Missions Program. (nasa Release 67-^54)
NASA contract activity:	Negotiations were initiated with McDonnell Douglas Corp. on a 121-million contract for Improved Delta launch support services. Contract would cover 20 launchings from WTR and ETR during 21-mo period beginning Jan. 1, 1968, and would provide for inspection, checkout, and actual launch. Negotiations were concluded with North American Rockwell Corp. on a $812-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for continuation of Apollo Command and Service Module Program from Dec. 4, 1966, through program completion. Contract covered engineering, design, manufacture,-analysis, and testing for Apollo spacecraft and related equipment, including production of four additional spacecraft through S/C 115A; contained improved plans for quality, reliability, assurance, and safety; and provided for an award fee based on achievement of specified management objectives. (nasa Releases 67-298,67-299)
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, discussing Soviet space plans in Ogonyek, hinted that U.S.S.R. was preparing to launch a large manned space station in the near future. It had been speculated that U.S.S.R.—which had not launched a manned spacecraft since March 18, 1965—would conduct major manned launch in 1967 to commemorate 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. Gagarin said there was little value in repeating feats already accomplished: “. . . it is not sensible in the future to put expensive spacecraft into orbit for several days. ... It is apparent that they will have to stay in orbit a long time. It will be necessary to supply them and change crews with the use of simplified types of space vehicles. . . . The time is not far off when longer and more distant space flights will be made.” In later Novosti press agency report Soviet Academy of Sciences Chairman Anatoly A. Blagonravov supported Gagarin’s predictions and said: “Mankind is entering the 7th year of the age of man’s space flight, and we do not doubt that in the not very distant future we will witness new space victories which will exert a growing influence on the life of people.” (Anderson, NYT, 4/9/67; upi, W Star, 4/9/67, A13; C Trib, 4/10/67)
NASA and Boeing Co. signed a $20-miUion letter contract extending the scope of Boeing’s work with NASA to include integration of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle [see May 9]. Boeing would: (1) assist and support NASA and its three manned spaceflight centers—MSC, msfc, and KSC—in performance of certain technical tasks for Apollo missions AS-501 through AS-515; and (2) be responsible for supporting Apollo Program Office in integrating Saturn V booster with Apollo Command Module (cm), Service Module (sm), and Lunar Module (lm). Work would be performed under overall direction of OMSF Apollo Program Office. Boeing Co.’s currently contracted Saturn work included engineering, construction, and testing of Saturn V 1st stage; support of assembly and system integration of Saturn V 2nd and 3rd stages with the 1st; and design engineering support of certain ground support equipment at KSC. (nasa Release 67-161)
NASA’s Apollo 4 (AS-501) was successfully launched from etr at 7:00 am EST in first all-up test of three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle, first in-orbit restart of third (S-IVB) stage, and first use of Launch Complex 39 and ground support equipment. Launch vehicle stages performed nominally; orbital insertion, 3rd stage restart, and injection into earth-intersecting coast ellipse were accomplished satisfactorily; Command Module (cm) encountered no functional problems; and splashdown occurred within 10 mi of planned landing point. Third stage ignited to insert Command Service Module (csm) into orbit with nominal parking apogee, 119 mi; perigee, 114 mi; period, 88.2 min; inclination, 32.6°. After two revolutions in parking orbit, 3rd stage was reignited for simulated translunar injection burn, injected stage and spacecraft into earth intersecting orbit with 10,774-mi apogee. Following stage/cSM separation, Service Propulsion System (sps) ignited for 16-sec burn, raising apogee to 11,314 mi. Spacecraft was aligned to a specific attitude to achieve thermal gradient across cm heat shield. Attitude, with cm hatch window directly toward sun, was maintained for about 41/2 hrs. [cm hatch window had been replaced with instrumented test panel containing simulations of flexible thermal seals and gaps between hatch and surrounding heat shield. Successful performance of thermal seals during reentry heating would qualify seals for use on manned cms,] SPS was then reignited for 271-sec bum to accelerate spacecraft to the most severe entry conditions that could possibly occur in a lunar-return trajectory, sps cutoff was followed by cm/sm separation and orientation of CM to entry attitude. Atmosphere reentry at 400,000 ft occurred at flight path angle of — 7.077° with inertial velocity of 36,537 fps (24,911 mph). cm landed in mid-Pacific near Hawaii at 3:37 pm, est, and was recovered by uss Bennington 2 hrs 14 min after touchdown. In significant step toward developing manned lunar landing capability, Apollo 4’s flight was the first of two to three missions designed to qualify Saturn V for manned flight, and the first test of the structural integrity and compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft. By subjecting cm’s heat shield to high heat load and heat rate, NASA was evaluating cm’s design adequacy for reentry from lunar missions—primary objective to achieve successful manned lunar mission. Other primary mission objectives were to: confirm launch loads and dynamic characteristics; demonstrate stage separation; verify operation of launch vehicle subsystems and spacecraft subsystems; evaluate performance of space vehicle Emer
Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell, was convinced the Soviet Union would attempt one or more space spectaculars during 1967, possibly during October, reported Richard Lewis of Chicago Sun-Times. October would mark the 10th anniversary of the launching of the first satellite, Sputnik I, and the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. The possibilities included a flight around the moon or a lunar landing with animals as passengers, a manned space station in earth orbit, and the first photographs of the planet Venus, the astronomer said. Sir Bernard Lovell said: “I have always believed that 1967 was the year they would try the circumlunar (around the moon) flight, but I should think they would do it unmanned because of the difficulties of the return at lunar flight velocity.” (Lewis, C S/T, 9/18/67, 16)
