NASA issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 crew was participating in verification test of electrically mated spacecraft and launch vehicle. For Apollo 8 mission, combined systems test on Command and Service Module 103 and checkout of Apollo Saturn 503 launch vehicle would continue through week at KSC. (Text)
In major organizational changes at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. W. R. Lucas, Director of Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, was named Director for Program Development, effective Dec. 16; Dave Newby was named Director of Center Operations; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Space Sciences Laboratory, was named Associate Director for Science. All were new positions, msfc Research and Development Operations would become Science and Engineering, with Hermann K. Weidner remaining Director; Industrial Operations would become Program Management under same director, E. F. O’Connor. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, said major function of new Program Development organization would be to “harden” complete package plans for new programs, such as space station. Director for Program Development would “help chart the course for this Center in the post-Apollo period, keeping in mind our Apollo program requirements and aap obligations.” (msfc Release 68—276; Marshall Star, 12/11/68,1)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V automatic space station [see Sept. 15—21] had carried first living organisms—wine flies, turtles, meal worms, plants, bacteria, and seeds—around moon and returned them safely to earth, Pravda announced. Turtles had lost about 10% of their body weight but remained very active and showed no loss of appetite. Preliminary blood tests indicated no substantial deviation from laboratory control animals, but analysis of test turtles 21 days after flight revealed excess glycogen and iron in their livers. (AP, W Star, 11/15/68, A4; B Sun, 11/16/68, A4)	.
NASA released transcript of Jan. 27 background briefing on NASA FY 1969	budget, in which Administrator James E. Webb explained how Apollo program had been kept close to schedule in spite of severe budget cuts. Although budget had been reduced $600-million in 1964, NASA had been given great deal of flexibility to reprogram funds. “This in effect permitted the driving forward of the program even though there were substantial reductions in the plan. I think if you examine all of the very large systems development in the country, you will not find a one that has kept more on schedule, given more for the money, and more nearly realized its goals on time than the Apollo, in spite of the fire, in spite of the reductions. The kind of rolling readjustment that we have had to make . . . has involved very large problems. And the projections we made as to our capability to meet problems of that kind have pretty well been borne out. . . . The fact is within this short period of time the Saturn V has flown. The heat shield on the Apollo has been improved. Service module has been tested. LM has been tested. And we have I think moved about as rapidly as any program—certainly more rapidly than any program of a comparable complexity.” Webb said NASA and dod were studying closer cooperation “in the area of orbiting laboratories,” such as mol and Saturn V Workshop. He envisioned production of “a basic capability of a rather primitive sort, something like an Antarctic base flown on the Saturn V which could be used for any national purpose.” (Transcript)
Command module for Apollo 7, first manned Apollo flight, left North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant enroute to Kennedy Space Center. Service module had arrived at ksc May 17. (nasa Release 68—100)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C., unique conditions in space suggested use of orbiting space stations for certain manufacturing processes. “For instance, liquid floating in a weightless environment takes the shape of a perfect sphere. Thus, it is conceivable that metal ball bearings could be manufactured in space to tolerances impossible on earth, yet at a cost, including transportation, less than we can now achieve. Perfect bearings would reduce friction and noise levels to the vanishing point. Free-fall casting techniques could be utilized to cast large flawless optical blanks for telescopes and by proper combinations of spinning and electrostatic forces we should be able to shape the surface as well.” Stable foams for mixtures of liquefied materials and gases, impossible to produce satisfactorily on earth, could be produced in weightlessness, resulting in “a steel foam almost as light as balsa wood with many of the properties of solid steel.” Composite materials like steel of different densities and properties and glass also could be produced. (Text; Schmeck, NYT, 11/27/68, 48; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/27/68, A6)
Workmen loading super-cold oxygen into Apollo 8 service module discovered gas had been contaminated, apparently by nitrogen used to flush tanks. Oxygen would be changed and tanks reflushed and launch was expected to take place on schedule (Lannan, W Star, 12/20/68, A5)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Integrated Systems Test had been completed on Apollo 7 command and service module (csm), Apollo 8 CSM would undergo combined systems tests at KSC early in week. Saturn 503 had been erected on mobile launcher. (Text)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 spacecraft would be electrically mated to Saturn IB launch vehicle at ksc Complex 34 next week. In Apollo 503 program, command module was scheduled to be mated to service module after Aug. 20. The three stages and instrument unit of Apollo 8 launch vehicle were mated at Complex 34 and undergoing tests. Modification and retests continued on Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages and modification and checkout on Saturn V 2nd stage for 504 mission. (Text)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary. In preparation for first manned Apollo flight, Apollo 7 spacecraft command module (cm) and service module (sm) had been mated in ksc altitude chamber to confirm compatible operation systems. Saturn IB launch vehicle 2nd-stage engine was being modified to strengthen propellant feed lines to augmented spark igniter. Apollo/Saturn 503 mission might be first manned Saturn V flight. Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle had successfully completed eight-day vacuum chamber test of Apollo 2TV—1 cm and sm at msc June 24. All tests necessary to help verify Apollo for first manned flight had been completed, with review of test data in progress. Last of seven scheduled verification tests of modified Apollo earth landing system had been postponed to complete analysis of all possible test conditions before drop of 13,000-lb full-scale Apollo cm from aircraft at Naval Air Facility, El Centro, Calif. Test would simulate severe landing condition using one of two drogue parachutes and two of three main parachutes. Ultimate load test of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes in reefed condition was scheduled no earlier than June 27. Repeat of unsuccessful test, it would be conducted from 13,00-lb parachute test vehicle at aircraft altitude of 46,000 ft. (Text; upi, W Post, 6/22/68, A8; SBD, 6/25/68, 270; 6/27/68, 285)
Apollo 7 spacecraft, which would carry three astronauts on 11-day earth-orbital mission in late 1968, was undergoing combined systems tests at KSC. Unmanned and manned altitude runs would follow, before spacecraft would be sent to Cape Kennedy to be placed on Saturn IB launch vehicle. Saturn had undergone tests and checkout on Launch Complex 34 for several months. NASA announced Apollo mission—which would demonstrate performance of spacecraft’s command module (cm), service module (sm), crew, and support facilities—would begin with mid-morning launch, carrying commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., CM pilot Donn F. Eisele, and lm pilot Walter Cunningham into earth orbit. During second revolution, crew would separate Apollo from rocket’s upper stage and perform transposition and simulated docking maneuver similar to one to be performed on lunar mission. Reentry under manual control of crew would culminate in splashdown in Atlantic at approximately 7 am EDT on 11th day. (nasa Release 68—108; ksc Release 285-68)
nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz announced William W. Rubey, professor of geology and geophysics at Univ. of California at Los Angles had been named Director of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex. NAS had accepted interim responsibility for operation of Institute until consortium of universities could be formed to assume its direction. Formation of Institute had been announced by President Johnson March 1, 1968, to provide base for academic scientists participating in lunar exploration program, working in Lunar Receiving Laboratory, or using other facilities of Manned Spacecraft Center devoted to study of the moon. It was to serve also as center for analysis and study of lunar data obtained from NASA unmanned missions, (nasa Release 68—191; NAS Release) October 31—November 1: Soviet academician and aerospace scientist, Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, visited Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute during AlAA-sponsored tour of U.S. At press conference he said U.S.S.R. would reach moon from orbital station but this was not crux of Soviet effort in space. “Other planets are just as important.” Zond-type satellites would circumnavigate other planets and return. In question and answer period following lecture he said U.S.S.R. would not conduct manned lunar space operation within following six months. In lecture, Prof. Sedov said it was “obvious that space technology and the associated research have a pronounced stimulating effect on the development of the technological fields . . . essential for large-scale progress—particularly in the development of automatic control systems; in radio engineering, television, and telemetry; in computer technology; in the preparation of new materials and new devices; in miniaturization and minimum-weight design; in problems associated with accuracy and reliability of automatic systems. . . It was clear that “space technology has become pivotal in modern industry in the broadest sense of the word.” Dr. G. G. Chernyi, Moscow Univ. professor, also participated in seminar. (Transcripts; Aero Daily, 11/7/68,29) During October: Soviet Science in the News, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., publication, said review of Soviet technical press indicated U.S.S.R. would attempt to orbit manned space station within the year and that it possessed “well-devised and thoroughly realizable designs.” First “rooms” of station would comprise Cosmos or Proton booster joined with Soyuz spacecraft. Additional rooms would combine solid and inflatable elements like polyethylene. Tests of water recovery systems in Pacific indicated broadening of Soviet techniques. Six vessels had been completed for ocean recoveries of spacecraft. Conclusion of Soviet scientists that weightlessness had adverse effect on human skeletal composition seemed to indicate space station would use artificial gravity. ‘Rotation of space station of from 40 to. 60 meters in diameter would generate sufficient artificial gravity to allow large number of scientists to work in space.” (SSN, 10/68, 1; Aero Daily, 10/16/68)
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
Boeing Co. said it would build one-fifth size thermal models of manned space stations under $156,500 NASA contract to determine their feasibility for predicting temperatures in full-size earth-orbiting station. (Boeing Release S—9840)
msfc awarded nine-month, $99,000 contract to Raymond Loewy/William Snaith, Inc., to conduct habitability studies of planned earth orbital space stations. Basic goal would be to ensure that workshop configurations were comfortable and functional structures in which to live and work, (msfc Release 68-79)
John A. Manke, NASA research pilot at prc, stands before wingless HL—10 lifting-body vehicle which he flew in first powered flight, after air launch from. B-52 aircraft. Manke reached 610 mph in NASA—usaf program to evaluate possible forerunners of reusable spacecraft. Eventual 1,000-mph speed was expected. Donn F. Eisele, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Flight crew support team wa3 Astronauts Joseph H. Engle, James B. Irwin, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Mission probabilities ranged from earth orbital operations to lunar orbital flight, with separation and docking of command and service module and lunar module. (NASA Release 68-201; AP, W Star, 11/14/68, A7; W Post, 11/14/68, A12; AP, NYT, 11/14/68, 21; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/14/68, 1)
Food, land, and raw material shortages might compel man to establish mining operations on other planets and to grow food in space stations, according to Dr. K. A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. He said farms growing food in chemicals could be established in earth-orbiting stations fertilized by chemicals produced on Mars and other planets. (AP, NYT, 7/15/68, 6)
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy called for prompt DOD action to revive work on quiet electric-drive nuclear submarine halted in May by DOD order when it decided to proceed with new high-speed nuclear submarine [see July 24]. (Transcript; Greene, NY News, 9/20/68, 8) characteristics of outer space near moon. Research mission had been completed and spacecraft was continuing to relay information to space stations. Zond V’s reentry and splashdown in Indian Ocean Sept. 21 was recorded by U.S., U.K., and West German space scientists, but U.S.S.R. made no official announcement until Sept 22. Tass then said Zond V had circled moon, explored space near moon, reentered at 11,000 mi per sec, softlanded by parachute in predetermined area, and was recovered by Soviet recovery ship—becoming first circumlunar spacecraft recovered on earth. “During the flight the station’s systems and aggregates for maneuvering on the trajectory and for returning to the Earth were tested. Flight control systems of the station and the radio-engineering means for measuring the parameters of its trajectory ensured the successful execution of the programme. “The successful flight of the ‘Zond—5’ automatic station over the Earth-Moon-Earth route, and its return to the predetermined area are an outstanding achievement of Soviet science and engineering. Another scientific-engineering problem has been solved, and broad prospects have been opened up for further research of outer space and planets of the solar system by automatic space stations which bring back research data to the Earth.” Tass announcement that atmosphere and pressure “remained within the limits of their present range” supported earlier speculation that Zond V carried prototype passenger cabin with atmosphere of artificial helium mixture which would be used by cosmonauts on future flights. Later Tass report quoted Soviet Prof. Leonid I. Sedov as saying spacecraft had special heat shield and was slowed down during reentry by “air resistance” and, “at a comparatively small height,” by parachute. Zond V was fifth spacecraft in Zond series and first Soviet spacecraft to land in water. Zond I (launched April 2, 1964) had failed in attempt to reach Venus and Zond II (launched Nov. 30, 1964) had suffered communications failure enroute to Mars. Zond III (launched July 18, 1965) had obtained photos of far side of moon; Zond IV (launched March 2, 1968) apparently had reached apogee comparable to lunar altitude and had burned in earth’s atmosphere on reentry, (gsfc SSR, 9/15/68; 9/30/68; W Post, 9/16/68, A17; 9/19/68, A25; 9/23/68, Al; NYT, 9/16/68, 29; 9/21-23/68, 1; Moscow News, 10/5-12/68, 3)
NASA’s Apollo 5 (AS—204) unmanned earth orbital mission, delayed for nearly four hours because of ground equipment malfunctions, was successfully launched from ksc Complex 37 at 5:48 pm est in fourth flight of Saturn IB and first flight of 31,700-lb lunar module (LM—1), designed to land two astronauts on the moon. Primary mission objectives were to verify operation of LM ascent propulsion system (aps), descent propulsion system (dps)—including restart—and spacecraft structures; evaluate LM staging; and evaluate 2nd-stage (S—IVB) and instrument-unit (iu) orbital performance. Launch phase occurred as planned; S—IVB ignited to insert spacecraft into orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 101-mi (163-km) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 31.63° inclination; nose cone jettisoned; spacecraft coasted for 43 min 52 sec; and LM separated from spacecraft LM adapter. LM entered orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 104-mi (167km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 31.63° inclination. Initial 39-sec dps burn, designed to simulate deceleration for descent to lunar surface, was automatically shut down after only 4 sec because of overly conservative computer programming. Ground controllers switched to minimum requirement sequence, an alternate flight plan with shorter total dps firing time and no provision for lunar landing simulation. Second dps engine firing occurred successfully, with 26-sec burn at 10% thrust level and 7 sec at maximum thrust. Third DPS engine firing 32 sec later consisted of 26-sec bum at 10% thrust, 2 sec at maximum thrust, and ascent stage fire-in-the-hole (fith) burn during which the two stages separated and aps engine was ignited simultaneously while dps was being shut down, simulating abort during landing phase. Duration of initial aps burn during abort staging was 60 sec, aps engine fired second time for 6 min 23 sec until fuel was depleted. At end of 11-hr 10min test period, both stages of the lm were left in orbit eventually to reenter and disintegrate. Apollo 5 mission, adjudged successful by NASA in spite of premature dps engine shutdown, proved out structural integrity of lm; verified in-space operation of dps and APS; and proved value of contingency planning, lm was last major piece of Apollo hardware to have its first test in space. Command module (cm) had been tested during AS—203 mission (July 5, 1966) and with service module (sm) on AS—202 (Aug. 25, 1966) and Apollo 4 (AS-501) (Nov. 9, 1967). Final decision on whether Apollo 5 results justified omitting second unmanned test and scheduling next mission to be manned would be deferred until March, pending final mission review, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—6K, 68—19; msc Release 68-4; AP, Strothman, W Post, 1/23/68, 1; Fahnestock, W Star, 1/23/68, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/24/68, 20)
Denver Post editorial: “With the goal of the project—landing of men on the moon by 1970—so close at hand, it would be sad indeed if NASA lost some key people now because of budget and morale problems. . . . There are future manned flights and space experiments to consider, and these will surely be crippled at infancy if NASA’s budget is cut back too severely.” {Denver Post, 6/24/68) In keynote address Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, noted no other program had given such impetus to technological and economic growth as national space program. “Those who oppose adequate spending on space technology are deliberately or inadvertently campaigning for a lower standard of living for our people, a declining Gross National Product for our Nation, and a secondary position in strength to that of the Soviet Union.” U.S. investment in space to date, he said, “has mostly been an investment in the future, the returns of which can be lost in large measure if we lack the vision and the vigor and the desire to keep this country great by maintaining a vigorous space effort. “Every major power and every nation eager to raise its standard of living and world influence strives to participate in space technology and space exploration. It certainly would be ironic if the United States, as the world’s leader in international cooperation and the world’s leader in standard of living, were to abandon or even neglect the source of such strength. I believe it might be labeled the worst mistake in history.” (Text; CR, 6/24/68, E5775—6; SBD, 6/25/68, 267; Aero Daily, 6/25/68) Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, said bioastronautics problems and provisions could have serious impact on mission performance, space station design, cost, and operations. Principal problems included those of crew rotation, crew size, compartment volume per crew member, radiation exposure, versatility of astronauts, station atmosphere, and prolonged weightlessness. In one study, savings from doubling crew rotation intervals from 30 to 60 days ranged from $220 million to $470 million per year, depending on altitude. Savings from increasing from 60 to 90 days were another $100 million a year. For same cost, slightly longer interval could support two more astronauts. Crew rotation intervals of two or more months should he goal. “If a future station can be expected to be useful over a period of many years and its cost can be amortized accordingly . . . efforts to achieve long crew rotation intervals have a very large potential payoff.” (Text; Aero Daily, 6/28/68) Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, described 100-man orbital workshop that could be operational by late 1970s. Proposed 615-ft-long, 1-million-lb vehicle, carrying 10,000 lb of experiments, would be launched in three separate parts by three Saturn V boosters and assembled in space. Baton-shaped station would revolve around hub in center which would serve as spaceport and zero-gravity laboratory. Crew would live and perform some work in 240-ft arm on one side of hub. On other side, 375-ft arm would house engine which would spin entire station at 3.5 rpm, creating centrifugal force to serve as artificial gravity. (Maloney, H Post, 6/26/68; AP, W Star, 6/26/68; CSM, 6/28/68) Arthur C. Clark, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, suggested that most earth inhabitants could not be very objective about possibility of extraterrestrial life because they were too “geocentrically minded,” still considering earth the center of the universe. “The whole history of astronomy teaches us to be cautious of any theory purporting to show that there is something special about the earth. In their various ways, the other planets may have orders of complexity as great as ours. Even the moon—which looked a promising candidate for geophysical simplicity less than a decade ago—has already begun to unleash an avalanche of surprises. “The discovery that Jupiter is quite warm and has precisely the type of atmosphere in which life is believed to have arisen on earth may be the prelude to the most significant biological findings of this century.” If we discover no trace of extraterrestrial life, he said, “even such a negative finding would give us much sounder understanding of the conditions in which living creatures are likely to evolve—and this in turn would clarify our views on the distribution of life in the universe as a whole.” (Leavitt, AF/SD, 8/68, 59-62)
American Nuclear Society held panel session in Washington, D.C., on “The U.S. Space Program: Achievements and Objectives.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, declared: “We must step up the rate at which we tap the vast potential of nuclear energy for the space activities of tomorrow. . . . if we do not make greater use of nuclear energy, we will neglect our mission of learning rapidly more and more about the solar system in which we live and about the planet where we reside. In the field of propulsion, chemical rockets, both liquid and solid, can be vastly improved when combined with the products of nuclear technology.” Combining nuclear stage with Saturn V “will greatly increase that rocket’s power of achievement. . . . Not only will we have the vast power of the atom at our command, but it will be compact, self-contained, long lived, highly maneuverable, and virtually independent of its surrounding environment. . . . Atomic energy will enable the space effort to reach for the infinite.” (Text) NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology James M. Beggs discussed “Research and Technology for the Future”: “The difference between success and failure of [nasa] missions . . . lies in our knowledge of the flight sciences and our skill for applying this knowledge to the development and operation of space vehicles. ... A natural characteristic of technology is its multiapplicability; an improvement in guidance or communication equipment, for example, may find many uses in space missions as well as non-aerospace applications. A key to making this process productive ... is a continuing research program . . . that has a good balance between the effort in the scientific and engineering disciplines and in the technologies needed to explore the unknown.” (Text) Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said: “The first practical application of space electric power systems, which have been under development over the past 10 years, may well be found in our second generation orbital space station program. Consistent with our present estimates of station initial power requirements, and allowing for growth, a zirconium hydride reactor coupled with a thermoelectric conversion system is being studied for application on such a space station.” (Text; Reuters, B Sun, 11/14/68, A10)
