Baltimore Sun said Indiana Univ. had announced plans for experiments with nasa to determine problems in making future lunar colonies selfsupporting. Studies to start in August would probe feasibility of growing earth plants in lunar soil to provide food for manned space stations and possibly fodder for animals transported to moon colonies in 20 to 30 yrs. “Moon grow” experiment would use lunar soil retrieved by lunar missions and would expand as more material became available. Experiments would be conducted by astrobotanist Dr. Paul Mahlberg and team at msc laboratory and later at university. (Perkinson, B Sun,
In telephone interview, ucla astronomer Dr. Samuel Herrick, Jr., said planetoid Geographos, due to pass earth at 5.6-million-mi distance Aug. 27, would be best site of all asteroids for eventual space station beyond moon and good spot for manned or unmanned spacecraft landing. Its farthest point from sun in given orbit was least distant from sun and from earth of all minor planets. But astronauts landing on it would have to “dig in and tie themselves down” since its estimated g was so slight “even a sneeze directed at the surface would propel a man off into space.” (AP, B Sun, 8/23/69, A3)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
Creation of U.N. Space Institute was urged by Columbia Univ. law professor Richard N. Gardner in New York Times. It would be “center for the cooperative planning of space exploration in which all U.N. members would be invited to take part.” U.S. and U.S.S.R. could divide responsibilities for instrumented landings on different planets. There should be “United Nations Space Station” in outer space manned by astronauts from all U.N. nations and trained at U.N. Space Institute. It would gather information about solar system and universe and be used for practical earth applications. {NYT, 7/26/69, 24)
At ksc briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget for community leaders, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, said: “It is clear that we will continue the present pace of launch operations in the Apollo program until the first lunar landing has been accomplished. . . . The continuation of space effort, however, must somehow take into account the same constraints on Government spending which now affect the entire federal budget. . . . The total ksc budget is being revised from $455 million for all purposes to $410 million. I am taking action to accomplish this reduction without crippling the essential launch team capability or drastically impacting the local economy.” Savings would be effected by: gradual cutback in efforts of contractors supporting design engineering; phasing down of Boeing technical integration effort; deceleration of Apollo/Saturn V launch rate to three manned vehicles annually, reducing employment; and greater use of five-day week and two-shift schedule, permitting stabilization of employment level at 18,500 by June 30, 1970, instead of current 23,500. ksc strength would remain at 80% of current level, with reduction in support and stage contractors. Civil service cadre would drop from 2,920 to 2,880 by June 30, 1970. Employment already had been frozen at current level. Saturn IB Apollo Applications missions would require increased employment at Launch Complexes 34 and 37 in 1971, with estimated increase in contract jobs of 2,600 to handle nearly simultaneous or dual launches, ksc also would participate in earth orbital space station studies. (Transcript)
MSFC announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to receive 11-mo, $2,899,986 contract for preliminary design and planning for 12-man earth-orbital space station for possible mid-1970 launch. Station— initial element of large space base and means of investigating effects of long-duration space flight on man—would have 10-yr lifetime, subject to expendables resupply and crew rotation. Parallel effort' was being conducted by Msc and North American Rockwell Corp. (msfc Release 69-204)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President, Prof. Mstislav V. Keldysh, said in Stockholm, “We no longer have any time plan for manned moon trips. Right now we are concentrating on constructing big satellite space stations.” He predicted expanded scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. with possibility of cosmonauts and astronauts aboard same spacecraft in future. In Sweden for Swedish Academy of Engineering’s 50th anniversary, Prof. Keldysh implied U.S.S.R. planned to assemble spacecraft in orbiting stations and launch them from there. He indicated existence of conflicting views in U.S.S.R. as to space research funding. “My personal view is that, when man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (upi, W Post, 10/25/69, A3)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight voted to add $230.5 million to $2.212-billion authorization requested by NASA for manned space flight in FY 1970. Of raise, $168 million was earmarked for development of scientific payloads for six manned lunar landings between 1970 and 1973 and $66 million for space flight operations to cover flying men in earth orbit for month at a time, in 1970 onward. Flights were to be forerunners of orbiting space stations. (CR, 3/26/69, D233; Committee member)
John N. Wilford said in New York Times: “Even though the Soyuz flights accomplished less than American observers had expected, they served notice that the Soviet Union may have forged ahead in space-station development while the United States was concentrating on the Apollo moon flight preparations.” But if U.S.S.R. had meant missions as beginning of first space station, “they fell far short.” There were “no link-ups of vehicles, no transfers of crews between ships and no test of the effects of long-duration weightlessness. None of the three ships was placed in an orbit high enough for the prolonged flights being considered for space stations.” Mission accomplishments could prove useful for construction of future space stations. “They proved that they were able to launch three manned spacecraft in three consecutive days, which the United States has not done. Such precision launchings are necessary for space station deployment.” Missions also had demonstrated first welding in space. “It will probably be necessary to weld together sections of a space station, rather than rely solely on the mechanical clamps used for present docking operations, and to make repairs by welding during flight.” (NYT, 10/19/69, E9)	..
nasa issued RFPs for design and planning studies of 12-man, earth-orbital space station for 1975 with 10-yr operational life, subject to resupply of expendables and crew rotation with logistics vehicles. Work also would include conceptual design of 50-man space base of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s and comparable to scientific and technical research, development, and operations center on earth. Modified Apollo and Gemini spacecraft would be considered as initial logistics systems if space shuttle did not become available in early phase of space station operations. Data from studies would be available for final design of future space station if program were approved for development. Proposals were due June 9. (nasa Release 69—65)
Joseph P. Loftus, Jr., Manager of MSC Program Engineering Office, described plans for future Apollo lunar exploration at MSC press conference. Technological objectives were to increase scientific payload to lunar orbit and to lunar surface, permit high flexibility in landing site selection, increase lunar orbit and lunar surface stay time, increase lunar surface mobility with self-propelled lunar roving vehicle, develop and demonstrate advanced techniques and hardware for expanded manned space mission capabilities, develop techniques for achieving point landings, and demonstrate closed-loop onboard navigation capability as applicable to advanced missions. Scientific objectives were to investigate major classes of lunar surface features, surface processes, and regional problems; collect samples at each site for analyses on earth; establish network of surface instrumentation to measure seismic activity, heat flow, and disturbance in moon’s axis of rotation; survey and measure lunar surface from lunar orbit with high-resolution photography and remote sensing; investigate near-moon environment and interaction of moon with solar wind; map lunar gravitational field and internally produced magnetic field; and detect atmospheric components resulting from neutralized solar wind and micrometeoroid impacts. Achievement of scientific objectives would be facilitated by addition of scientific instrument module (sim) under service module sector door, sim would consist of scientific instruments mounted on shelves behind door, which would be deployed pyrotechnically after crew left lunar surface. Spacecraft would also use new modular equipment storage assembly (mesa) . “Unlike the existing mesa it is modular and people, instead of having to take many things out of compartments and stick them into a bag .' . . here you simply take hold of a handle . . . and lift out an entire shelf. On that shelf are all the things required for the next eva period. So, it is one movement instead of a dozen.” One tank of hydrogen and one tank of oxygen would be added to extend mission capability to I6V2 days. Since each eva period would increase up to 5 hrs and total lunar stay time would increase up to 200 hrs, lithium hydroxide would be increased for portable life-support system and for spacecraft, and insulation would £e increased on top of spacecraft around docking tunnel. Minor changes would be made to interior garments so crew would have more suitable environment and crew would remove spacesuits and sleep in hammocks during rest periods on lunar surface. (Transcript)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
MSFC announced engineer Chester B. May would be member of oceanologist Dr. Jacques Piccard’s six-man crew on Gulf Stream Drift Mission, scientific undersea journey aboard submersible vessel Ben Franklin (PX—15). Vessel would drift with Gulf Stream current from Miami, Fla., to Halifax, Nova Scotia, from four to six weeks beginning in June. May would study vessel’s operation and evaluate analogies between it and future NASA space station. Mission, covering 1,450 nm, would be conducted at 1,000-ft average depth, with periodic excursions to 300 ft and 2,000 ft. PX—15, designed by Dr. Piccard, would remain submerged throughout journey. Crew would experience space station characteristics: isolation, confinement, and stressful environment. (msfc Release 69—100; Marshall Star, 4/9/69, 1)
NASA noted new level of maturity in conduct of Apollo 8 mission, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. ■Homer E. Newell, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C. “We got the feeling that the people . . . handling the operations had now a new tool that fit the hand.” Maturing of total space capability was seen in use of Pioneers and earth orbiting satellites during Apollo 8 “to keep track of what the sun was doing so that the directors of the Apollo operation could know what radiation conditions in space were relative to . . . crew safety.” Mission also used weather satellites and communication satellites, “not only to transmit pictures . . . but also as an integral part of the operation, to transmit data. . . .” Asked NASA’s priority on space station versus lunar exploration in view of increase in funding request for lunar landing program, Dr. Newell said: “Now you have touched uppn what I think is going to be the most difficult question for the country to resolve in the months ahead.” There was general agreement that manned space flight should continue. Debate would be over whether it would be done by continued lunar exploration, earth orbital operations, or both. “Our own feeling is that the country ought to do both. Certainly after having put all the investment into landing a man on the moon and developing the capability to do so we must continue to explore the moou. And we cannot foresee any reasonable or rational national program in which we do not continue that exploration. At the same time ... we haven’t finished developing the manned space flight capability. We have got to . . . get that permanent foothold in space and that is where the space station comes in.” (Transcript)
Underwater test program begun at msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator several years earlier was providing information essential for design of first U.S. space station, NASA reported. Technicians, design engineers, and professional divers in spacesuits and scuba gear were conducting tasks similar to those necessary to activate space orbiting workshop, in 1.4-million-gal water tank containing mockups of aap cluster elements (Saturn I Workshop, lunar module ascent stage, Apollo Telescope Mount solar observatory, and airlock and multiple docking adapter), simulating weightlessness of space. Weightlessness was impossible to duplicate on earth for longer than fraction of minute. Conclusions from tests would be reflected in workshop’s final design, with decision expected in May 1969. (nasa Release 69—4)
NASA would require $5- to $5.6-billion annual budget “within three years” for simultaneous development of orbiting space station and lunar exploration in 1970 and onward, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, said in Washington Post interview. (Cohn, W Post, 4/17/69, A3)
Bill added $258 million to R&D funds for new total of $3,264 billion, including increase of $75.7 million for Apollo program, to total $1,767 billion. Of this increase, $32.1 million was for Saturn V improvements and $4.6 million for lunar exploration. Within new total of $354.8-million noa for manned space flight operations, bill restored $57 million cut from Apollo Applications by budget amendment and added $66 million for space station and shuttle and $6.2 million for Saturn V production. In space science and applications, bill reduced funds for supporting research and technology by $12 million and deferred funding for four proposed Explorer satellites and for Mariner-Mercury 1973 mission, but restored biosatellite program to originally requested $18 million plus $1.6 million restored for Delta launch vehicle for Biosatellite-F. Earth Resources Technology Satellite funds were increased by $10 million, with transfer of funds to other projects prohibited. Advanced research and technology funds were increased by $31.5 million, including $13.5-million increase for nuclear rocket program, $5.25 million for chemical propulsion, and restoration of $1.20 million for aeronautics. Research and program management total was cut by $7.15 million, to $643.75 million. Construction of facilities total remained unchanged. (Text; CR, 5/15/69; House Rpt 91—255)
International team of scientists might man first U.S. permanent space laboratory, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at London news conference. Work on project would begin about 1975 and additional sections would be added each year for decade, eventually producing laboratory for about 50 scientists. Dr. Paine, on his way to Paris Air Show, said it was too early to say if there would be permanent U.S. lunar space station or to predict if man would land on Mars. He had no information to support rumors of imminent Soviet moon landing. (Reuters, W Post, 6/5/69, E5)
NASA announced establishment of task group on manned space station under Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and of task group on space shuttle under Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Reporting to Dr. Mueller would be LeRoy E. Day, former Director of Apollo Test. His group would develop NASA material for report on space shuttles to President’s Space Task Group by June 15. Frank Borman, former Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc and Apollo 8 commander, would report to Mathews as Field Director for Space Station effort. (NASA Release 69—70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
New York Times published interview in which Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. President Llewellyn J. Evans expressed concern over possibility of failure in future space missions. “It has been one big gamble up to this point. This country must come up with rescue hardware. It would be shocking if someone got stuck in orbit someplace.” He saw need for four space facilities: space station in earth or lunar orbit, shuttle for travel between earth and space laboratory, space “tug” to go between nonatmospheric orbits, and rescue vehicle. (Kampel, NYT, 8/3/69, F7)
Washington Post editorial said: “The fact that the Russians may be able to complete a floating [space] station substantially before the United States is ready to attempt it should be of no great concern. Although the psychological impact of knowing that men are up there looking down on us constantly is bound to be great, this should be more than offset by the successes of the Apollo program. The important things are for the American space effort to proceed in a logical fashion designed to reap the largest possible scientific benefits and to remain largely under civilian control.” (W Post, 1/22/69, A26)
msfc announced award of two contracts. Eight-month, $400,000 contract had been given to General Dynamics Corp. to study experiment modules for proposed manned space station. Study, which would complement space station investigations being conducted by McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp., would examine variety of experiments suitable for manned space station, analyze scientific and engineering community’s need for experiment modules, and develop concepts for least number of modules needed to meet these requirements. Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded $1,170,000 contract to fabricate, test, and deliver 15 Saturn V workshop rate gyro processors and 1 module test set and to retrofit 22 Apollo Telescope Mount rategyro processors for Apollo Applications program. Work, expected to take 18 mos, would be done in Orlando, Fla. (msfc Releases 69—172, 69-173)
MSFC announced it had awarded $173,000, 11-mo contract to Boeing Co. for study of cost-reduction methods in future space vehicle logistics systems, including expendable and reusable systems. Major emphasis of study would be on space station logistics missions in 100- to 300-mi orbits, with 5,000- to 50,000-lb payloads, and capable of holding 12 passengers and 3,000- to 12,500-lb cargo, (msfc Release 69-26)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and other top NASA officials testified on future space programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Introducing programs, Dr. Paine said: “The decade of the 1970’s and 1980’s should have a program as bold in concept and as productive as we have had in the decade of the 1960’s. ... we need to have clear objectives to focus our work and a commitment, subject ... to annual review, as to what these achievements will be. Our general goal area should be the continued exploration of the solar system while deriving the maximum scientific and practical benefits here on earth from the space program. There is no question that, at some future time, we will have the capability for manned planetary exploration and we need to face now some of the decisions that will not bear fruition for more than a decade. Although I do not believe that we will see manned exploration of the planets in the 1970’s in the United States ... I do think this could come in the 1980’s. It is by no means clear that for the Soviet Union the decision may not be made to mount a crash program and bring this in before the end of the decade of the 1970’s.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, described possible 1981— 1982, 12-man, 2-ship expedition to Mars [see Aug. 1]. Each spacecraft would weigh 1.6 million lbs at departure from earth orbit and would be 270 ft long, “smaller than what we are flying already to the moon.” nasa was using “concept of reusability” in planning, to improve and reduce cost of operating in space, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Committee. Reusability could be achieved “through the reuse of launch and space vehicles and . . . through the reuse of a mission module such as a space station” put into orbit and used over 10-yr or even 20-yr period. Space shuttles would be designed to run 100 or more flights. Modules and vehicles would be designed for multiple applications in earth, lunar, and synchronous orbits. Space tug would permit travel from space station to other spacecraft and back again—“general purpose . . . equipment.” In earth orbital operations, “it permits us to fly off from the space station over to ... an oao, orbiting astronomical observatory, either to repair or check the oao, or to bring it back to a space station where it can then be loaded on the space shuttle for return to earth and then brought back into orbit after repairs.” (Transcript)
Electrostatic zero-gravity workbench experiment by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud Assembly Facility might provide substitute for gravity in small space-station area, NASA reported. If successful, experimental equipment—three-foot-square workbench with coated metal top, high voltage and variable power supply, and ion source with interconnected cabling—would enable astronaut to manipulate loose objects like tools in weightlessness of orbiting space station. Ion source and high-voltage power supply, directed downward, would create force field to hold tools to bench top. Ground experiments would be completed in six months. (NASA Release 69—58)
Space shuttle was “first step or keystone to the success and growth of future space flight developments for the exploration and exploitation of space,” LeRoy E. Day and B. G. Noblitt of Space Shuttle Task Group, NASA OMSF, said in paper presented at IEEE EASCON Session on Earth Orbiting Manned Space Station in Washington, D.C. “Large experiment modules and unmanned satellites can be placed into low earth orbit and retrieved as desired. Propulsive stages and payloads . . . destined for higher energy orbits can be placed into low earth orbits.” On-orbit reusable shuttles like space tugs and nuclear stages “become economically advantageous once propellants can be inexpensively delivered to earth orbit. . . . On-orbit maintenance services can be provided for malfunctioning or inoperative satellites. . . . short duration special purpose orbital missions can be conducted by the space shuttle itself to augment or complement space station activities. The design and operational characteristics of the space shuttle will also provide a potential capability to conduct space rescue missions—a capability that is not practical with conventional expendable launch systems,” (Text)
Eureka, Calif., high school senior Ronald Titus had identified sketch of future space station released by Tass Oct. 11 as identical to drawing in Sperry Gyroscope Co. advertisement in February 1962 Scientific American, New York Times reported. Original Soviet caption had said it was “Soviet sketch of a future space station.” Sketch had appeared in Eureka Times-Standard and New York Times as concept of Soviet space station. (NYT, 10/26/69, 11)
In interview published by This Week, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said many things could be learned from moon: “One ... I hope will be international cooperation, such as now exists in Antarctica. Even though the moon struck me as a very desolate, forbidding expanse, it will be very beneficial for men to work together to unlock its many mysteries and secrets. I hope that both the moon and the large permanent space stations from earth will be citadels for international cooperation and that the people who visit them will really be internationalists in the truest sense.” (This Week, 4/6/69)
aec—nasa Nuclear Rocket Development Station in Jackass Flats, Nev., was “scaling down operations, laying off workers, husbanding the facilities it already has—and waiting,” New York Times reported. Like many U.S. space research and test centers, “their futures uncertain amid an increasing emphasis on defense and domestic matters at the expense of space,” station’s scientists and engineers were “waiting for President Nixon to decide on the direction and pace of the national space effort in the next decade.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/4/69, 20)
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
Nixon Administration was responding to nasa requests for $200 million supplemental r&d funds by “emphatically ordering future reductions” in FY 1970 budget, said William J. Normyle in Aviation Week & Space Technology, bob had told NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to plan on $140-million loss despite conclusions of House subcommittees that NASA’s R&d should be increased $234.4 million. Until Nixon decisions on U.S. space future, cut would “wipe out” work on space stations, shuttle/logistics vehicles, and manned lunar exploration. Feasible future programs were being studied by President’s ad hoc committee which would report in September. (Av Wk, 4/14/69, 27-8)
Economist said of Soviet Soyuz “fiasco” U.S.S.R. had tried “highly ambitious link-up of the components of a permanent, orbiting space station, something the Americans will be in no shape to do for perhaps five years. The fact that the Russians apparently failed must have been humiliating to them, and gratifying to the Americans, but it is unlikely to be more than a temporary check to a programme that has rolled with considerable success since the Russians put the world’s first satellite in orbit more than a decade ago. The slow progress reflects the state of Soviet industry, but is steady progress with few loose ends. The American programme, trimmed and squeezed by political pressure and public opinion, is trailing appreciably more loose ends; despite the victory on the moon Nasa will have to set about tidying them up. And it is then that the Russians will have the last laugh.” (Economist, 10/25/69, 20)
msfc announced it had issued rfps for experiment modules to be used with proposed manned space station to orbit earth in 1970s. Study, under eight-month contract, would analyze scientific and engineering need for experiment modules and develop concepts for least number of modules needed. Study tasks included further defining candidate experiment groupings, developing preliminary module concepts, defining minimum number of concepts, developing preliminary design and cost analysis for each module concept, and making proposed plan schedule. Proposals were due May-22. (msfc Release 69—125)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator-designate, discussed possibility of integrated European space program alongside that of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in Thomas A. Edison Memorial Lecture at Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. “The space-age challenge to Europe in my view is to find new ways of organizing and managing the great wealth of that continent to overtake, if you like, major American and Soviet space and other programs. This is the space-age challenge to Europe: not the ‘technology gap’ but the ‘management gap.’ ” Dr. Paine also said, if 1969, 1971, and 1973 space probes should find “very exciting things about Mars, it is possible that we or the Russians might want to move a manned interplanetary expedition to a higher order of national priority. At the present time, the best guess is that this would not take place until the mid 1980’s but new priorities might lengthen or shorten this period.” In reply to question on man-in-space justification, he said: “For almost any simple specific experiment ... an automated probe can be developed to do it at lower cost. The basic question here is the difference between short-range research projects to achieve simple specific objectives, and complex research aimed at developing general exploratory capability and broad technological positions which will let you do things in the future which you can’t yet fully foresee. For the latter you will need men.” Dr. Paine expected U.S.S.R. “very likely” would put space station into orbit before U.S. In lunar exploration, he expected U.S. to stay ahead a while. In planetary probes, he expected U.S.S.R. to stay ahead. In earth applications, he expected U.S. to stay ahead. (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on Apollo program, space flight operations, and advanced manned missions before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. He explained importance of lunar exploration and outlined plans for new space station.	■ President’s Science Advisory Committee had said answers to questions about moon “may profoundly affect our views of the evolution of the solar system and its place, as well as man’s in the larger scheme of things.” Fact that earth’s moon was largest in relation to its planet, Dr. Mueller said, “implies that the two bodies may have been formed in the same manner at the same time. If true, the moon may be a book containing the secret of the earth’s first billion years of life. This record is lost on the earth which is subjected to . . . erosion by atmosphere and water. ... By comparing similarities and contrasting differences, man may be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth; for example, the mechanisms that cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and the processes responsible for concentrating ore deposits. The orbits of Apollo 8 and the Lunar Orbiters were disturbed by mass concentrations beneath the circular lunar seas. These may be huge meteors that struck the moon with such force that they melted and sank into the interior, or they may be iron deposits. “Another objective of lunar exploration is to learn about man as a space explorer—his capabilities and limitations. Some day man will move on to other planets; the moon is a training ground. . . . We don’t have the basic information which early lunar landings will furnish and we can only speculate today about the feasibility of the moon as a base for an observatory or a permanent science station—about exploiting its environment of low gravity and high vacuum—about its potential for natural resources. ... A long-range goal like the lunar base would direct technological advances, stimulate public interest, and attain subsidiary objectives with earth application such as food synthesis, environmental control, and recovery of useful elements from rock.” Within new program category, Space Flight Operations, nasa was bypassing intermediate space station, launch vehicles, and logistic craft and proposing to move directly to new, semipermanent space station and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system. Space station “should be in being by the mid-1970s.” With FY 1969 funds, contractor definition efforts were being initiated. FY 1970 funds would continue definition, preliminary design, and supporting work. Dr. Mueller described space complex 200 to 300 mi above earth planned for 10 yrs’ continuous operation and adaptable for crew size, additional laboratory facilities, or other special-purpose equipment through selection, design, and arrangement of component modules. Crew would rotate at three- to six-month intervals, ferried between station and earth by reusable shuttles. Station’s electric power would come from solar panels or small nuclear generator. (Testimony; NASA Release 69-49)
San Francisco Board of Supervisors had voted to negotiate with Texas millionaire Lamar Hunt on lease of 22-acre Alcatraz Island, United Press International reported. Hunt planned underground museum in tribute to Apollo 11, while restoring island’s historic buildings. (W Star, 10/20/69, B4) weather satellite itos that would be launched in prototype by NASA later in 1969 and in operational form by ESSA in early 1970. “It combines in one spacecraft both the stored-data and direct readout cameras of the present two-satellite [tiros] arrangement. Fewer launches will be required to keep the system in operation. The design allows for growth and the capacity to accommodate a variety of instruments to meet new and developing needs.” System would contain high-resolution infrared radiometer for “nighttime observations approaching daytime pictures in resolution and quality” thus providing 24-hr weather satellite coverage. “This step will enable us to meet fully the first national program objective—providing twice-daily observations of the entire earth, both by stored and direct readout systems, day and night.” (Text) Fifty years of transatlantic flight—from usn NC—4 flying boat’s Lisbon arrival May 27, 1919, to June 3, 1969, maiden Atlantic crossing of Boeing 747—was traced in paper by Dr. Richard K. Smith, Ramsey Fellow at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. During “the Heroic Years on the North Atlantic between 27 May 1919 and 27 May 1939, there were 175 flights across the Atlantic; 142 were by airplanes, 33 by airships. ... It is confidently believed that all the persons who flew the Atlantic by airplane during that period could be accommodated aboard a 747, perhaps with some seats to spare. However, at least three more 747s would be required to lift those persons who flew by airship during 1919—1937!” (Text) msc Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said Apollo program might be extended to 1973 to allow NASA to fly three space station training missions in 1972. “It’s going to be some time before we settle it. But it’s going to be difficult to handle both Apollo and Apollo Applications from an operational point of view as well as a people point of view in 1972.” Revised launch schedule set Apollo 19 landing back to November 1972 and Apollo 20 to May 1973. Between Apollo 18 launch Feb. 11, 1972, and Apollo 19 were three orbital flights preparatory for establishment of first U.S. permanent space station in 1975. These flights could come just after Apollo 18, in May 1972 and in September 1972. Further reason for Apollo landings delay was possibility they would be made in remote lunar areas like crater Tycho, almost 1,000 mi below moon’s equator and rated among top-priority landing sites. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/23/69, A21) Dr. Arthur D. Code, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer, reported discovery that relatively young stars in constellations Orion and Scorpius were generating heats of 45,000°F—5,000° hotter than had been thought. Finding, from data obtained by NASA’s Oao II satellite (launched Dec. 7, 1968), suggested young stars might be more massive and maturing faster than originally believed and supported theories of thermonuclear processes in stars’ interiors that generated such heats. Oao II data also showed younger stars had more complex chemical composition than stars formed near universe’s beginning. They contained fairly large amounts of carbon, silicon, magnesium, and heavier elements, as well as predominant hydrogen and helium. Other Oao II data indicated particles in interstellar space were variety of complex matter, much of which might be debris ejected from stars. (Wilford, NYT, 10/21/69, C19) msc Director of Engineering Development Maxime A. Faget outlined concept of space vehicle with two reusable stages—booster rocket and orbiter craft—both with fixed wings, long fuselages, and rear rocket engines. Vehicle would be 225 ft high and weigh 2.5 million lbs at launch. Orbiter vehicle, capable of carrying 25,000 lbs of cargo and passengers, would be attached pickaback to booster stage’s upper half. Booster, burning liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, would elevate orbiter to fringe of space, separate, drop away, and cruise to landing like jet airliner. Booster probably would be piloted by two astronauts. Orbiter would ignite rocket engine to continue upward to space station orbiting at 300-mi altitude. After link-up with space station, transfer of cargo or 12 passengers, and pickup of new load, orbiter would be steered by pilot into atmosphere and controlled glide to landing on 10,000-ft runways used by aircraft. Key to reentry would be orbiter’s “angle of attack” when hitting atmosphere. Faget proposed 60° angle with nose up, so flattened bottom would catch airflow to slow descent. Small jet engines would be fired to help control final descent phases of both orbiter and booster. Outer surface of vehicles would be made of metal alloys that could sustain temperatures to 2,700°F. (Wilford, NYT, 10/24/69, 43) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed dod space activities: “In communications, meteorology and surveillance . . . we are actively pursuing increased capability. . . . Tactical communications using satellite relays are presently being intensely tested and show great promise in improving control of field units and increasing . . . cooperation between land, sea and air forces. In surveillance, our efforts have produced results. Of first importance is a new satellite early warning system that will do a great deal to further insure our ability to deter nuclear attack.” Savings in space travel costs “must be linked to the recovery and reuse of space vehicles. . . . Since major improvement in our ability to use space environment would be of direct assistance to both NASA and the military, we are jointly planning our research and development towards this objective.” (Text) Major aiaa awards presented included Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to George M. Low, former Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, currently on special assignment to msc Director, for “his leadership role in bringing the Apollo Program to fulfillment, and to the thousands of engineers who dedicated their careers, without public recognition, to the conquest of space.” Daniel Guggenheim Medal for 1969 was presented to retired arc Director H. Julian Allen for “personal contributions to outstanding research and development leading to vastly improved re-entry bodies, missiles, satellites, and spacecraft, and for leadership in directing and inspiring a large group of research men at Ames Laboratory.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given Edgar C. Lineberry, Jr., Chief of Orbital Mission Analysis Branch, msc, for “significant advancement in the field of rendezvous mechanics through his development of the space maneuver logic and associated control techniques, and his formulation of the mission plans which contributed decisively to the success of all rendezvous operations conducted during United States manned space flights.” De Florez Training Award was given to Gifford Bull, Principal Engineer and Engineering Pilot at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, for “establishing the use of variable stability airplanes as flight dynamics training vehicles for engineering test pilots.” New aiaa Award for Spacecraft Design was awarded Otto E. Bartoe, Jr., Vice President, Aerospace Div., Ball Brothers Research Corp., for “concept and preliminary design of the Orbiting Solar Observatory spacecraft configuration and control systems, the first embodiment of the spin-despin design.” Aerospace Communications Award was awarded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency and former JPL Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, for “development of phase lock systems for space communications, guidance and control, and for contributions to the design, development and operation of NASA’s Deep Space Network.” (msc Release; aiaa Releases; aiaa Booster, 10/20/69) Honored as new Honorary Fellows at Honors and Award Banquet Oct. 23 were Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Among 29 new Fellows were: Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, Deputy Director, Flight Crew Operations Directorate, msc; former gsfc Director, Dr. Harry J. Goett, Chief Engineer, Space and Re-Entry Systems Div., Philco-Ford Corp.; Najeeb E. Halaby, President, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Samuel L. Higginbottom, Vice President, Operations Group, Eastern Airlines, Inc.; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director; John G. Borger, Chief Engineer, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Walter Haeussermann, Director, Astrionics Laboratory, MSFC; Dr. John C. Houbolt, Vice President and Senior Consultant, Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, (aiaa Release) During third aiaa President’s Forum, Under Secretary of Interior Russell E. Train said, “Photographs of Earth, taken by our astronauts from the vicinity of the Moon, bring home more forcefully than the words of all scientists of all times the fact that we live on a finite planet with finite but poorly known resources.” (A&A, 2/70) October 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIV into orbit with 760-km (472.2-mi) apogee, 742-km (461.1-mi) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69)
NASA unloaded eight-ton airlock at MSFC for ground testing to qualify it as part of orbiting space station. Part of Apollo Applications program cluster to be launched in mid-1970s, 65-in-dia, 17-ft cylindrical unit was flown from McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s St. Louis plant to be joined to multiple-docking adapter. It would provide interconnecting passageway between S—IVB rocket stage and multiple-docking adapter in flight, condition environmental gases, and provide instrumentation, data management, intercommunication, and other services, (msfc Release 69—124)
Special Task Force report submitted to President Nixon Jan. 8 but not released by White House called for NASA revamping and shift in space priorities, John Lannan said in Washington Sunday Star. Panel, chaired by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Charles H. Townes, included Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, then NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. James A. Van Allen of Univ. of Iowa; Dr. Harry H. Hess, chairman of nas—NRC Space Science Board; and Dr. Walter Orr Roberts of National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report recommended continuation of $6-billion space effort, with $2 billion for dod and rest for NASA; disapproved of any commitment to large orbiting space station; and urged commitment to unmanned planetary probes. It considered NASA’s present structure inappropriate for post-Apollo program and urged bringing “an outstanding scientist into its top administrative ranks.” It was desirable to avoid manned versus unmanned operations argument and to focus on search for most appropriate role for human being in entire system. NASA organization was not “adapted to this approach.” nasc should be chaired by President rather than Vice President. Panel advocated lunar exploration and gave high priority to use of space for commercial and civil benefits. It urged space spending at Vl% to 1% of gnp and proposed U.S. intensify efforts toward international cooperation in space, Lannan reported. (W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified in FY 1970 authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that he believed “the greatest significance” of President Nixon’s decision to include in budget amendment amounts for continued lunar exploration after first Apollo landings and for continued Saturn V production was “that it recognizes the fundamental fact that the United States should not and does not plan to stop its further development and use of manned space flight.” Early manned lunar landing would allow additional savings of perhaps as much as $39 million in amended Apollo budget. Budget included funds for improved scientific equipment for more advanced missions to moon and for limited Apollo Applications program. Fund cuts would mean some program reorientation as well as delay in Workshop, previously scheduled for mid-1971. Amended budget supported continuation of plans for 1971 and 1973 Mars missions and first mission to Mercury in 1973, with Venus swing-by. In space applications, “where we are placing special emphasis,” Earth Resources Technology Satellite program would enable NASA, with other agencies, to test practical use of space to gather information on water levels, crops, forests, and other resources. “Despite the sizable overall reduction ... we have not reduced the earth resources project.” Budget included funds to proceed with nerva development and continued to give “high priority to our work in aeronautics.” New construction would include Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory at LaRC, “unique national facility for studying the fundamentals of noise generation and reduction.” U.S.S.R. was continuing vigorous program in both aeronautics and space. “The Soviet commitment represents . . . the application of resources at about the same rate as that we have averaged in recent years,” with “significantly higher percentage of the gross national product.” Soviets were “proceeding in manned space flight programs directed both at sending men to the moon and at substantially enlarged and extended manned operations in earth orbit. . . . Automatic rendezvous and docking flights with Cosmos 186—188 and 212—213 and the manned Soyuz 4—5 mission in January, with manned docking and crew transfer, demonstrated the increasing Soviet capability. . . . They appear to be pointed to a future capability for assembly in earth orbit of large space stations and of manned spacecraft to send to the moon and beyond.” U.S.S.R. had “made attempts to launch one or more spacecraft to the planets at almost every opportunity—three or four times the number of attempts we have been able to make.” (Testimony)
Space Task Group presented report The Post-Apollo Space Program: Directions for the Future to President Nixon at White House. It recommended basic goal of balanced manned and unmanned space program conducted for all mankind, with emphasis on increased utilization of space capabilities for services to man through expanded space applications program; enhancement of U.S. defense posture for world peace and security through exploitation of space techniques for military missions; continuing strong program of lunar and planetary exploration, astronomy, physics, and earth and life sciences; development of new systems and technology for space operations, emphasizing commonality, reusability, and economy through development of new space transportation capability and space station modules; and promotion of world community through program of broad international participation and cooperation. As focus for development of new capability, Task Group recommended U.S. accept long-range goal of manned planetary exploration with manned Mars mission before end of century. Activities leading to goal should include initial concentration on exploiting existing capability and developing new one while maintaining program balance within available resources; operational phase using new systems and capabilities in earth-moon space, with men living and working in that environment for extended periods; and manned exploration missions out of earth-moon space, using experience of earlier two phases. Schedule and budgetary implications of phases were subject to Presidential choice, with detailed program to be determined in normal annual budget and program review. Report outlined three possible NASA programs for manned Mars landing before century’s end. Option I would launch manned mission in mid-1980s and would establish orbiting lunar station, 50-man earthorbiting space base, and lunar surface base. Funding would rise from current $4-billion level to $8- to $10-billion level in 1980. Decision to proceed with development of space station, earth-to-orbit shuttle, and space tug would be required in FY 1971. Option II would include Mars mission launch in 1986, allowing for evaluation of unmanned Mars mission results before final designation of landing date and require about $8-billion maximum annual expenditure in early 1980s. Option III would include initial development of space station and reusable shuttles, as in Options I and II, but would defer decision on manned Mars landing date while maintaining goal of after 1980 but before close of century. Concurrent development of space transportation system and modular space stations would require rise in 1976 annual expenditures to $5.7 billion, while their development in series would entail $4- to $5-billion funding level. Recommended DOD options were: (A) program of full military space capability in case of overt threat to national security, (B) development of efforts to counter known and accepted projections of security threat and increase in development activities if threat increased, and (C) program of lower level system deployment with technology and support effort necessary for contingency planning on assumption that lessening of world tensions would reduce emphasis on national defense. At White House briefing following presentation, press secretary Ronald L. Ziegler said President Nixon had concurred in Task Group’s rejection of two other, extreme space programs, one to land men on Mars as soon as possible, regardless of cost, and one to eliminate manned flight program after completion of Apollo. He did not know when President would make decision on course to follow, but budgetary considerations would be major factor. (Text; PD, 9/22/69, 1291; NYT, 9/16/69, 1)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: “During the entire spectrum of our second and third decades in space, manned space flight has not merely been emphasized, but has literally cannibalized any hope for major scientific planetary, interplanetary, communications, meteorological, oceanographic (in cooperation with satellites), earth resources satellite programs, etc.! I must conclude . . . that the only valid justification for early development of the [space] shuttle is to supply the newborn 50—100 crew manned space stations and the manned exploration of Mars.” From 1958 to 1969 U.S. had launched approximately 750 spacecraft, Karth said: usaf, 380; NASA, 241; usn, 91; and joint usaf—USN, 37. (Text)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp.’s Space Div. to conduct parallel $2.9-million, 11-mo design and planning studies of 12-man earth orbital space station which could be developed by 1975 and have 10-yr lifetime. Companies would also include conceptual design of 50-man space base composed of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s to serve as centralized scientific and technical facility in orbit. Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., and Hughes Aircraft Co. had been selected for final competitive negotiation of contract to develop advanced optical communications experiment. Companies would compete for one $5-million contract to develop wideband laser communications system to be placed on board Applications Technology Satellite ATS—F, scheduled for launch in 1972, for communications between satellite and transportable ground station. (NASA Releases 69—108, 69-109)
