Two alternative plans for future Apollo lunar exploration were being developed by omsf for nasa Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and NAS-NRC Space Science Board evaluation, NASA announced. First plan was to fly remaining six Apollo missions as planned; second was to delete two missions, thus freeing two Saturn Vs and spacecraft for possible future use such as in space station mission. (NASA Release 70-1 35)~
NASA held Hq. briefing on space station and shuttle programs for representatives of 17 nations, eldo, esc, and esro. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said foreign participation was step in NASA’s continuing efforts to inform other nations of post-Apollo program planning so that they might determine extent to which they wished to participate in it. (NASA Release 70-41)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II-13) was successfully captive-fired for 367 secs at MTF. Stage would be used to launch Skylab space station in late 1972. (msfc Release 70-85)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
msfc engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 520 496 for Serpentuator—snake-like instrument to move men and tools under weightless conditions around space station. Series of metal tubes with motors at joints to control angles could be regulated from control panel inside or outside space station. (Jones, NYT, 7/18/70, 29; Patent Off)
NASA delegation to U.S.-U.S.S.R. space talks—headed by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director—arrived in Moscow for Oct. 26-27 meetings to discuss cooperation in developing manned space stations and linking spacecraft in orbit. (Clarity, NYT, 10/25/70, 24)
msfc announced award of $21 029 756 modification to Boeing Co. contract for work on Saturn V 1st stages and extension of contract performance period through March 31,1973. MSFC also issued rfp on preliminary design of Research and Applications Module (ram) that could be used with space station and space shuttle. Proposals were due Jan. 8, 1971. (MSFC releases 70250,70-251)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on NASA FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Manned space expenditures for FY 1971 would be about 25% less than in FY 1970 and about half FY 1966 peak. “We are able to make these rapid changes . . . as the result of two fundamental policies .... One of these policies is that the great bulk of the NASA program is carried out under contracts with industry, university laboratories and other institutions in the private sector of our economy. The other ... is that NASA must maintain a civil service staff sufficient in quality and numbers to properly supervise the work performed under contract .... Essentially all the reductions being implemented in the manned space flight programs in Fiscal Year 1971 are in those efforts carried out urtder contract.” In FY 1971 NASA proposed to complete definition of space shuttle and space station and continue studies of systems, missions, and payloads for further economies in future years. In Apollo program, Myers pointed out, scheduled stretchout of manned lunar landings would “add to operational costs of the lunar exploration program, although not to our costs this year.” In Skylab program, design, development, and ground testing of subsystems and assemblies of Saturn Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and atm were well advanced. Fabrication had begun on first flight articles, with delivery scheduled for late 1971. In space shuttle program, shuttle would be “designed so that it can be maintained in a state of launch readiness for lengthy periods and yet be launched within two hours notice into an orbit of any inclination. In the event of an emergency in space, it would be able to carry engineering or repair specialists to overcome the problem or rescue an endangered crew.” (Testimony)
Washington Post editorial on Luna XVI: “. . .the flight of Luna 16 is a major achievement for the Soviet Union. Its scientists have concentrated in recent years on a system of landing and retrieving unmanned spacecraft, an activity that the United States had not emphasized, and Luna 16 shows that the system works.” In long-term space exploitation “it seems to us that the manned approach will be most useful. Men will be out there some day, following the trail marked by the Apollo craft, and in the meantime the American effort can properly be devoted to finding a way to get them out of the earth’s atmosphere more cheaply and to making the best possible uses of earth-orbiting space stations and laboratories.” (WPost, 9/29/70, A18)
NASA announced it was inviting 450 scientific and technical leaders to Space Station Utilization Conference to be held at ARC Sept. 9-11. Invitees would participate in planning of manned earth orbital space station scheduled for 1976-1978 launch. Laboratory was to be operated in space for 10 yrs. At conference, panels would be formed to screen potential space station uses and panel recommendations would provide material for related study in summer 1971. (NASA Release 70-137) E.	Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Among those honored were Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders; Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chafee, and Edward H. White II, killed in Apollo fire; Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and wife Valentina V. Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Gherman S. Titov, Aleksey A. Leonov, Vladimir A. Shatalov, and Konstantin P. Feoktistov; and late Cosmonauts Vladimir M. Komarov and Pavel I. Belyayev. Others honored included Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, former NASA Deputy Administrator; N. E. Golovin, White Sands rocket scientist; Willy Ley, rocket scientist and author; Dr. W. R. Lovelace, former nasa Director of Space Medicine for Manned Space Flight; Theodore T. von Karman, aerodynamics expert; Joseph A. Walker, NASA X-15 test pilot; and Alan T. Waterman, NASA consultant and first NSF Director. Names had been selected by Working Group on Lunar Nomenclature and were approved by IAU officials. Other names approved included those of medieval Persian poet-astronomer Omar Khayyam, U.S. physicist Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, U.S. scientist George Washington Carver, mythological figures Icarus and Daedalus, and apocryphal Chinese rocket inventor Wan Hu. (McElheny, W Post, 8/15/70, Al; AP, W Star, 8/22/70, A2; SAOPIO; Sky and Telescope, 11/70,262-6) Communications with Skynet B were lost suddenly during apogee motor firing Aug. 22. Search for spacecraft was being conducted by NORAD. Skynet B was second of two U.K. military comsats launched in IDCSP-A program under dod-U.K. agreement. USAF managed project for DOD and would reimburse NASA for launch services. U.K. would reimburse USAF. Skynet A, launched Nov. 21, 1969, was operating satisfactorily over Indian Ocean. (NASA Proj Off; B Sun, 8/20/70, A3) August /9.-U.S.S.R.. launched Cosmos CCCLVIIinto orbit with 466km (289.6-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 24. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/ 70; 11/30/70)
U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX (launched June 2) set new manned flight endurance record at 6:35 pm Baykonur time, when it surpassed 13-day 8-hr 35-min record set by NASA’s Gemini VII(Dec. 4-18, 1965). Apollo Astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., sent congratulatory telegram to SoyuzIXcrew: “Your accomplishments are adding new evidence supporting the capability of men to live and work in extended periods in space. We wish you continued success in this important mission and a safe return to earth.” Lovell told press in Houston that mission suggested U.S.S.R. would develop permanent earth-orbiting space station: “Soyuz now seems to be purely an aeromedical flight, pushing men to their limits to see how weightlessness and the pure oxygen environment affects their work in space. It all fits very naturally with the space station concept.” (Astrachan, WPost, 6/16/70, Al; SBD, 6/16/70,211)
MSFC announced award of $320 000 contract to NR Space Div. for lunar base synthesis study to define and analyze lunar exploration missions, establish requirements, and develop conceptual descriptions of semipermanent lunar surface bases. Study would appraise mobile systems for long traverses of lunar surface, examine different surface drills and other tools and equipment, and relate capabilities of flying and surface roving vehicles to mission needs. Study also would examine operation of semipermanent lunar base without lunar orbit space station, operation of base while space base was in lunar orbit, missions that could be performed from base, and surface missions that could be performed from either lunar orbit or surface base, (msfc Release 70-119)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
NASA announced award of $1.5-million contract extensions to McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Div. to continue parallel space station program-definition studies through Feb. 1, 1971. (NASA Release 70-136)
Short circuit in oxygen tank No. 2 caused combustion within tank. “This in turn caused the pressure and a temperature within the tank to increase. The tank then ruptured. This rupture. .. caused the pressure in the compartment in which the tank is located to increase which then caused. .. the big covering panel in the Service Module to blow off.” Panel hit high-gain antenna and knocked it out, causing brief loss of data. Preflight events of possible significance included change of motors of fans inside tank at Beech Aircraft Co. plant early in manufacture. “Later on the tank, itself, was.. .moved from one spacecraft and installed in spacecraft 109 and during the removal from spacecraft.. .106, it was jarred or dropped an inch or two [5-10 cm].... Finally, during the loading and unloading of the tank during the countdown demonstration tests at the Cape there was an anomaly which made it very difficult to get the oxygen out of the tank. This was several weeks before the flight and a new procedure not previously tried was used in the detanking”—gaseous oxygen “was pumped into the tank and released again, the heaters were turned off and on....” Board was investigating connection between events and accident and would submit final report to Dr. Low and Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, about June 1. (Transcript)
Convair engineers presented results of “Phase A” experiment module concepts study during meeting at MSFC of NASA representatives and Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. Meeting was also attended by French representatives of ESRO. Module would be extension of space station that could be outfitted on ground and transported into space by shuttle vehicle. Program technical director Max E. Nein said module was attractive to European scientific commmunity because country desiring to participate could either build module complete with experiment package or build experiment package for integration into U.S. module. (MSFC Release 70196)
Lend-lease of quarters and equipment aboard U.S. earth-orbiting space station of 1970s to help foreign scientists study terrain of underdeveloped countries was advocated by Dr. Kraft A. Ehricke, Chief Scientific Adviser for Advanced Programs at North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div., before press in Los Angeles. (Miles, LA Times. 2/19/70)
MSFC engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 534 926 for machine to manufacture materials and articles in space. Cylindrical tank would be used in space station to produce new metal alloys and glasses, metal membranes, metal foam, high-precision ball bearings of hollow steel, and optical components in zero-g condition, where heavy materials did not settle out because of lack of buoyancy. Astronaut outside tank would control admission of liquid metal, gases, and other materials, and regulate heat, ventilation pressure, spinning, and agitation. (Jones, NYT, 10/23/70,43)
In LaRC test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft, four crewmen were sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Div. of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in Huntington Beach, Calif. During 90-day experiment, part of NASA oart program, crew would drink reclaimed water and breathe regenerated oxygen. Information obtained would be applied to operation of three-man Skylab workshop scheduled for 1971 launch and to design of 12-man space station for later in 1970s. (Langley Researcher, 6/26/70,1)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed Fourteenth General IAEA Conference in Vienna: “The industrial and technological advances being made in the world are creating increasing demands for electric power that is cheap, abundant, safe, reliable and clean. In my country, the estimated total electrical generating capacity for 1970 is about 300 000 megawatts. I believe that a realistic estimate of the projected growth of our electrical generating capacity by the year 2000 is about 2 100 000 megawatts, which will require adding the equivalent of a total of 1 800 power plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each.” On global scale, “some 5000 new electric generating plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each would be needed over the next 30 years.” (Text) Predominant theme of conference, was that reusable shuttles would substantially lessen cost of practical uses of space. There was little talk of manned space stations or exploration of other planets. Discussions centered on use of satellites for communications, air traffic control, and weather forecasting. European public had become “cool to manned space flight,” New York Times said. ESRO head, Dr. Herman Bondi, said at conference, “We have grown up with the impression that everything in space is devilishly expensive.” Belgian aerospace executive Maurice Desirant said European efforts at joint space programs had been handicapped by pressures to perform national feats. Now, however, European countries had become “more and more aware of the dangers.” They had seen money wasted on duplicated efforts which had achieved limited results. Lefevre said that, to be effective, European contribution to major space effort must be under leadership strong enough to override any differences arising from “divergent technical points of view, reasons of industrial competition, economic whims for national politics or finances.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers outlined shuttle plans. Payload of 22 680 kg (50 0OO lb) had been halved. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/23-24/70; NYT, 9/26/70, 11) September 23: Roy P. Jackson, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div., was named NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective Nov. 2. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, also announced appointment of Oran W. Nicks, who had been Acting Associate Administrator of OART, as Deputy Director of Langley Research Center, effective Nov. 2. Vincent L. Johnson was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective immediately. (NASA Release 70-155)
Four crewmen sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. [see June 12] successfully completed first 30 days of scheduled 90-day confinement. (Langley Researcher, 7/24/70, 1)
Space applications of plutonium 238 were discussed by Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, at Fourth International Conference on Plutonium and Other Actinides in Santa Fe, N. Mex. Most noteworthy use of plutonium-238-powered, radioisotope thermoelectric generator (rtg) had been as SNAP-27, power source for Apollo 12 experimental package left on moon, rtg’s were “of particular interest as space electric power sources for missions requiring a long life and high reliability, where there are long periods of darkness or great distance from the sun, or where orientation or other problems tend to reduce the effectiveness of solar cells as an energy source.” Significant number of future space missions might require plutonium 238 power source. Element “finds another extremely important use in space as the power source for waste disposal.” Heat from plutonium 238 decay would both produce bactena-free drinking water from waste products and incinerate waste itself. After Apollo, exploration of moon might continue with robot vehicles. “The maintenance and servicing of space stations and nerva engines in space may be done more easily and safely by robots than by man.... Nuclear power would be an obvious candidate power system.” (Text)
Four-man LaRC team emerged from space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, Calif., after successful completion of 90-day test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft [see June 13]. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong greeted crewmen John H. Hall, Terry Donlon, Stephen G. Dennis, and Wilson Wong. Project chief engineer Karl Houghton said test could have continued beyond scheduled 90 days. (AP, NYT, 9/12/70, 8; Langley Researcher, 9118/70, 1)
Office of Science and Technology sent to Congress The Next Decade in Space, report of Space Science and Technology Panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee: National program for next decade in space should focus on using “space capabilities for the welfare, security, and enlightenment of all people.” Recommended goals were to contribute to Nation’s economic strength and security and expand earth-oriented research and applications of space science and technology; explore solar system with phased program of lunar exploration, search for extraterrestrial life, and diversified planetary exploration; and use space platforms to expand knowledge of universe and basic physical laws. Panel urged that U.S. develop technology to expand capability for automated equipment controlled by man in remote location for space exploration and civil applications, reduce cost of space operations by cost reduction for expendable vehicles and payload development, strengthen biomedical basis for possible long-duration manned space flights, and encourage international cooperative programs. Panel recommended NASA and dod continue joint study of reusable space transportation system “in the expectation that a decision can be made for a FY 1972 budget decision on an STS development program.” Design target should be replacement “of the largest possible part of the national launch vehicle stable,” including Saturn V. “We urge the deferral of a development decision on space stations more elaborate than the aap space station.. .concept until the prior availability of the STS can be'confidently anticipated.” It was “likely that some form of multiply reusable space transportation system will indeed become the most attractive major new technology development for the decade.” Other recommendations were basic biomedical research program supplemented by 12- to 18-mo Apollo Applications flight program, to provide human factors information for more ambitious space station; possible second-generation space station to utilize sts; and earth-orbital manned space flight activity with systems using sts. (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine addressed Economic Club of Detroit in last public appearance as NASA Administrator. He summarized NASA projections of potential space advances to year 2000-advances U.S., U.S.S.R., Western Europe, and Japan, alone or in concert, would have industrial and economic resources to realize. For both America and other countries, response to challenge would “determine their futures.” _ New space transportation system—with reusable space shuttle to make return trips to orbit with passengers and cargo, permanent orbiting space station, and automated and manned space tugs for emplacing and recovering satellites and for transportation between orbits—was “bridge to our future in space.” Space shuttle would be “nasa’s major single effort during the next ten years.” New approach to large payloads based on shuttle booster stage would offset termination of Saturn V after completion of Apollo lunar landings by 1972. Skylab program scheduled to start during 1973 would provide basis for final design of space station. Integrated lunar exploration in early 1980s could use station in lunar orbit as platform for descent to any portion of moon’s surface for up to 14 days. Broad, vigorous, unmanned program to explore planets in 1970s would be start of orderly program to visit every planet in solar system, blazing trail for manned trips to Mars and Venus before end of century. “The space in orbit two hundred miles [320 km] above the earth can be thought of as a vast new continent, equal in area to the surface of the entire globe.” Discovered only a dozen years ago, new continent would “become increasingly important as the leading world source of global information and communication services and then, inevitably, as a new home of men from earth.” Beyond solar system, automated and manned astronomical probes would “extend our understanding of the universe through more intensive investigations in optical and radio astronomy and space physics.” Before century’s end, man might find answers to “the overwhelming questions of man’s origin, his destiny, and of his uniqueness as the bearer of intelligence in the universe.” Man “may indeed be unique— but the odds against it approach a thousand billion billion to one. ... Every experiment so far has been negative, but the search will continue. ... We do not know what may exist, but we are upon the verge of knowing.” Of Apollo program Dr. Paine said, “History may record that the substitution of major international technical competition, in place of war, was the great and unprecedented peacekeeping breakthrough of our era.” Benefit on international social and technical change was “evident to all.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
Proposal for space station to be assembled in orbit one module at a time was being studied at msfc and MSC, NASA announced. Station, to provide centralized facility for research, applications, and operations for 6 to 12 men over 10 yrs, would be composed of cylindrical modules 4.3 m (14 ft) in diameter and 17.7 m (58 ft) long, joined to form variety of shapes. Individual modules would be carried into orbit on reusable shuttle vehicle. Station could be assembled within months in circular orbit 320-480 km (200-300 mi) high with 55° inclination. (NASA Release 70-192)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
msfc announced NR had been awarded two modifications to contract for Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II): $1 768 228 for changes to original contract awarded in 1962 for manufacture and test of 15 S-II flight versions and $2 429 005 to identify S-II’s capabilities for launching space stations and determine what production impacts would result from msfc space station studies, (msfc Release 70-172)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight released Manned Space Flight: Present and Future. Staff study concluded that growth of national space program in decade had “provided major national technological and scientific resource of personnel and facilities.” Decline in resource could increase risk in accomplishing current programs and was causing “dislocations in affected communities throughout the United States.” With termination of Apollo fabrication, 8 Saturn Vs and 6 Saturn IBs, 12 cms and sms, and 1 or 2 lms would be available for manned flight. After 1974, U.S. would have no capability for lifting manned payloads over 27 200 kg (60 000 lbs) into space and would have only three vehicles that could lift 27 200-kg payloads unless Saturn V production was resumed or substitute was developed. Launch rate of less than two manned vehicles per year could materially increase risk of manned launch and spaceflight operations; production rate of two or more Apollo spacecraft and launch vehicles per year would minimize annual cost without inordinate increases in total vehicle cost over current costs, while maintaining critical skills of major subcontractors. U.S. would have no long-duration manned earth-orbital capability after 1973 without extension of orbital workshop program or initiation of development of space station. Early development of low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system appeared to offer greatest opportunity for reducing space flight costs while increasing flexibility and variety of missions in near-earth orbit. For increased flexibility in low-cost earth-to-orbit recoverable transportation system, development of chemical space tug was advised. Report noted that nasa maintained the only U.S. manned space flight capability and advised major decisions on manned space flight program to prolong capability beyond 1974. (Text)
AEC announced selection of Gulf General Atomic to receive $2 000 000, one-year contract to begin development of technology for thermionic-reactor power system for use in space. Reactor could be used in manned orbiting space station, lunar base, manned or unmanned electric-propulsion probe to explore solar system, and advanced communications satellites. Program was expected to take 8 to 10 yrs. (aec Release N-155)
At NASA Hq. industry briefing on space program for 1970s and beyond, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “I think that when we talk about reducing the overall aerospace program by 12 percent, we have to look at the other side of the point too.. .we will still be spending $3.3 billion in the 71 budget, and I think by any possible measure that puts the space program very, very high in the nation’s priorities.” Major reduction would be in manned spaceflight “from a little over $2 billion in FY 70 to $1,474,000,000 in 71.” With “the manned lunar landing behind us, with almost all the initial buy of 15 vehicles now completed, we are able to take a major reduction in the Apollo account as that program reaches a logical termination. We had hoped to continue the Saturn V at limited production of several a year. The decision was made under these austere conditions that we would terminate that production and take the savings.” Peak NASA expenditure of $6 billion in 1965 included outlay for buildup of total NASA base. Fact “that we are now down between the three and four billion mark by no means means that we will be operating at a substantially lower space activity than we had at the peak. It reflects more the fact that the base is now completed; we can put a much higher percentage of our expenditures into program.” However, FY 1971 budget would delay Apollo Applications flight until end of 1972; stretch Apollo lunar flights to two a year, with Apollo 16 occurring before aa program launch in 1972-1973 and Apollo 17 and 18 after aa program missions; delay ATS-F and ats-G by one year, and Viking-Mars lander from 1973 to 1975; and reduce NASA operational base by shutting down erc and possibly mothballing Mississippi Test Facility. Dr. Paine said NASA aeronautics effort would increase. “We feel that much of the work that will be going forward in the shuttle program will probably have some spin-off into the aeronautics area.” Emphasis would be placed on v/STOL and quiet engines. Orbiting Solar Observatory launch recommended by Space Task Group for 1975 would be delayed to 1976. Interplanetary Monitoring Probes originally scheduled for 1971 and 1972 would be launched in 1972 and 1973 and ISIS would be moved from 1970 and 1972 to 1971 and 1973. Synchronous Meteorological Satellites each would slip one year, to 1972 and 1973, and Applications Technology Satellites, one year, to 1973 and 1975. lunar roving vehicle would be carried on Apollo 16,17, 18, and 19. Decision on whether to fund two or three space shuttle definition studies would be made after proposals were received. In space station area experimental requirements would be emphasized. Two Phase-B definition studies were under way. Summer study of utilization of space stations would be international conference “with, we hope, strong participation from the European space research organization.” nerva studies would continue. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told conference that “with the technology we already have in hand” antipollution program could be initiated “to produce a space reflector—maybe it will have to be a mile [1.6 km] in diameter—that can direct the sun’s energy to create holes over our cities which would act as chimneys to evacuate smog.” (Transcript)
arc biochemists were developing process to convert principal body wastes—carbon dioxide and water—into palatable food for long-duration space missions, arc announced. Methods to turn carbon dioxide and water vapor exhaled and water recovered from urine into sugars and glycerol in series of chemical reactions might also be applied to solve food problems on earth. Work was under way by arc, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and two industrial contractors to develop system to produce chemical foods under space conditions, including weightlessness, and reduce food deliveries to orbiting space station, (arc Release 70-3)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
MSC announced award of $100 000 NASA contract to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for study of station operating techniques during space station mission to define crew command structure necessary to ensure successful operations, (msc Release 70-68)
Senate passed, by vote of 69 to 15, H.R. 16516, $3.316-billion NASA FY 1971 authorization, after rejecting amendment by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to delete $110 million for definition and design of space shuttle and space station. Senate requested conference with House. (CR, 5/6/70, S6768-817)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
NASA FY 1971 interim operating plan news conference was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said principal decision was “how best to carry out the Apollo and other existing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future. ... In our discussions, it became clear that the vitality of our national space program depends on a determined and vigorous continuation of plans for a reusable space shuttle followed by a space station in the manned flight program”; early development of erts, ATS, and HE AO; Grand Tour unmanned flights to distant planets; unmanned Viking Mars landers; Pioneer flights to Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter; and ‘a healthy aeronautical research program.” “With all of these considerations in mind. . .actions have been taken that will effectively reduce NASA’s FY 1971 budget request of $3,333 billion to an interim operating plan of $3.2687 billion.. .and to minimize NASA’s budgetary requirements for future years.” Budget request for Apollo was being reduced by $42.1 million to $914.4 million by canceling Apollo 15 and 19 lunar missions and by phasing down manpower levels at major Apollo facilities more rapidly. Although Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and nas-nrc Space Science Board had strongly recommended, after special review, that NASA carry out all six remaining lunar landing missions, NASA had “most reluctantly concluded that a reduction. . .should be made.” Remaining Apollo missions would be redesignated 14 through 17 and would be flown before start of Skylab operations in November 1972. Schedule would allow additional flexibility by providing Apollo hardware for possible use in Skylab, space station, or other programs where manned operations or heavy boost capability would be required. Advanced mission studies would be reduced by $1 million. Tracking and data acquisition network operations would be reduced $8 million by reducing number of manned flights and by more rapid phasedown in operating levels. Construction of facilities would be reduced to $25 million by deferring Polymer Research Laboratory at arc, Calibration Laboratory at MSC, and Multispectral Photo Laboratory at msfc and by rehabilitation and modification effort and facility planning and design. Research and program management minimum operating budget would be established at $678.7 million, amount included in previous appropriations bill and $13.6 million below NASA’s FY 1971 request. Dr. Paine said NASA had concluded “that it is prudent and realistic. . .to make these decisions now.. .to avoid more drastic and disruptive actions which would result if the decisions were postponed until later in the fiscal year. We also no longer have the capability to prepare in parallel two Apollo spacecraft, as would be required to maintain an option to reach a later decision on the number of Apollo missions.” Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers explained Apollo schedule changes: Apollo 14 would be launched as planned Jan. 31, 1971, followed at six-month intervals by Apollo 16 (renamed Apollo 15) with advanced capability for greater exploitation of lunar exploration, Apollo 17 (renamed Apollo 16), and Apollo 18 (renamed 17), last launch in series. Beginning with Apollo 15 launch in July, eva would be increased from two periods to three and man-hours per mission, from 18 hrs to 40 hrs. Weight of landed scientific payload would be doubled, from 227 kg to 454 kg (500 lbs to 1000 lbs); SM experiment package would be added; and range and efficiency of surface operations would be increased by improved suit mobility, improved life support system, and addition of lunar roving vehicle. Crew for new Apollo 15 would be same as previously planned—Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin. Skylab core module would be launched by Saturn V in November 1972, as scheduled, and would be revisited by Saturn IBs and csms up through June 1973. Beyond that, activities would be “at a standstill as far as orbital operations are concerned until the shuttle comes on line, hopefully in the 1976-77 time period.” (Text; Transcript)
msc announced selection of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to receive 18-mo, $1075 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for large space station solar-array technology-evaluation program. Program objectives were to conduct technical evaluation of current state of the art of solar systems and design analysis and test evaluation of components. Work would be conducted under MSC direction, (msc Release 70-48)
Explorer I. first U.S. satellite (launched Jan. 31. 1958), reentered the atmosphere over the South Pacific after completing 58 408 revolutions and traveling 2.67 billion kilometers (1.66 billion miles) during its 13-year lifetime. To celebrate the launch. Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Jet Propulsion Laboratory Feb. 17. 1958. Examining the spacecraft model with him (left to right above) were Dr. Clark B. Millikan. Director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Cal Tech: Dr. Lee A. Du Bridge, President of CalTech: Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPl; Dr. Jack E. Froehlich. Explorer Project Director at JPL; V, C. Larsen, Jr., Laboratory Administrator at ipl: and Robert J. Parks, Chief of JPl. Guidance Control Division. ty Associate Administrator for Planning, Dr, Wernher von Braun held press conference on NASA planning procedures: Skylab program would consist of four flights. First would be an unmanned flight boosted by two-stage Saturn V—only first and second stage, with third stage replaced by orbital workshop, now called Skylab. “It will be this country’s first orbital space station. Attached to this Skylab is an airlock module, and a multiple docking adapter, to which arriving command and service modules can dock for crew exchange. And ajso attached to it is the ATM.. .a manned solar observatory that will be serviced by the people living in the Skylab. One day after this Skylab has been launched into orbit and has deployed its solar panels, both on the ATM and the Skylab itself, it will be visited by a Saturn IB-launched command and service module, bringing the first crew complement of three. The command module will dock to the multiple docking adapter, the crew will slip through the docking adapter and the airlock, into the workshop. . . . And the men will stay up there for 28 days.” Crew would then “crawl back into their command module, detach.. .use the service module to deboost themselves, and the command module will reenter the ocean and make a normal Apollo landing. “About three months after the first flight, another flight will go up, and this time the crew stay.. .will be extended to 56 days. ... And finally, there will be a third revisit, again of 56 days, after which the third crew will descend. The Skylab will then go into storage and can potentially be reactivated any time thereafter if more revisits are planned.” Even without budget restraints, it would be “something like 1977 before we could have a [space] shuttle flying.” NASA was “in continuous touch with the Air Force” in space shuttle and space station field. “The armed forces. . .have the duty to look into everything that may have a defense aspect; and so it is entirely proper that they want to understand the ramifications of space.” (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, discussed future ofU.S. space program on abc program “Issues and Answers.” Dr. Paine said he did not anticipate further cutbacks in NASA personnel and facilities. “In my opinion we have slimmed down the NASA base to the point where we now have something which I would expect to see extended throughout the seventies and eighties.” He was “quite optimistic about the future of the space agency.” Dr. von Braun said “in the long haul” U.S. could not compete with U.S.S.R. at $3.333-billion budget level. It was obvious “that we are ahead in some areas,” but U.S.S.R. was probably ahead in space station field. (NASA Special Ann, 3/11/70; SBD, 3/17/70, 76)
Stages in development of Soviet space stations were described by Boris Petrov in Soviet Academy of Sciences journal Vestnik Akade-mii Nauk SSSR: “First.. .small stations. . .with three to twelve men, with a period of existence of from one month to a year or slightly longer, will be put into circumterrestrial orbit. ... Well elaborated and tested compartments of space vehicles and individual stages of carrier rockets will be used as the main units of those stations.” Orbital stations could be orbited in assembled state by carrier rockets or in parts, with one or two dockings. Station crew could be delivered by transport space vehicle and crews exchanged. One of main tasks of stations would be medical and biological experiments. Orbital stations would be created “of block design, assembled in circumterrestrial orbit in parts,” with maximum 10-yr life and 12- to 20-member crew. Petrov saw advisability “of very large multipurpose orbital base stations” for crews of 50 to 70 and, ultimately 100 to 120. U.S.S.R. had in view not simply space station but system of space stations. (AF Mag, 6/71,54-9) November I: Nixon Administration was “moving to make the hydraheaded Federal science and technology apparatus more responsive to the nation’s needs,” New York Times reported. New effort, to be tested in early 1971, would identify priorities in science and technology and weigh them to determine “where they will rank in the struggle for Federal dollars.” oSTand nsf officials had said in interviews that they were determined to bring better order into system of Federal research agencies. Reorganization efforts would focus on $14-billion-a-year r&d programs to translate scientific knowledge into better housing, mass transportation, cleaner air, and “healthier people.” Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, had emphasized that pure and basic research, currently allotted $2 billion per year, would be specifically exempted from reorganization. Current r&d budget was lowest in five fiscal years and smallest in decade in terms of constant dollars. (Lyons, NYT, 11/1/70, 1)
NASA manned earth-orbital experiment program for next decade was discussed during meeting of more than 150 Government and industry scientists and engineers at msfc. Purpose of conference was to discuss changes to planning document Reference Earth Orbital Research and Applications Investigations. NASA used book as primary source of experiment program data for continuing space station studies, research and applications module studies, and other manned space flight planning activities. General Dynamics Corp. had NASA contract to update book. (MSFC Release 70-252)
Budget limits had caused cancellation of one lunar landing and stretchout of remaining seven Apollo missions into 1974, Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in interview following LSI dedication in Houston, Tex. Eighth lunar landing had been dropped to permit use of Saturn V rocket to launch first U.S. space station in July 1972. (UPI, NYT, 1/5/70, 1)
North American Rockwell Corp. had begun testing world’s largest known rotational machine under NASA contract to evaluate human performance in rotating environment, New York Times reported. Four-man crew would live in machine for one week and perform mechanical chores and decision-reaction tests in LaRC study, to approximate conditions in space stations of late 1970s. Bulletshaped crew module 12 m (40 ft) long rotated at 4 rpm, which was best approximation of space station obtainable, according to NR Program Manager, Dr. James A. Green. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/70)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Four major research directorates were established at LaRC: Aeronautics, directed by Laurence K. Loftin, Jr.; Space, directed by Clifford H. Nelson; Electronics, directed by George B. Groves, Jr.; and Structures, directed by Dr. George W. Brooks. Supporting Centerwide directorates were established in Systems Engineering and Operation, directed by Percy J. Crain; Administration, directed by T. Melvin Butler; and Center Development, directed by Eugene C. Draley. Reorganization was to implement goals outlined in staff meeting by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright: expanded aeronautics program with increased emphasis on civil aircraft, new era of manned space flight with permanent space stations supplied by reusable space shuttles, planetary exploration, and maintenance of NASA’s basic research skills. (Langley Researcher, 10/2/70,1)
Thomas O’Toole reported in Washington Post that NASA was considering canceling three of six remaining Apollo lunar landing missions so it could use Saturn V boosters to orbit Skylab space station. Although firm decision had not yet been made, NASA had “undertaken a top priority study to see if it might be feasible to cancel . . .the landings to divert funds into. . .an ‘intermediate’ space station that could be launched in 1976.” (W Post, 7/9/70, A12)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine’s resignation as NASA Administrator became effective. He was honored at Bolling afb reception and testimonial dinner given by Dr. George M. Low, who would be Acting Administrator until appointment of successor. Dr. Paine told guests he believed requirements of U.S. space program “are not understood at the highest level of our official life” and said he was confident NASA budget would be approved despite President’s Aug. 11 veto of Independent Offices and HUD appropriations bill. U.S., he said, “must be the first nation to put in the first skylab and space stations. We must look to the post-dog-sled era of lunar exploration and develop a more permanent type of lunar exploration.” Dr. Paine warned that NASA must “face the reality that in the 70s the Soviet Union will attempt to overtake us. ... We will be tested against a strong and vigorous Soviet program.” U.S. had “held out the olive branch.. .but if the cold war is extended into space, then NASA will be ready to meet any threat that may develop in space.” According to Washington Evening Star, it was first time Dr. Paine had publicly cited threat of Soviet military supremacy in space. Later, in interview following dinner, Dr. Paine said he meant NASA’s charge was to keep U.S. in forefront of space technology and to be ready to hand that technology to dod if required. He believed defense against icbm might yet be space-based. If so, NASA should be in technologically superior position because of space station, shuttle, and other concepts. (W Star, 9/16/ 70, B8, C7)
msfc Advanced Systems Analysis Office was investigating possible uses of space tug, multipurpose vehicle to be developed simultaneously with larger space shuttle, msfc announced. Only space vehicle that would work with and connect all existing and future vehicles and systems, tug would first be used as link between space shuttle and space station to taxi cargo and passengers in earth orbit. Both msfc and msc were working to develop space tug plans, (msfc Release 70-102)
