Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of gsfc Institute for Space Studies, was quoted as saying in London that people often forgot intelligence factor in debate over manned versus unmanned space missions. Dr. Jastrow had pointed out that by time unmanned space exploration technology reached level of achievement already exhibited in manned exploration, lunar exploration—or even Martian exploration—might have advanced to stage of extended expeditions or space station. Then human performance would again have jumped ahead of machines. (Cowen, CSM, 2/11/71)
First detailed Soviet analysis of U.S. plan for Grand Tour of outer planets was reported by New York Times. In Vestnik, principal publication of Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet space expert Timur M. Eneyev had suggested that four missions covering two planets each might be more successful than the two missions to three planets contemplated by NASA. He indicated Soviet scientists favored approach of delivering automatic space stations to outer planets and suspending them by balloons in planetary atmosphere. He said technique, “for all its exotic aspects and difficulties of realization, is probably the most promising because it would yield far more data about the nature of the giant planets than could be obtained from fly-by trajectories.” (Shabad, NYT, 5/9/71)
NASA announced assignment of Robert 0. Aller, Manager of Space Station Operations, Space Station Task Force for omsf, to Skylab Program Office as Director of Operations. Aller would be responsible for coordination and development of operationally related program and mission planning activities, (nasa Hq WB )
nasa announced it was requesting proposals from potential U.S. and foreign experimenters for investigations of data to be acquired from earth resources experiment package (erep) to fly on manned Skylab spacecraft in late 1972. Data would be used to appraise value and direct applications of space observations in agriculture, geography, forestry, geology, hydrology, oceanography, and cartography. Objectives of erep were to extend use of sensors; use man to observe, discriminate, and select study areas; and provide early source of unique research data for analysis. Three-man experimental space station would be manned by three different crews for total five months during eight-month mission in circular orbit of 435 km (270 mi) with 50° inclination. Astronauts would investigate solar astronomy, space medicine, space physics, bioscience, and material processing in addition to operating erep sensors, including six high-precision, 70-mm cameras, infrared spectrometer, multispectral scanner, microwave radiometer/ scatterometer and altimeter, and passive radiometer, (nasa Release 71-5)
U.S. manned space flight program would continue on schedule despite Soyuz 11 tragedy, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, told press in Houston. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, said cosmonauts could have been killed by a toxic gas that accidently escaped, either by a chemical reaction or by a substance being heated inadvertently. He said odds were 1000 to 1 against one cosmonaut dying from effects of 24 days of weightlessness and it was almost impossible for all three to die simultaneously from weightlessness. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told press cosmonauts’ deaths might have been caused by failure of spacecraft’s oxygen-supply system or by physical rupture of spacecraft. Deaths, he said, were “a terrible tragedy. They were pioneers in their achievements in space—in establishing the first manned space station. Our hearts go out to their families and to their colleagues. The cause of their death is not yet known to us. But I would speculate that the fault was with the spacecraft and not with the men. In all of our experience man has readily adapted to new conditions, while machines have sometimes failed.” Dr. Low said he did not expect changes in nasa’s Skylab program because of cosmonauts’ deaths: “All of our experience in 24 manned flights suggests we can and should move ahead.” (upx, W Star, 7/1/71, A3; NASA Activities, 7/15/71, 107)
Newsweek commented on “shrinking space shuttle.” U.S. space program had been “hit with another budgetary broadside.” Space shuttle to service planned space station “will get no more than a third of the money its designers insist they need to build it.” Original request for $300 million had been cut by NASA to $225 million. “Now White House budgeteers have shrunk it to $105 million—and it has yet to face the anti-technology faction in Congress.” (Newsweek, 1/25/71)
U.S.S.R. was “clearly a big jump ahead” of U.S. in “post-moon race operations,” Detroit News editorial said. “Credit must be given the Russians for having the shrewdness to go all out for orbital space stations when they realized, as they must have done before Armstrong and Aldrin landed on the moon . . . that they were sure to lose the moon race. We shall have to watch for a few years because the decision has been made to slash the space budget.” (Detroit News, 4/25/71, 4M)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
Marshall Space Flight Center announced retirement of Director of Program Management Lee B. James, effective May 31. James, who would return to academic community, would be replaced in acting capacity by James T. Shepherd, Deputy Director (Technical), Program Management. (msfc Release 71—77) During April: nasa issued Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific and Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1970—1972: Annual Report to The National Science Foundation. In FY 1972 budget, NASA was seeking authorization of $3,271 billion. Effect on programs would be: Funds for basic research would remain at FY 1970 level in FY 1971 and rise in FY 1972, reflecting increased funding for Viking and initiation of outer planets Grand Tour project. In applied research, estimates for FY 1971 reflected 10% increase over 1970 and slight increase in FY 1972, primarily for earth resources surveys and space station. Budget authority for development activities would decline in 1971 and 1972, primarily as result of completion of Apollo program and reduction in nasa—aec nerva program effort, r&d funds were requested in FY 1972 for space shuttle technology and engine development facilities. (Text)
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, described future benefit of space program spinoff in Parade article on applications of space technology to social problems. “On the 1973 flights in the Skylab experimental space station, a medical doctor will go into space with the astronauts. He will carry out a comprehensive program of experiments ... to establish how well men live and work in weightless conditions in an enclosed space as big as a three-bedroom house.” With data obtained, space benefits could be achieved in a few years and made available to people everywhere. (Parade, 12/5/71, 8, 12)
nasa press conference at msc summarized June 21-25 U.S — U.S.S.R. discussions on joint space docking. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director and head of NASA delegation to discussions, said talks had been friendly throughout. “It was a period of hard work covering very difficult technical areas.” Meetings had been successful “in reaching conclusions, in principle, on all these subjects that we discussed, and in some detail in several of the subjects.” Need had been felt by both sides for “possibility of flight studies to test the technical requirements for docking and rendezvous, . . . one that would use the actual kind of compatible . . . equipment” that would make possible space rescue from spacecraft of either side that might be in trouble. U.S. and Soviet CMS and space stations with mixed crews could orbit earth within four years. Soviet crews and U.S. crews “would no doubt, if they docked, . . . want to open the hatches and visit with one another.” Dr. Gilruth said flight test might take place in mid-70s. (Transcript)
New York Times editorial commented on Soyuz-Salyut mission: “The latest Soviet spade spectacular follows a long series of indications by Kremlin leaders that their present priority in manned space flight is establishment of a long-lasting station in space. This latest experiment seems an important—as well as expensive—step on the road toward that objective.” But there was no guarantee that space stations would be restricted to benign purposes. “Logically, there should be no national space stations in space. All such facilities should be operated by the United Nations employing crews from many nations and they should all be open to appropriate international inspection.” Principle had been recognized in Antarctic “where the presence of Soviet scientists in American bases and American scientists in Soviet bases has a long, useful and honorable history. With the latest Soyuz and Salyut vehicles in orbit, the sensitive issues raised by space stations must be faced in the nearest future.” (NYT, 4/24/71)
U.S.S.R. was “showing signs of an accelerated effort” in space “stretching far beyond the implications of last month’s start on an orbiting space station,” Aviation Week & Space Technology said. “Latest analysis of orbital changes achieved by Cosmos 382, launched by a Proton booster . . . last fall . . . shows that the large unmanned satellite was moved once at an acceleration corresponding precisely to that required for lunar orbit insertion and once at exactly the velocity change needed for trans-earth injection.” (Av Wk, 5/3/71, 13)
Major Soviet space station project included “powerful new launch vehicle in the class of America’s Saturn 5,” Kenneth Gatland said in New Scientist and Science Journal article. Prototype had been destroyed by fire in 1969 while undergoing static test on launch pad at Baykonur, he reported. (New Sci & Sci J, 4/29/71, 256-7)
Boris Petrov, chairman of Soviet Intercosmos Scientific Council on Space, said in Pravda that deaths of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts would not halt U.S.S.R.’s manned orbital space station: “New flights into space, the building of new manned orbital stations of the Salyut type, lie ahead. Undoubtedly, larger and more complex multipurpose and specialized manned space stations will be built. One can say with confidence that the 1970s will become an epoch of the development and broad use of long-term manned orbital stations with changing crews which will make it possible to switch from occasional experiments in space to a regular vigil by scientists and experts in space laboratories.” (upi, NY News, 7/5/71, 7)
Electrical power development for space was summarized by aiaa Electric Power Systems Committee in Astronautics & Aeronautics article: “Batteries have continued to be employed beyond Explorer I for either primary power or as an element of power subsystem. Silver-zinc batteries provided 13.5 kilowatt-hours (Kwh) of electrical energy for the Mercury spacecraft, up to 63 Kwh for the early Geminis, and 65 Kwh for the Apollo Lunar Module. Specific energies have advanced to 90 watt-hours per pound (wh/lb) [198 wh per kg] in unmanned Agena vehicles. The continuing flight dependence on batteries was dramatically illustrated by the rescue phase of the Apollo-13 mission, which used the lm batteries for power after the failure of the cryogenic supply of the Service Module fuel cell system. Undoubtedly, batteries will remain a vital independent power source in manned missions and perhaps unmanned missions for many years.” Committee recommended that “competitiveness of the isotope and reactor systems for powers in the tens of kilowatts be encouraged rather than inhibited and that the technology programs for both be kept viable,” felt “that achieving acceptance of a reactor power system for manned Earth-orbiting missions presents a major challenge to the power community in the 1970s,” and criticized lack of resources “to pursue effectively all of the advanced reactor power-system options that have been carried along most of the 1960s.” (A&A, 8/71, 22-30)
TRW Inc. would develop conceptual designs for manned research laboratory to support communications and navigation experiments under 10-mo, $288 000 contract, msfc announced. Study assumed laboratory would be launched in 1980s and could be flown as research and applications module or as segment of orbiting space station, (msfc Release 71-108)
Future space shuttle missions were described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in speech before South Carolina Lions Clubs in Greenville, S.C.: “These payloads cover the areas of space physics, astronomy, space applications, life sciences, unmanned planetary exploration, and earth resources, military and commercial.” Payloads ranged from 113-kg (250-lb) Explorer and Space Physics Satellites to 9100-kg (20 000-lb) astronomy mission “requiring annual revisits by the shuttle for servicing maintenance and updating of instrumentation.” Sortie flights conducted solely by shuttle could be made within its seven-day orbit capability. Scientist could “conduct his own experiment in the orbiting shuttle and return with the data as well as his own observations. When the space station becomes operational, crew rescue missions could also be flown.” (Text)
John C. Lindsay Memorial Award for 1971 was presented to Harry E. Peters of gsfc Laser Data Systems Branch during gsfc Scientific Colloquium. Award, given annually to gsfc employee who had made outstanding contribution to science or technology, was presented for individual contributions to the advancement of hydrogen maser frequency standards resulting in most stable frequency standards known and making possible dramatic improvement in space tracking and system precision. (Goddard News, 6/14/71, 1) Orbital parameters for Soyuz 11 were apogee, 237 km (147.3 mi); perigee, 163 km (101.3 mi); period, 88.4 min; and inclination, 51.5°. Spacecraft docked with Salyut 1 at 10:45 am Moscow time (3:45 am edt) June 7. Tass announcement said: “In accordance with the Soviet programme of creating long-term orbital stations, the ‘Salyut’ orbital scientific station has started to function as the first piloted scientific station. . . . After successfully docking the Soyuz-11 transport spaceship with the scientific station . . . the crew of Soyuz-11 entered the scientific station. Solved for the first time was the engineering and technical task of delivering a crew to an orbiting scientific station by a transport ship.” Tass said Salyut-Soyuz space system was 20 m (66 ft) long, weighed more than 25 tons, and consisted of compartments containing equipment for scientific and technical experiments, for spacecraft control, and for crew work and rest. Cosmonauts would check out spacecraft subsystems; test orientation and navigation equipment; study geological-geographical objects on earth’s surface, atmospheric formations, and snow and ice cover; study physical characteristics, processes, and phenomena in atmosphere and outer space; and study medico-biological influence of space flight factors on human organism. Cosmonauts checked out systems, conducted experiments, and sent messages of thanks to scientists, engineers, and workers who took part in creation of space station system. TV transmissions showed crew performing duties in spacecraft. After one week in orbit, crew was in good health and had completed first phase of experiments with all systems functioning normally. Crew was allowed one-day rest before continuing experiments. By 1:00 pm Moscow time (6:00 am edt) June 13 Salyut-Soyuz station had completed 100 orbits of earth. Cosmonauts continued to follow preplanned program of work, rest, and two hours of exercise per day and reported they were in good health. Experiments included communications with ground via orbiting Molniya I comsat, astronomical observations, medical experiments, observation of cyclone in Pacific near Japan, and experiments with plants in hothouse on board. They reared tadpoles into frogs and grew cabbages and onions. By 12:00 noon Moscow time (5:00 am edt) June 22 station had completed 245 orbits of earth. Station completed 18th day in orbit June 24, surpassing 17-day 17-hr endurance record set by Soyuz 9 June 2—19,1970. On June 29 cosmonauts completed flight program and prepared for reentry. Crew transferred equipment to Soyuz 11 and undocked from Salyut 1 at 9:28 pm Moscow time (2:28 pm edt). Crew reported successful undocking and said all systems were functioning normally. At 1:35 am Moscow time June 30 (6:35 pm edt June 29) spacecraft’s braking engine was fired for prescheduled period. At end of engine firing communication with Soyuz 11 crew ceased. Tass said: “According to the program, after aerodynamic braking in the atmosphere the parachute system was put into action and before landing—the soft-landing engines were fired. The flight of the descending apparatus ended in a smooth landing in the pre-set area. Landing simultaneously with the ship, a helicopter-borne recovery group, upon opening .the hatch, found the crew ... in their seats, without any signs of life. The causes of the crew’s death are being investigated.” (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71; fbis-Sov-71-109-126, 6/7-30/71; Newsweek, 7/12/71)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) on Senate floor questioned need for space shuttle and space station: “I have written to NASA on a number of occasions to ask whether . . . there is a need for the space shuttle-space station. All nasa has told me in reply is that first, the shuttle would enable us to continue to have an active space program, and second, it would reduce the costs of the space program. But why do we actually need it? What would it help us to accomplish that we could not otherwise accomplish? NASA seemingly has no answer to these questions.” (CR, 5/26/71, S7811—2)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had selected msfc to integrate two proposed earth orbital projects, space station and research and applications modules (ram), by supervising definition, design, and verification of design concepts, msfc announced. Development of space station would follow development of space shuttle, ram was family of space payload carrier modules to be delivered to earth orbit by shuttle, (msfc Release 71—118)
Three aerospace teams, including seven European firms interested in support roles, submitted proposals to msfc on preliminary design of research and applications module (ram) proposed for space shuttle and space station. Proposals were submitted by McDonnell Douglas Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and General Electric Co. Team headed by General Dynamics would include matra of France, erno of Germany, SAAB of Sweden, Hawker Siddeley of U.K., and Fiat of Italy. General Electric team would include Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm of Germany and Thompson-CSF of France, (msfc Release 71—10)
Milwaukee Journal editorial on Apollo 14 commented: “The real return on Apollo lies in the future—beyond the more difficult missions of flights 15, 16 and 17. It is in Skylab, reusable space shuttles and sophisticated space stations to come. It is in the complex monitoring of the earth and its resources from space. It is in the co-operation and internationalization of space programs that appear to be developing—hopefully to replace competition. Here is the payoff. To this Apollo 14 and its crew have made their extraordinary contribution.” (MJ, 2/10/71)
Univ. of Toronto had announced discovery by astronomer Dr. Sidney Van Den Bergh of three galaxies composed of thousands of stars, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 11/12/71, A36) First photos were obscured by dust storm but before end of month Mariner 9 had shown that Mars bulged at equator, was “rougher gravitationally” than expected, and probably had wide variety of rock compositions; instruments had detected small amounts of water vapor at south pole and warmer air pockets above pole [see Nov. 16-23]. Spacecraft also made man’s first close photo of potato-shaped Martian moon Deimos [see Nov. 26—27] and photos of moon Phobos [see Nov. 29-30]. First Mariner photos from orbit were broadcast live by national TV network, but detail was limited by dust storms that had raged on surface since September. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, jpl project scientist, said “We’re hopeful that as the storm dies down we can get some good pictures of the dust settling to the surface. This is an unprecedented chance to watch changes in the Martian weather.” He said that if cameras worked properly pictures would be 1000 times better than any earthbound telescopes had taken. On Nov. 14 spacecraft transmitted three sequences of TV pictures. Of more than 60 photos returned, only seven revealed surface features. Dust storm continued and atmospheric experts could see no sign of abatement. Dust obscuring planet was apparently very fine sand which high winds pushed to height of as much as 16 km (10 mi) above surface. On fourth orbit spacecraft successfully completed orbit trim maneuver at 9:44 pm est Nov. 15. Maneuver changed orbital period of spacecraft to make it synchronous with Mars viewing period of Deep Space Station antenna at Goldstone, Calif. New orbital parameters were 1394-km (866.2-mi) periapsis altitude, 11-hr 57-min 12-sec period, and 64.34° inclination. Data from remote-sensing instruments confirmed earlier observations that carbon dioxide was major constituent of Martian atmosphere and also suggested possibility of “hot spots” on planet. Dr. Ellis D. Miner of JPL said sensor detected average temperature rise of 6.7 K (12°F) in area 24 km (15 mi) square below Mars equator. Temperature rise might indicate hole in cloud cover exposing mountain peak or plateau reflecting residual heat or evidence of internal source of heat on Mars, uv spectrometer data indicated dust storm was made up of fairly coarse-grained, sandlike particles, (nasa Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, ll/14r-16/71; O’Toole, W Post, ll/14r-15/71; W Star, 11/16/71, A4)
Office of Management and Budget had released $98.1 million in FY 1972 funds voted for science education and institutional support, while impounding $30 million, Aviation Week & Space Technology noted. “The 25% holdback of funding at the basic science level is considered by some in Congress as highly destructive because it will tend to reduce the number of future scientists.” It was viewed as “direct contradiction of the pro-science policy they have been led to anticipate.” (Av Wk, 9/20/71, 15) Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott told opening session that analysis of 2.7-m (9-ft) Apollo 15 lunar core sample had disclosed 58 distinct layers that represented 58 “chapters in the history of the sun.” Number of “pages in each chapter” awaited further analysis. Later Scott said in interview that Dr. Liaquat Husain, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientist who had analyzed Apollo 15 “Genesis” rock, was concerned that alteration of rock by shock when it impacted with site at which it was found might have partly invalidated determination of rock’s age at 4.15 billion yrs. arc engineer John C. Arvesen described development of method for monitoring biological productivity from air by detecting signs of chlorophyll. Monitoring device, when tested over California lakes and offshore areas, had produced results that conformed closely to readings obtained by arduous direct sampling of waters. Ultimate goal was to develop satellite-borne system that could monitor global productivity of oceans. Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said newly completed studies of medical data from Apollo 14 had shown radiation exposure to crew that was more than twice that of previous Apollo missions. Primary reason for higher exposure was passage of Apollo 14 spacecraft close to Van Allen radiation belts. Dr. Berry said radiation dose was “of no hazard or biological significance.” Soviet scientists said later that cosmonauts carried special antiradiation drug on all space flights but had never used it. Dr. Berry said Apollo 14 Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had lost 27% of fluid within his body cells during mission. His total body water had dropped 18% and red cells in his bloodstream had decreased 9%. Losses had been far less for other Apollo 14 astronauts and no such dramatic losses had been recorded for Apollo 15 astronauts, indicating that individual responses to space varied widely. Heavy loss of “exchangeable” potassium had been noted in astronauts during extended missions. On Apollo 15, loss had been as great as 15%. Potassium was deemed exchangeable because it could move readily in and out of tissues and thus could be purged from body. E. G. Johnson, Equipment and Facilities Branch Chief in NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office, described program for development of teleoperator systems in which remote-controlled devices could perform tasks in situations dangerous to health or safety of humans. In space, teleoperator could enter high radiation environment of space station’s nuclear power plant to change fuel elements or make repairs. Johnson said optical or radioastronomy observatory on moon’s far side could be run for 40 to 50 yrs using computer-controlled teleoperators whose control could be assumed from earth when necessary. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium was held during iaf congress. Sessions discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries in regard to earth resources research. iaa Fifth History of Astronautics Symposium on Sept. 23 was chaired by JPL Historian R. Cargill Hall. Soviet Cochairman V. N. Sokolsky did not attend for unexplained reason. Papers read included “From the History of the Development of Powder Rockets in the U.S.S.R.,” by Soviet Academician Yu A. Pobedonostsev, which traced work on Soviet solid propellants leading to Katyusha rocket in current use; “Comparative Analysis of Projects for Jet Planes Constructed up to the 1940’s,” by V. N, Sokolsky; “Evolution of Spacecraft Attitude Control Concepts before 1951,” by R. E. Robertson of Univ. of California at San Diego; and “Memoir: The Evolution of Aerospace Guidance Technology at M.I.T., 1935-1951,” by Dr. C. Stark Draper. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium, held during Congress, discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award was presented to Professor Luigi Broglio of Univ. of Rome for achievements in experiments with floating platforms to launch satellites into equatorial orbits. Only cosmonaut attending IAF Congress was Boris B. Yegorov, only physician to travel in space (launched in Voskhod 1 Oct. 12, 1964). (iaa Annual Rpt 1971; Sullivan, NYT, 9/21/71, 9/23/71, 9/27/71; Proceedings)
