Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, joined nasa as a consultant to the Administrator. (nasa Ann, 9/10/73) August 14:	An Apollo command module atop its Saturn IB launch vehicle was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center. Vehicle readiness had been ordered by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider for a possible rescue mission of Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28) when two of the four quadrants of the service module’s reaction control system, used for maneuvering the command and service module, failed and raised doubts about the ability of the CM to return safely to earth. If a rescue system were not ordered, the vehicle would carry Skylab 4 astronauts—Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—to a Nov. 9 rendezvous with the Skylab Orbital Workshop. (Marshall Star, 8/15/73, 1; Thomas, Today, 8/14/73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 553 from Plesetsk into orbit with a486-km (302.0-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 70.9° inclination—on the 12th anniversary of Vostok 1, the first manned orbital space flight. The satellite reentered Nov. 11. National Cosmonaut Day honored the April 12, 1961, mission flown by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin, the first man in space. Some observers had expected the announcement of a new manned Soviet mission, but in an interview published by Pravda Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov indicated there was sufficient time left for a crew to be placed aboard the Salyut 2 space station, launched April 3. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73, 11/30/73; SBD, 4/16/73, 253; LA Times, 4/13/73; A&A 1972)
Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. director of cosmonaut training, denied Western press reports of recent Soviet space failures and said there would be manned Soviet launches before the 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission, during a Moscow interview with U.S. correspondents. Of Soyuz 2 (launched April 3 and reported to have disintegrated in space) he said, “This craft this time was not intended for manned flight. The experiment was successfully completed and we are satisfied with the results.” Salyut 2 had had a “much more narrow purpose” than Salyut 1 (launched April 19, 1971, as a space station). Salyut 2 was “intended to finalize some design peculiarities. As soon as it fulfilled its task, it finished its existence.” Several manned space flights were planned as part of the Soviet space program and to test design changes in the Soyuz spacecraft for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp). The U.S.S.R. was considering admitting Western journalists to their space facilities for the first time and the establishment of a press center at Baykonur Cosmodrome, but newsmen would not be permitted beyond 7 km (4.3 mi) of the launch site, (upi, Inti Herald Tribune, 6/27/73; B Sun, 6/27/73, A2)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Johnson Space Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., died in Houston at age 43. He had contracted a fatal illness in 1971. Dr. Gast had been on leave from Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and, since 1970, had directed the lunar science team studying lunar samples at JSC. He had received the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service in 1970 and the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1972. He had been awarded the first Victor Goldschmidt Award of the Geochemical Society in 1972 and had been named to receive the James Furman Kemp Medal of Columbia Univ. in 1973 for directing the lunar rock study. (NYT, 5/18/73, 34; SF, 10/73, 389) May 18:	Newspapers commented on the Skylab 1 mission as engineers at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center prepared sunshades to cool down the overheated space station: New York Times: The “partial recovery from earlier disaster has set the stage for an unprecedented improvisation in space. Present plans are for the Skylab crew to blast off a week from today and install a sunshade or awning to replace the missing thermal shield. If that can be done, the temperature problem will be solved and the astronauts will be able to begin living in the space station and to carry out at least some of the projected experiments. All these plans transcend past space feats, and if successful, will mark a major advance in the nation’s space capabilities. But the task will not be easy and a happy ending is by no means guaranteed.” (NYT, 5/18/73, 32) Chicago Daily News: “The space station experiments not only look outward toward the sun and stars, but also down at the Earth. From 270 miles [435 kilometers] up, men can learn much about the planet, its resources and its weather that they can’t see on the ground. Much of the knowledge gained from Skylab can be expected to have practical application toward improving the quality of life on Earth.” (C Daily News, 5/18/73)
Objectives of Skylab’s scientific and engineering experiments were outlined in a Kennedy Space Center press briefing. The 57 major experiment components aboard the space station scheduled for May 14 launch would provide data for 270 investigations in earth resources, solar astronomy, and materials science by 702 investigators and associates— 200 of them foreign. Dr. Edward J. McLaughlin, NASA Director for Space Medicine, said 20 life sciences experiments would provide “a comprehensive picture of the interactions of man with his environment and of various body systems that are influenced ... by the space environment.” They would deal primarily with the metabolic and cardiovascular systems, exercise capacity, and nutrition. Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, NASA Chief of Solar Physics, said the objective of Skylab astronomy was “the study of the stars, including the sun, and other objects in space such as planets,| comets, objects and libration points near the moon, and x-ray objects in the sky.” Emphasis would be placed on the study of solar activity known to influence general weather patterns and on solar flares, responsible for radio communication blackouts and interference. Skylab was unique in that it would be manned. The astronaut would be able to align the instruments and select targets of interest, taking advantage of phenomena as it occurred. Dr. Robert A. Parker, astronaut and Skylab program scientist, said that corollary experiments would study gas and particles surrounding the Skylab and their effect on sensitive instruments, collect micrometeoroids, study man-made disturbances in Skylab and their effect on instrument alignment, and study flammable materials and manufacturing techniques in the zero-g environment. (Transcript)
Life in weightlessness in the Skylab Workshop, orbited May 14, was described by a Wall Street Journal article as the Skylab 2 crew began its 15th day on board the space station. Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., had reported, after attempting to eat canned tomatoes, that he was “flinging tomatoes all over the place.” He had warned, “You’ve got to eat the whole tomato.” Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had told Mission Control: “I don’t use the salt much. It tends to bounce off the food a lot.” Later he had reported a minor kitchen disaster with a bag of dehydrated corn. “The bag failed at its seam. . . . We’ve got corn powder all over everything.” Kerwin said taking a shower was pleasant, but the water didn’t “fly through the air, it sticks to whatever is there, mostly you and partly the walls. It takes forever to dry both one’s self and the walls . . . even using that inadequate little vacuum cleaner that we’ve got.” The crew recommended allotting an hour for taking a shower on future missions. The astronauts were being awakened by the noise of the suction fan when the toilet was used at night. They found themselves growing hoarse from shouting at each other across the roomy Workshop during the day. Kerwin had found himself unable to whistle in zero g, but Astronaut Paul J. Weitz had assured him he could learn after a few days’ practice. “You’ve got to hold your lips a little farther apart.” (Bishop, WSJ, 6/8/73, 1)
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)
A need “to shift gears and return to the main line of development in space flight” was underlined by Michael A. G. Michaud in a Spaceflight article: The purposes of space flight “go far beyond our lifetime. Ultimately, our journey away from Earth will determine the future of the human race; this millennial, evolutionary effort must not founder now for lack of a satisfying rationale.” The basic purpose of space flight was “to expand the realm of Man.” Reasons were to challenge human abilities, learn more about the universe we live in, search for extraterrestrial intelligence and prepare for contact with it, develop and test technologies for earth use, stimulate and employ advanced sectors of the economy, improve orbital applications of space technology with immediate benefits, develop and test military technology, and encourage international cooperation. Michaud proposed a medium-term program to the year 2000 to assemble a manned space station in earth orbit, build a base on the moon, land human beings on Mars by 2000, prepare for interstellar flight, search for planets in other systems, and begin the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. A long-term program beyond 2000 would plan to send unmanned probes to the most promising nearby stars, create a permanent colony on Mars, experiment in planetary engineering—possibly on Venus, “where orbiting space vehicles could introduce materials into the atmosphere that might change its composition” —launch the first manned interstellar flights, and communicate with extraterrestrial intelligence. [SF, 10/73, 362-5)
Former nasa scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Hampshire College astronomer, criticized manned space flight spending in a New York Times article: “The spectacular problems of the $2.5-billion Skylab mission and the failure of the first three Soviet Salyut space stations may have dealt a death blow to manned space flight. The enormous expense, the high risk, the much-ballyhooed and grossly exaggerated claims about the pertinence of manned earth orbital flights to the quality of life on earth are creating an ever-widening credibility gap between the public interest and a vested interest inherited from the space of the nineteen-sixties. The result is the squandering of public funds.” He suggested “indefinite postponement of the space shuttle program, a reduction in excessive NASA management costs and the establishment of a moderate unmanned space program emphasizing space science and applications” on a less than $2-billion budget. (NYT, 6/5/73, 39)
“We hope that through astute improvisations much of the Skylab I mission can be salvaged. Yet if it has to be scrubbed, then NASA should be encouraged to go ahead with backup plans to send a second space laboratory into earth orbit next year.” NASA could find the money “if it is prepared to cut back or postpone other activities, including the controversial $14 billion space shuttle program. . . . While space shuttles can operate independently, they will approach their full potential only when they can rendezvous with orbital space stations or laboratories.” (B Sun, S/YI/1Z, A18)
The U.K. Trades Union Congress announced that it was asking its 9.5 million members to boycott French products for a week in protest against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific. (W Post, 6/28/73, B19) June 27-28:	Pioneer 11, launched by NASA April 5 toward a December 1974 rendezvous with the planet Jupiter, became the second spacecraft to cross the orbit of Mars. By June 28 the probe was 76 781 000 km (47 711 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at 108 000 km (67 110 mi) per hr. The earth had passed between the spacecraft and the sun, permitting scientists to look for the earth’s magnetic tail, the extension of the magnetic field blown away from the earth by the solar wind. Data had suggested a malfunction in the spacecraft radio transmitter but were insufficient to identify the problem. The backup traveling-wave tube was being used. Flight controllers had fired the thrusters on Pioneer 10—twin probe launched March 2, 1972, toward December 1973 meeting with Jupiter— on June 21 to trim its course slightly and ensure passage behind Jupiter’s 1 moon Io. Pioneer 10, traveling at 43 470 km (27 000 mi) per hr, was 533 540 000 km (331 542 000 mi) from the earth. It had crossed the orbit of Mars in 1972 and finished crossing the Asteroid Belt in February, (nasa Release 72-122) June 28:	NASA held three Skylab 1-2 postflight reviews at Johnson Space At a summary review of the May 14-June 22 mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that Skylab 1—2 had accomplished the intent of its 48 experiments—6 earth resources, 15 medical, 5 astronomical, 17 scientific and technological, and 5 student-proposed. Space station operation experience had been gained and there were no constraints on continuing the Skylab program as originally planned. More data had been handled in real time than ever before and gave “no reason to believe that all of the things that we had previously said we accomplished in flight are not going to give us creditable scientific data for analysis by scientists.” Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, earth resources experiment package project scientist, said during an erep review that the erep experiments had gathered good data for 145 principal investigators on 13 km (8 mi) of magnetic tape. Data were collected over six foreign countries—Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Venezuela. There were 186 individual task sites covered, including the Puerto Rican trench, the Gulf of Mexico, the Wabash River area, and the Amazon River basin. During a review of the Skylab 2 crew health, Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said medical experiments on the Workshop had yielded very interesting results. All three crew members had stayed within their preflight baseline levels on the bicycle ergometer study. In the motion-sensitivity study—with two crew members participating—the preflight threshold level (the point at which motion sickness symptoms would begin) of science pilot Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin was 121/2 rpm in the rotating chair, at which speed he could perform 50 head movements. Pilot Paul J. Weitz had a preflight threshold of 15 rpm and 40 to 50 head movements. Both men could do 150 head movements in flight at preflight speeds without symptoms. During tests immediately following splashdown both men had experienced vestibular disturbances with even the slightest head movement. The symptoms had disappeared within two days and both crewmen had performed at preflight speeds on the third day following recovery, completing 150 head movements without symptoms. (Transcripts)
The U.S.S.R. had canceled the launch of two cosmonauts because an unmanned Salyut spacecraft with which they would have docked had failed in orbit, Western observers believed. The Salyut, identified as Cosmos 557, was launched May 11 into an orbit similar to that of the crippled Salyut 2 space station, launched April 3. Observers believed the satellite would be a docking target for a manned Soyuz but its maneuvering engine apparently failed; it made an early reentry May 22. The tracking ships that had steamed to stations off Newfoundland and the Gulf of Guinea were returning to their home port in the Black Sea. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/19/73, A12; SF, 1/74, 39-40; Lyons, NYT, 9/26/73, 33)
Science & Government Report quoted the response of an unidentified alumnus of the President’s Office of Science and Technology when asked if OST had participated in the Watergate episode: “No, they didn’t trust us enough for anything as important as that. If we had been involved, do you think they’d have been using stone age electronics?” (referring to eavesdropping devices found in Democratic Party headquarters). (Sci & Gov Rpt, 5/1/73, 1) May 2:	The Skylab manned space laboratory to be launched May 14 would fly over 89% of the world’s population and 65% of the earth’s land areas and would be visible to the naked eye, NASA announced. Information would be distributed to enable people in most of the populated areas of the world to see Skylab in orbit. Skylab would be visible only in clear skies during the two hours before and after dusk when the viewer would be in the earth’s shadow and the space station in the sunlight. It would appear like the brightest star but would move fast enough to be distinguishable from stars. (NASA Release 73-90)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
The possibility that three Soviet cosmonauts had died in training accidents early in the Soviet space program was discussed by James E. Oberg of the Dept, of Defense Computer Institute in a speech before the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C. Oberg, a Soviet space program observer, said photos and training films showed four cosmonauts— identified only as Ivan, Vasily, Grigori, and Valentin—in 1960 and 1961, before the April 12, 1961, Vostok 1 first manned orbital space flight. None of these cosmonauts had been seen or heard of since. Oberg said they might still be training for a Salyut space station or a lunar landing mission or they could have been killed in accidents before making their intended flights. Oberg said there was no apparent truth to stories that as many as 18 cosmonauts had died secretly. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/13/73, A3) April 13:	Preparations for the first Skylab mission, launch of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop scheduled for May 14, continued with only minor discrepancies, NASA announced. Onboard experiments and major spacecraft elements that had not flown before required extensive first-time testing. Lower than desired voltage had been detected in one cell in each of two important flight batteries. The batteries would be replaced and tested. Stowage of crew equipment and consumables in the Orbital Workshop had been completed. Testing of the Saturn IR and the command and service modules continued without major problems, (nasa Release 73-74)
All outstanding options on the Concorde supersonic transport had been dropped, The Washington Post reported. British Aircraft Corp-Aerospatiale combined British-French manufacturers, would take only direct orders. The action had followed the cancellation of 20 options by U.S. commercial airline companies and would end marketing “brinkmanship.” (Egan, W Post, 3/29/73, Cll) March 30:	Preparations for twin launches of the Skylab space station and its first three-man crew continued with few significant problems, NASA announced. Major elements of the space station had completed integrated mission simulation and flight-readiness testing. Seventy percent of stowed items had been placed in the Workshop section. Simulated loading of propellant into the Saturn IB launch vehicle had been completed. A leaking valve in the service module had caused replacement of a 244- by 91-cm (96- by 36-in) panel containing propellant tanks, plumbing, and engines. Excessive leakage in the oxidizer tank bladder was also being investigated, (nasa Release 73-61)
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Naval Research Laboratory payload to a 245.3-km (152.4-mi) altitude to evaluate instrumentation for the calibration rocket (calroc) series to be launched in support of the manned Sky-lab missions [see Jan. 22]. The rocket performed satisfactorily but minimum data were acquired from the instrumentation, (gsfc proj off) April 4:	Launching of Skylab, the Nation’s first space station, was set for
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin galactic astronomy experiment. The second, launched two hours later, carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 3—13:	NASA’s Mariner 10 (Mariner-J) Venus-Mercury probe was launched into a parking orbit from Eastern Test Range at 12:45 am est by an Atlas-Centaur Dl-A launch vehicle. After a 25-min coast, a 130-sec burn of the Centaur engines injected the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would allow Mariner 10 to pass within 5300 km (3300 mi) of Venus Feb. 5, 1974. Using the gravitational field of Venus to change the speed and flight path of the spacecraft, Mariner 10 would travel toward a March 29 encounter with Mercury, approaching the sun more closely than any other planetary mission. Mariner 10 would be the first spacecraft to use gravity assist in a dual-planet mission and the first to explore Mercury. The primary objective was to measure Mercury’s environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity-assist mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED! The seven experiments aboard the octagonal 503-kg (1108-lb) spacecraft included a TV camera and an infrared radiometer to investigate the planet’s surface; plasma science experiment, charged particle telescope, and magnetometer to investigate the environment around the planet and the interplanetary medium; dual-frequency-radio science experiment and ultraviolet spectrometer to measure characteristics of the Mercury neutral atmosphere and ionosphere if they existed; and celestial mechanics experiments to measure planetary mass characteristics and test the theory of relativity. All experiments had been designed and selected for their Mercury scientific objectives but also would obtain important data at Venus and during the cruise phases. The Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station was unable to maintain command lock with the spacecraft following spacecraft injection. Acquisition of the star Vega by the spacecraft Canopus tracker also was delayed, but two-way communications were established within an hour and, after repeated commands, Vega was acquired. Solar panels, high-gain and low-gain antennas, and plasma science and magnetometer booms were deployed. On Nov. 4-5 four moon and three earth TV picture mosaics were completed. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft was 1 394 000 km (866 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at a speed of 4.32 km (2.68 mi) per sec. All science experiments except the infrared radiometer and electrostatic analyzer had been turned on. The scanning electron spectrometer portion of the plasma science experiment was not operating properly and the problem was being analyzed. Four trajectory correction maneuvers were scheduled during the mission. The first, Nov. 13, successfully adjusted the flight path for closest approach to Venus on Feb. 5, 1974, as planned. A second would be made Jan. 18, 1974. On Feb. 9 and March 1, 1974, after the Venus encounter, maneuvers would target the Mariner 10 to pass Mercury at 1000-km (620-mi) altitude. The Mariner program, including mission operations and tracking and data systems, was managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., was responsible for the launch vehicle. Previous missions had been made to Mars, including Mariner 4, 6, 7, and 9 (launched Nov. 28, 1964; Feb. 24, 1969; March 27, 1969; and May 30, 1971). Mariner 9 had been the first spacecraft to orbit a planet other than the earth. All others had been flyby missions. (nasa prog off; jpl Release 673) November 3—January 9, 1974:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 interplanetary probe (launched March 2, 1972) became the first spacecraft to reach Jupiter during a two-month encounter, returning new findings about the giant planet and continuing toward Uranus and eventual exit from the solar system. November 3—December 3:	Encounter operations were begun Nov. 3 by Ames Research Center controllers and scientists and on Nov. 4 Pioneer 10 began sending photopolarimeter images of Jupiter to the earth three to eight hours a day. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft, 25 000 000 km (15 500 000 mi) from Jupiter, had begun measuring the placet’s atmosphere above Jupiter’s orange-and-blue-striped cloud tops and the characteristics of particles making up the dense clouds. On Nov. 8 the spacecraft crossed the orbits of Hades and Poseidon, the first two of Jupiter’s outer moons, and on Nov. 9 and 11 it crossed the orbits of Pan and Andrastea. At a Nov. 19 press briefing at arc Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, said that low temperature in that area of the solar system slowed evolution and scientists hoped to find objects not very different from what they were at their formation. “The passage of Pioneer 10 past Jupiter also marks the gateway to the exploration of the outer solar system. This is an exploration which is critical if we truly want to understand the formation and evolution of our solar system.” Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said that Pioneer 10 had encountered 100 times more space dust than expected during the journey between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter. He expected that 30 times more particles would be detected as the spacecraft neared Jupiter. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s moons Demeter, Hera, and Hestia Nov. 22 and was 11400 600 km (7 084 000 mi) from Jupiter. By Nov. 25 a charged particle detector aboard the spacecraft had begun to show traces of particle radiation. Preliminary indications were that the probe was beginning to cross into Jupiter’s magnetosphere, estimated to be 20 times stronger than the earth’s. The planet’s radiation belts contained particle concentrations up to 1 million times higher than the earth’s Van Allen Belt and were considered by some scientists to be extremely dangerous to the spacecraft’s electronics. At a distance of 8 336 400 km (5180 000 mi) from Jupiter, spacecraft instruments began returning pictures of Jupiter’s great red spot. The final spacecraft-attitude change before encounter was made Nov. 26 and a 24-hour day of imaging and polarimetry began. At 3:30 pm EST Nov. 26 Pioneer 10 successfully crossed Jupiter’s bow shock wave at a distance of 7 709 000 km (4 790 000 mi)—with great turbulence when the solar wind hit Jupiter’s magnetic field. The spacecraft was unaffected by the turbulence hut data from 6 of its 11 instruments changed dramatically. Solar wind speed abruptly decreased to half the normal velocity and solar wind temperatures rose sharply. On Nov. 27, at a distance of 6 760 000 km (4 200 000 mi) from Jupiter, the spacecraft crossed into the planet’s true magnetic envelope, the region of interplanetary space into which the solar wind could not penetrate. Pioneer 10 crossed the magnetopause, entering the magnetic field for the first time at 3:30 pm est. At a Nov. 29 press briefing arc scientists said new data had shown the reach of Jupiter’s magnetic field to be greater than predicted. It stretched more than 13 000 000 km (8 000 000 mi) in diameter and its strength was 40 times that of the earth’s ma'gnetic field. Its direction was south, rather than north as predicted. The strength of the magnetism at 6 400 000 km (4 000 000 mi) from the planet seemed to rise and fall in a regular 10-hour phase, possibly because of the planet’s rotation. Jupiter’s mass was also found to be greater than estimated and the spacecraft was being drawn toward Jupiter faster than planned; it would arrive at its closest approach two minutes earlier than predicted. On Nov. 30 Pioneer 10 recorded a sharp drop in magnetic and radiation measurements, indicating disappearance of the magnetic field. Eleven hours later the spacecraft again crossed the magnetopause, which had apparently been driven toward the planet by a disturbance in the solar wind. At 1 427 500 km (887 000 mi) from the planet, the spacecraft entered Jupiter’s dipole magnetic field. Preliminary data indicated that the outer portions of Jupiter’s magnetic field did not rotate with the planet and were more flattened than the earth’s field. Also, the magnetic dipole center was appreciably offset, both radially and toward the north from the center of the planet. The magnetic axis was tilted from the spin axis. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s innermost moons—Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, and Io—Dec. 2-3. As it came within 446 000 km (277 000 mi) of Ganymede, the infrared radiometer indicated the moon’s surface temperature was 125 K (—235°F). Six hours before its closest approach to Jupiter the probe entered the dangerous region of intense radiation and, soon after, the imaging system ceased returning picture data. Radio commands switched the system back to normal operation within 30 minutes, however. The press later reported that NASA attributed the mishap to an unidentified flight control room guest who had inadvertently pressed against a cathode ray display, pushing a button that cut out eight instruments. December 3—11:	As the gold and silver spacecraft approached Jupiter and radiation intensity increased 10-fold every two hours, reaching 65 million ev 90 min before periapsis, tense scientists paced the floor of arc’s Mission Control with fingers crossed. At 9:25 pm est Dec. 3, after a flight of 641 days and 826 000 000 km (513 000 000 mi), Pioneer 10 sped past Jupiter at an altitude of 130 000 km (81 000 mi), traveling 155 140 km per hour (96 400 mph), the fastest speed ever achieved by a man-made object. The spacecraft’s 11 instruments sent back readings and pictures that came in loud and clear, taking 46 minutes to reach a jubilant team on earth. “Needless to say, we’re elated,” Dr. John Wolfe, Pioneer Project Scientist, told cheering newsmen. The Washington Post later described the scene at arc: “So deluged were Pioneer scientists with transmissions of the spacecraft’s instruments, they were literally changing their minds about Jupiter’s physics and chemistry every hour.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “Some of us have been looking through telescopes at Jupiter since our early teens. This is more than we ever dreamed of.” The spacecraft suffered no apparent failures and continued to function as planned. However, preliminary estimates of radiation belt parameters and observed effects on the spacecraft and instrumentation indicated that the margin of survival had been small. As Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter, the spacecraft was accelerated and slung by the planet’s gravity into a new trajectory that would take it past the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and, traveling at a constant 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph), out of the solar system toward the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 10 would be the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. By 7:00 pm EST Dec. 4, it had traveled nearly 1600 000 km (1000 000 mi) beyond Jupiter. December 11—January 9:	arc Mission Control ended Jupiter picturetaking Dec. 11 and returned to routine interplanetary operations. The spacecraft recrossed the bow shock wave Dec. 12 and continued into interplanetary space. By Dec. 14 the spacecraft was 10 881000 km (6 761 000 mi) from Jupiter, traveling at 83 525 km per hr (51 900 mph) toward the edge of the solar system. Preliminary findings from the encounter included the discovery of an ionosphere (implying a tenuous atmosphere) surrounding Jupiter’s moon Io, detection of helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere, new density measurements of the entire Jovian system that would affect current theories on the formation of the universe, and new temperature measurements of Jupiter that indicated little difference between average daytime and nighttime temperatures. Pioneer 10 was expected to continue collecting and returning data until it reached the orbit of Uranus in 1980, almost 3 200 000 000 km (2 000 000 000 mi) from the earth. Data returned would determine whether the second Jupiter probe, Pioneer 11 (launched April 5 and crossing the Asteroid Belt since August), could safely be retargeted closer to the planet. The Pioneer 10 mission was officially adjudged a success Jan. 9, 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by arc. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1969, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays, (nasa prog off; arc Release, 11/6/73; nasa Releases 73-243K, 73-256, 73-279; Wilford, NYT, 11/25/73; 11/30/73, 1; 12/4/73, 1; 12/5/73, 13; O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/73, Al; AP, W Star-News, 11/28-29/73; AP, B Sun, 12/3-4/73; Miles, LA Times, 12/4/73; 12/6/73) November 3:	The Skylab 4 launch crew successfully completed a simulated launch of the Saturn IB booster at Kennedy Space Center. The booster was scheduled to lift the Apollo command and service module and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue into orbit Nov. 10 to dock with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) and begin NASA’s third manned Skylab mission. Following the perfectly timed simulation, the fuel was drained from the launch vehicle and preparations for the final countdown were begun. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/73, A7)
Langley Research Center engineers and technicians were cooperating with investigators from West Virginia Univ. in a summer study to improve rural West Virginia housing with space age technology. The preliminary study was to lead to eventual construction and demonstration of a self-contained house or small community, “Space Station West Virginia,” incorporating modern technology to supply energy, water and sewage, fire control, and systems analysis. (NASA Release 73—132) July 18—27:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics sponsored an aeronautical technology display at the Soviet Exhibition of Economic Achievement in Moscow, aiaa also cosponsored, with the U.S.S.R. Committee for Science and Technology, a joint Symposium on Aeronautical Technology at the exhibition July 23 to 27. Advanced equipment to modernize civil air traffic control systems was displayed or depicted by 27 U.S. companies and reviewed by an estimated 25 000 aviation specialists from the U.S.S.R. and its East European allies. The joint symposium—opened by Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield and the Soviet Minister of Civil Aviation, Gen. Boris P. Bugaev—covered air traffic control, airport and air system facilities, and new aircraft technology. Among participants were members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space, (aiaa Release 7/20/73; Program; Shabad, NYT, 7/22/73, 43) July 19:	NASA’s X-24B lifting body [see July 5-6], flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed its first captive flight from Flight Research Center, attached to a B—52 aircraft. Erratic B-52 power resulted in unintelligible telemetry traces and forced a switch to X—24B internal power. The telemetry cleared and excellent traces were returned. X-24B performance was adjudged satisfactory but the scheduled glider flight was postponed until July 24 to allow for battery recharge. The X-24B had been built around the existing basic structure and subsystems of the X-24A, which, like other lifting bodies, had been designed for reentry from space flight. But the X—24B had a new doubledelta shape with small blended wings and three vertical tails—parts of a configuration representing a forerunner of future aircraft capable of hypersonic (above mach 5) flight. Like its lifting-body predecessors, the X-24B would be air-launched by a B-52 aircraft from 12 000-m (40 000-ft). Subsequent flights would use the XLR—11 rocket engine to increase speed and altitude performance in the joint NASA—usaf program at Flight Research Center, (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-130)
Newspapers commented on the Skylab missions as Skylab 2 astronauts activated the Apollo Telescope Mount aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop, following repairs to the damaged spacecraft they had joined May 25 [see May 14-June 23]. Miami News editorial: “To us, the conquest of the moon, and now the building of a space station, demonstrated that this nation can accomplish just about anything it sets its mind on. The secret lies in the magic word, commitment. With the kind of commitment we pledged to the space program, we could indeed surmount the housing crisis, the crime crisis, the energy crisis, or any other crisis.” (M News, 5/29/73) Wall Street Journal article: Skylab Vs successful in-orbit repair had wide implications for the U.S. space program’s future. “When the three Skylab astronauts erected a heat shield over their damaged space station, they both saved their mission and paved the way for future launching of two other missions in the $2.5 billion space-station program.” They also had provided NASA with “a powerful argument for new manned-flight projects.” NASA could contend that “the value of man in orbit has been proven in practice as well as in theory.” While budget shortages would preclude any attempt to capitalize on Skylab’s success before the space shuttle evolved, it had armed NASA against congressional critics of manned space flight. (Spivak, WSJ, 5/29/73) New York Times columnist Russell Baker: “The space program until now has seemed less malevolent than most new ventures in technology, but to people watching those incessant countdowns at Cape Kennedy it has also seemed pointless.” Lunar exploration had been “wonderful” but “it didn’t really open any horizons for most of us, and it was certainly hard to see how it was going to improve man’s lot.” Skylab, by contrast, was wonderful. “There they are way up there—270 miles [435 kilometers] in the sky. They are attached to 100 tons [90 700 kilograms] of machinery which stretches out through space a distance of 118 feet [36 meters], about the length of an exciting pass play in the National Football League. And what are they doing? Repair work. They are fixing some of the machinery which doesn’t work right.” This was space with a purpose. “We ought to be asking why NASA didn’t make this approach from the beginning instead of going after moon dust. The repair industry in this country could very well be rejuvenated by this trip, and not be a moment too soon, either.” (NYT, 5/29/73, 31)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
The prototype of a miniature medical diagnostic system developed for NASA’s use aboard manned space stations by the Atomic Energy Commission’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory might have clinical uses, NASA announced. The analyzer, being tested at Johnson Space Center, provided fast, automated blood analysis by using one fiftieth the amount of blood required by existing analyzers. It could help a doctor perform rapid analysis in his office, with results within minutes, (nasa Release 73-71)
U.S. space observers believed an accident to the Soviet Salyut 2 space station launched April 3 had prevented the U.S.S.R. from carrying out a maximum one-month mission manned by a Soyuz crew, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. Their assessment was that Salyut 2 had begun tumbling in orbit when a maneuvering engine fired and then kept firing out of control. The firing had forced Salyut 2 into cartwheel motion through space. Its solar panels had been torn loose, cutting the station off from almost all its electric power. The only electricity supplied to Salyut 2 after the accident had come from batteries that might now be burned out. A few U.S. observers thought the Soviet tracking ship that instructed the station to make the fatal maneuver had received details of the accident by radio from Salyut 2 before communications ceased. The ship had left its station off Newfoundland and had joined a sister ship in Curasao, Dutch West Indies, where both had been refueled and refitted. The ships were now in Cuba, which had led some space observers to think they might put to sea again to await a further Soviet attempt to launch a Salyut station. (W Post, 5/2/73, A20)
