Dr. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on manned space systems in development, before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 payloads were projected for the 12-yr period beginning in 1980, with one third each for applications, science, and the Dept, of Defense. Duplication of the accomplishments expected from the space shuttle sortie (Spacelab) program would require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned space station, and a system for manned transport. The shuttle, with effective integration of payloads and the ability to service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a potential savings of $14 billion over expendable systems from 1980 to 1991. Studies had shown that 725 flights were required to fly the projected 986 payloads, an average of 60 flights a year. At a 10% rate of discount and a 10% rate of return, the space transportation system would break even if the shuttle were flown only 25 times a year. (Transcript) industry unwillingness to risk capital on advanced communications research and development. Private industry could meet short-term commercial needs but “continued NASA activity is essential to identify and meet long term national needs.” The investment level in advanced communications r&d would increase from $1.0 million in FY 1974 to $1.4 million in FY 1975. R&d included investigations into advanced antenna techniques to define radiation pattern contours to fit geographical boundaries and eliminate unwanted spillover; technology to open near-and far-infrared wavelengths for communications; new techniques in solid-state, high-power devices to replace traveling wave tubes; and use of millimeter-wave regions to expand the spectrum for satellite communications. The ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite scheduled for 1974 launch would conduct health and education telecommunications and radio beacon experiments and measure charged particles and magnetic fields over the U.S. for one year. The satellite would then be moved over India to beam educational TV to 4000 villages, ats-f (to he Ats 6 after launch) also would be used to extend coverage during the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission. Following completion of the Indian experiments, ats-f would he moved back over to the U.S. to continue experiments there. (Transcript)
Tass announced that the flight of the U.S.S.R.’s Salyut 3 orbiting space station, launched 25 June, would soon end, after completion of a six-month program that doubled the flight duration originally planned. During its six months operation the spacecraft had performed more than 400 scientific and technical experiments, received more than 8000 control commands from the earth, conducted more than 200 “dynamic operations,” conducted 70 TV transmission and 2500 telemetric sessions, fired its thrusters more than 500 000 times, and generated 5000 kw of electricity with its solar panels. A two-man crew, launched 3 July on Soyuz 14, boarded the space station and spent 15 days living and working in space. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. on Soyuz 15, failed in several attempts to dock with the station and returned to the earth after 48 hrs in space. Since that time Salyut 3 had operated in an unmanned automatic mode. The Western press later speculated that the mission was being ended to prevent any interference with the mission of Salyut 4 [see 26 Dec.—9 Feb. 1975]. The retrorockets were fired 24 Jan. 1975 and the station reentered the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean after 213 days in space. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 26 Dec 74, Ul-2; 24 Jan 75, Ul; gsfc SSR, 28 Feb 75; Soviet Aero, 6 Jan 75,1) 26 December—9 February 1975: The U.S.S.R. launched Salyut 4 space station into earth orbit and 16 days later launched Soyuz 17 with a two-man crew to join the Salyut and establish a manned orbital laboratory. Salyui 4 was launched 26 Dec. from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with a 252-km apogee, 214-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to test the design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific studies and experiments in space. The news agency also reported that onboard systems and equipment were operating normally. The Western press reported that major maneuvers 29 and 30 Dec. put the station at a record high altitude for a Salyut space station, reaching an orbit with a 350-km apogee and 337-km perigee by 31 Dec. Soyuz 17, launched at 2:43 am 11 Jan. 1975 local time (4:43 pm est 10 Jan.) from Baykonur Cosmodrome, carried cosmonauts Lt. Col. Aleksey A. Gubarev and Georgy M. Grechko into orbit with a 249-km apogee, 186-km perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the mission would carry out joint experiments with Salyut 4, including a comprehensive checkup of the spacecraft’s onboard systems in various flight conditions. In a launch-day interview with Tass, Maj. Gen. Georgy T. Beregovoy, head of the Soviet cosmonaut training center, said that Soyuz 17- was in “no way connected with additional checkups of ‘Soyuz’ systems before its rendezvous with ‘Apollo.’ ” An orbital correction raised the spacecraft to an orbit with a 354km apogee, 293-km perigee, 90.7-min period, and 51.6° inclination, permitting Soyuz 17 to dock with Salyut 4 on 12 Jan. The spacecraft was moved automatically to a distance of 10 m from the station and then the cosmonauts completed docking by manual control. The crew entered the space station, switched on the power and radio transmitters, and inspected the scientific equipment. In a 14 Jan. interview with Tass, Dr. Konstantin P. Feoktistov, cosmonaut who had helped design the space station, said that Salyut 4 improvements included three panels of solar batteries that were positioned like the tail of an aircraft and could be individually oriented toward the sun. The panels permitted the energy supply in the station to be replenished without using fuel for spacecraft orientation. Other improvements had been introduced in the flight control systems. During a broadcast from the spacecraft over Moscow Radio 15 Jan., Gubarev and Grechko said they had set up the first Soviet space-based teletype communications station. The teletype could receive and copy communications from the earth while the cosmonauts were busy at other tasks. Tass reported 17 Jan. that the cosmonauts, neither of whom had been in space before, had become accustomed to weightlessness about the fifth or sixth day of flight. During nearly 30 days aboard Salyut 4, Gubarev and Grechko used a newly developed high-resolution solar telescope to study solar phenomena, x-ray telescopes and sensors to study the flux of x-radiation from celestial bodies, and an infrared spectrometer to examine the earth’s radiation. The cosmonauts also studied effects of weightlessness on the human vestibular function, cardiovascular system, and blood; made earth resources observations; and studied the earth’s upper atmosphere. They resprayed two telescope mirrors dulled by exposure to space; carried out biological “Oasis” experiments using insects, microorganisms, tissue cultures, and plants; and tried recycling water, condensed from the cabin atmosphere, for drinking and food preparation. The crew began preparations for their return to earth 9 Feb., transferring equipment to Soyuz 17. The cosmonauts boarded Soyuz 17 and undocked from the space station at 11:08 am Baykonur time (1:08 am est). Soyuz 17 softlanded in the U.S.S.R. 110 km northeast of Tselino-grad, Kazakhstan, “in complex meteorological conditions” after 29 days 13 hrs 20 min in space. The Soyuz 17 cosmonauts had broken the previous 23-day 18-hr 22-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 11 crew on Salyut 1 (6-30 June 1971) before they were killed during reentry. On-the-spot and later medical checks showed that the Soyuz 17 cosmonauts had “withstood well the long space flight.” Salyut 4 was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days before their reentry tragedy. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973, but an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 [see 25 Dec.], (gsfc Wkly SSR, 19-25 Dec 74; gsfc SSR, 31 Dec 74; 28 Feb 75; Tass, fbis—Sov, 31 Dec 74^13 Feb 75; SF, June 75, 235; April 75, 144—5; O’Toole, W Post, 31 Dec 74, A7; upi, NYT, 16 Jan 75,14; SBD, 14 Jan 75, 62; LC, S&T News Alert 2645)
John H. Disher, Skylab Program Deputy Director since August 1965, had been named Director of Advanced Programs in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. Skylab had concluded operations with the 8 Feb. splashdown of its third manned mission to visit the Nation’s first experimental space station. In the Advanced Program Office, Disher would head evaluations of concepts for manned space activities within changing national needs and priorities, to guide transition from present to future programs. From 1959 to 1961 Disher had headed advanced manned missions. He had also served as Apollo Test Director and Assistant Director for Apollo Spacecraft Development, (nasa Release 74-48)
The Apollo command and service module for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, which had been delivered to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station by a C-5A transport, arrived at Kennedy Space Center. The spacecraft completed the ASTP flight hardware with exception of the docking module, which would arrive at ksc in late October after thermal and vacuum tests at Johnson Space Center, (ksc Release 132-74)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Experiments carried out during the U.S.S.R.’s eight-day Soyuz 13 mission launched 18 Dec. 1973 were further evidence that the U.S.S.R. was continuing manned space station efforts, a Spaceflight article said. The flight had included the Oasis 2 experiment, part of a plan to demonstrate that biological closed-cycle life support systems could be used for large space stations and other long-duration manned missions. Observation of stars in the ultraviolet range with the Orion 2 telescope was also a continuing program related to space station activity. Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov had said in a statement to the British Interplanetary Society that, in the years between the Soyuz 11 tragedy in June 1971 and the Soyuz 12 mission in September 1973, design engineers had been analyzing the performance of all spacecraft systems and making modification and improvements. He stressed that work on manned space stations was continuing because of the importance of these stations in the exploration of natural resources. Soyuz 12 and Soyuz 13 crews had made multispectral photos of the earth’s surface. (SF, March 74, 110)
The U.S.S.R. announced the mission of the Salyut 3 space station (launched 25 June) had been “completely fulfilled.” The “main program of work” had ended 23 Sept, and the recoverable module containing research materials and experiments had separated from Salyut 3. Engines were discarded before entry into the atmosphere, and the parachute system was activated at an altitude of 8.4 km to land the module in a preset area of the U.S.S.R. Salyut 3 plans had been for a
NASA announced selection of 39 scientists to provide experiments for the 1978 Pioneer twin missions to Venus. The selection, made from 162 scientists who had submitted proposals to NASA, included one scientist each from Germany and France. The scientists would participate in a detailed study of the planet, including composition, structure, and radiation field of its atmosphere; nature of the clouds; and magnetic and radiation environment of the planet, (nasa Release 74-155) 24 June—12 July: Eight U.S. astronauts—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, Donald K. Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R. Lousma, Robert F. Overmyer, and Karol J. Bobko—took part in training in Star City, near Moscow, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A ninth, Eugene A. Cernan, took part in the first two weeks of training, representing the Johnson Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. In addition to studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet flight crews in simulators and mockups. They also continued planning procedures and checklists for the joint mission, (jsc Release 74-121; JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 25 June-19 July: The Salyut 3 research station and—nine days later—the Soyuz 14 spacecraft carrying a two-man crew were launched into nearearth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R. manned orbital workshop. Salyut 3 was launched at 4:55 am local time 25 June (7:55 pm EOT 24 June) from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with 252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to improve the station’s design, onboard systems, and equipment and to perform scientific research during space flight. By 30 June Salyut 3, which consisted of two cylinders more than 21 m in length and weighing some 18 500 kg, had been raised to a near-circular orbit with a 268-km apogee and 265-km perigee. Soyuz 14 was launched 3 July at 11:51 pm local time (2:51 pm EDT) from Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich, commander and veteran of the 12 Aug. 1962 Vostok 4 mission, and Yuri P. Artyukhin, flight engineer, to rendezvous with Salyut 3. The launch was seen by Soviet citizens by delayed broadcast on Moscow TV. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 338-km apogee, 201-km perigee, 89.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July Tass interview that the main objectives of the mission were “testing methods and systems of controlling the craft, improvement in the life-sustaining complex, [and] exploration of new possibilities of using both separate craft and groups of space objects to accomplish scientific and applied tasks in a nearearth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July trajectory correction placed the spacecraft in an orbit with a 277-km apogee, 255-km perigee, 89.7min period, and 51.6° inclination. All spacecraft systems were successfully checked out and the crew was reported to be in good health. The Soyuz 14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and docked with Scdyut 3 on 5 July during their 17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the Soviets would use during the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m three-room laboratory. During their 15-day mission the cosmonauts studied geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, atmospheric formations and phenomena, physical characteristics of outer space, and manufacturing techniques, as well as testing the Salyut space station’s improved design and solar-panel energy system. The crew also studied the influences of space on the human organism and exercised to prevent loss of muscle tone, using an onboard comprehensive trainer to simulate running, jumping, and weight lifting. . Tass reported 15 July that some Soviet scientists considered terminating the mission because unexpected, intense solar flares 4-8 July dramatically increased the radiation exposure. However, because the flares subsided and the space station’s orbit prevented excessive exposure, the crew’s work was not disrupted. While the cosmonauts worked in space, two Soviet researchers lived in a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same work. All commands relayed to the orbiting Salyut 3 were first checked on the ground and alternate versions of decisions for unforeseen situations were calculated. On 8 July the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, in training at Star City for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, telegraphed congratulations to the Salyut 3 cosmonauts on their “great success.” They said they looked forward to meeting the two after their “happy return.” By 18 July the crew completed most experiments and began transferring equipment to Soyuz 14. After checking out spacecraft systems, the cosmonauts undocked 19 July. Retrorockets were fired, parachutes deployed, and Soyuz 14 softlanded at 5:21 pm Baykonur time (8:21 am edt) 140 km southeast of Dzhezkazgan 2000 m from the planned target after 15 days 17 hours 30 min in space. The crew left the spacecraft unaided, and on-the-spot medical checks showed the cosmonauts’ health was “good.” All mission tests were reported completed. For the first time, a U.S.S.R. orbital mission had been in touch with mission control continuously because of maritime tracking. Salyut 3 was the third space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz 10 docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. A second crew, launched 6 June 1971 aboard Soyuz 11, entered the orbiting station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days. The three died during reentry when an open valve evacuated air from the spacecraft. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 20-26 June, 3—10 July 74; gsfc SSR, 30 June, 31 Aug 74; Tass, FBis-Sov, 25 June-23 July 74; UPl, W Star-News, 14 July 74; Browne, NYT, 9, 20 July 74; SBD, 9, 27 July 74; A&A 1973)
Evidence revealed during U.S.—U.S.S.R. planning for the joint 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had indicated the Soviet Union was never in the race to the moon, the Associated Press reported. U.S. officials had learned the Soyuz capsule was designed for relatively brief earth orbital flights and for ferrying cosmonauts to and from a space station, but it could not make a journey to the moon. AP quoted Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, a member of the astp planning team, as saying, “Our Apollo spacecraft is far, far more sophisticated and has got a greater capability than their Soyuz. That doesn’t say the Soyuz is no good. It was just built for a different job.” In addition, Soyuz was designed to be controlled from the ground or by preautomated devices. “Their spacecraft ... is designed around a philosophy that it doesn’t need a man to fly.” Cernan said that the U.S.S.R. “had no major over-all goal like landing on the moon. Their goals were all to be first. Get the first iron ball in orbit. Get the first man there . . . the first woman . . . the first multiman spacecraft.” By proceeding in this way, politically they “gained some significant firsts.” (Benedict, H Chron, 7 June 74)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
The universe was 16 billion yrs old, 6 billion yrs older than earlier estimates, according to California Institute of Technology astronomer Dr. Allen R. Sandage, the Washington Post reported after an interview. After 10 yrs of observing 50 galaxies, Dr. Sandage had dated the galaxies from 14 billion yrs ago, meaning that 2 billion yrs were required for the primordial gas cloud to cool enough for stars to begin forming. Working with Swiss astronomer Gustav Tamman, Dr. Sandage had arrived at his new date when his observations had led him to recalculate the Hubble Constant, the rate of speed for the expansion of the universe. He had checked his figures by dating stars in globular clusters in the Milky Way and by measuring the amounts of metal still burning in their atmospheres. (O’Toole, W Post, 11 Dec 74, Al)
Prof. Mikhail Tikhonravov, Soviet rocket pioneer, died in Moscow at the age of 73. Prof. Tikhonravov had worked on the development of the first man-made satellites, pilot-operated spacecraft, and automatic space stations. With Sergey P. Korolev, he had worked on development of early liquicUfuel rockets in the 1930s. He had been an early expert in glider and aircraft engineering. Tikhonravov had been awarded the Orders of Lenin and the Red Banner of Labor, the title of Hero of Socialist Labor, and the Lenin Prize. (NYT, 7 March 74, 40; Av Wk, 11 March 74)
The success of the Skylab program had made the idea of continuous occupation of an orbital base more concrete to the directors of the American space efforts, a New York Times article reported. Such a base could be assembled by flights of the space shuttle being developed by NASA and could be used to observe the sun and the earth and for manufacturing special materials under weightless conditions. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider had said in an interview, “We have shown that there is no man or machine limitation on whatever we want to do in space.” The confidence of space scientists had been strengthened by the apparent adaptation of the astronauts to space, although the Times reported Skylab 2 Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin and Johnson Space Center Director Christopher C. Kraft as cautioning that nine men “is a very small statistical sample.” More long test flights would have to be made. However, if the medical data held true, the design of future space stations could be made much simpler and the number of space shuttle flights to establish it would be fewer. Schneider had noted that the conflict between the Workshop’s need for power and its program for observation was still to be solved. The current design called for Workshop solar panels to point toward the sun rather than the earth. In a future space station, observatories might be placed on long booms which could turn on their own, minimizing the station’s need to maneuver. (McElheny, NYT, 10 Feb 74,40)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers testified on the manned space program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Myers said NASA’s ability to hold close to the original cost target for the space shuttle in spite of schedule adjustments in the last two years was “due to bringing on our contractors below our cost estimates” and the ability 6f the management structure to remain dynamic and react to changes and “surprise problems.” He was confident that the average-cost-per-flight commitment of $10.5 million in 1971 dollars would be maintained. However, resolution of the protested selection of Thiokol Corp. for the solid-fueled rocket motor contract was necessary before work on the motor could begin; “a timely start of this . . . activity is very important to orderly progress in the shuttle development schedule.” In the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the astp spacecraft was to be delivered to Kennedy Space Center in the fall, joint docking system qualification testing and preflight docking system compatibility tests were to be completed during the winter, experiment hardware was to be qualified by early spring, and flight readiness activities were to be conmleted by spring, leading to the July launch. NASA had allocated $13 million for experiments for astp. More than 140 proposals from the scientific community had been evaluated by eminent scientists and medical doctors. The final, “first-rate” experiment package had been given final approval by the Administrator. Following astp, two Saturn Vs, two Saturn IBs, one complete and one partially complete command and service module, the unused Skylab backup Workshop cluster, and one astp docking module and system would remain unused. Acquisition cost of the hardware was $870 million. With the conclusion of the programs, the hardware would be stored. Total storage costs per year would be $100 000. After FY 1975, disposition of the hardware would have to be considered. (Transcript)
The International Aeronautical Federation held its 25th Congress in Amsterdam with the theme “Space Stations, Present and Future.” Among speakers, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, U.S. and Soviet commanders in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, stressed how well joint work and understanding had advanced. A paper by Daniel J. Shramo of Lewis Research Center, with B. R. Foushee and P. J. O’Leary of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., described the Centaur primary upper stage for solar system exploration and its potential adaptation as an upper stage for the space shuttle. A Ukranian Academy of Sciences research team reported on experiments in the formation of melts in weightlessness with radiant heating and on prospects of using solar energy for space engineering. Comparative studies of metal solidification had suggested that a more uniform distribution of short-grained structures under weightlessness might become the basis of space technology, with the added attraction of using the sun as an energy source. The team had built a prototype solar plant that could be mounted on a spacecraft or used in a vacuum chamber on the earth. Soviet medical investigations during the flights of Soyuz 12 (launched 27 Sept. 1973), Soyuz 13 (18 Dec. 1973), and Soyuz 14 (3 July) were reported by Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko and others. Findings indicated that prolonged exercises, full and partial spacesuits, and gravity-simulating fittings had reduced effects of weightlessness during the space flight and after the crew’s return. Although reports of initial adaptation symptoms were similar to American findings, the Soviet paper also noted that cosmonauts had reduced vestibular symptoms by deliberately slowing down movements, especially head movements. Prof. Hilding A. Bjurstedt, Head of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, received the 1974 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for studies of physiological responses to environmental stress. Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, was elected iaf President (iaa Ann Rpt, 28 Aug 74; Parks, SF, Feb 75, 42-50; Program, 25th iaf Congress; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74, 21) During September: Large-scale verification tests of the “rectenna” receiving system for microwave energy transmission were run at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA. A microwave energy transmission system was being developed to determine the possibility of transmitting energy through space. The tests established a new record for microwave power transmission, delivering one kilowatt over a 1.6-km range. The 10-yr program had increased DC-to-DC efficiency of transmissions from 17% to 50% and efficiency of the rectenna in converting radio frequency to dc from 25% to 78%. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 15 Oct 74, 57-60)
A New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial advocated international cooperation in space: The U.S. was committed to a reusable space shuttle for possible use in the future with a permanent manned space station. The U.S.S.R. would probably embark on its own space shuttle and space station program. “The cost of establishing a space station ... is such that it would be foolish for each nation to assume the full burden when a common station could provide everything a separate one could—even a ‘secure section’ for each side for passive military uses.” {T—Picayune, 13 May 74,23)
The Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data through 1972 and a Forward Look (74-35SP), prepared by Dt. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of the Science Policy Research Div. In its manned program the U.S.S.R. had launched a Salyut 2 space station 3 April 1973 but a failure—possibly a wildly firing thruster—had damaged the station, which reentered the earth’s atmosphere May 28. Other later attempts to launch and man a space station also appeared to have failed. Two manned launches, Soyuz 12 and Soyuz 13, had been successful in September and December, the second spacecraft remaining in space eight days to conduct astrophysical, biological, and earth resources experiments. By 30 June 1974 the United States expected to have spent $75 billion on combined military and civilian space programs since the beginning of the space program, spending about $4.7 billion in FY 1974. The Soviet Union did not publish space budget data, but its program was thought to be “at least of the same magnitude as that of the United States at its former peak” of $7.7 billion a year. The U.S. had several major space research and development centers operated by the military and private industry as well as NASA. There was no reason to believe the Soviet aerospace industry was as fully equipped but missiles of similar capabilities and different design philosophies which had appeared in Moscow parades “suggest the existence of more than one design and development team for space work.” The U.S. had launch vehicles scaled to lift payloads weighing from 9 kg to 136 000 kg. The Soviet Union had started to use in 1957 its original intercontinental ballistic missile and still used the same basic vehicle with stages added to improve performance. The very large Soviet vehicle predicted by NASA officials had not been seen. A Soviet lunar landing did not seem imminent but was still expected, as part of Soviet long-range plans, as soon as the problems of unreliable hardware were solved. U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperation in space efforts was “the hope of well-intentioned people everywhere.” Two motives for cooperation were to lessen tension and to save money. Although there was already exchange of information between scientists and engineers, “no assessment of the overall prospects can be made successfully without forecasting the future political climate.” (Text) Despite the loss of the prime power chain, causing automatic transfer to the backup system, Mariner 10’s instruments continued scientific studies. Comet Kohoutek’s tail was observed in the extreme ultraviolet range. On 13 Jan. hydrogen Lyman-alpha intensity, beginning 20° from the comet’s nucleus, climbed rapidly as the nucleus region drifted toward the uv airglow spectrometer’s field of view. The nucleus was scanned 16 Jan. On 17 Jan., while the spacecraft was powered down for its second trajectory correction maneuver, shutting off several instrument heaters allowed the TV optics heaters, which had failed to function earlier, to turn on. Scientists had feared that below-freezing temperature might prevent camera operation during the Venus encounter. On 21 Jan., instruments for Comet Kohoutek and solar wind experiments were turned on. On 22 Jan. the uv spectrometer measured hydrogen Lyman-alpha intensities out to 17° to map the comet’s hydrogen cloud. Comet Kohoutek was scanned seven hours 24 Jan. by the UV spectrometer—the only instrument of its kind to observe the comet from outside the earth’s own hydrogen cloud. During the seventh and final roll calibration maneuver 28 Jan., telemetry indicated a rapid increase in the use of attitude control gas, the nitrogen gas supply dropping from 2.7 to 2.1 kg. The gyros were turned off and the spacecraft put into celestial control, with the sun and the star Canopus as references. Nitrogen-gas-use rate returned to normal and estimates of the supply indicated a comfortable margin for reaching Mercury and executing experiments. The backup electric power system was still in use, as studies of that problem continued. On 31 Jan. Mariner 10 was 3 200 000 km from Venus and 38 800 000 km from the earth, traveling at 30 238 km per hr. (JPL Mariner Venus/ Mercury 1973 Bull Nos 14, 15; NASA pao press briefing transcript, 31 Jan 74; W Post, 10 Jan 74, A5)
Hills 1000 m high on the planet Mercury, as well as valleys 700 m deep and craterlike surface features 50 km across, had been found by Jet Propulsion Laboratory radar astronomers during high-resolution scans, NASA announced. The features were charted by directing high-powered beams at Mercury in 14 probes between 15 July and 8 Dec. 1972 from Goldstone Deep Space Station’s 64-m dish antenna. Months of computer work had analyzed the data and formulated a map of radar findings, which might be verified 29 March when Mariner 10 (launched 3 Nov. 1973) was scheduled to fly past and take the first closeup photos of Mercury, (nasa Release 74-12)
