The European Space Agency’s launch vehicle Ariane during its 5-yr development period would use hydrazine fuel supplied by the USSR, reported the British journal New Scientist. The U.S. hydrazine plant near Baltimore had been closed down because of contamination by nitro-samines, hydrazine sources suspected of causing cancer. Hydrazine, highly corrosive and difficult to handle, had not been manufactured in Western Europe, and no one wanted to do so, according to the report. Ariane’s discontinued predecessor Europa used a less powerful fuel— liquid oxygen and kerosene—and the USSR had used hydrazine from the plant near Moscow to power the large rockets that launched the Salyut space stations and large interplanetary probes. The report said that the hydrazine deal stemmed from France’s longstanding cooperation with the USSR in aerospace technology; if the Soviets should restrict hydrazine supplies, France would build a European plant because its commitments would override environmental objections. (W Post, 22 Apr 76, A-52)
Recovery of the unmanned Soyuz 20 spacecraft that landed in Kazakhstan 16 Feb. carrying a “comprehensive biology payload”—including both plant and animal life—concluded what the Christian Science Monitor described as an impressive 3-mo biology experiment. Results from Soyuz 20 would be compared with those of similar experiments— including some from the U.S.—carried on the Vostok-type biosat Cosmos 782 which stayed 19.4 days in space last year. Cosmos 782 had carried a small centrifuge to test effects of artificial gravity on flora and fauna; comparison of the previous tests with those from Soyuz 20 would help decide whether—and how much—artificial gravity would be needed in future space stations. Soyuz 20 had docked with the Salyut 4 space station 19 Nov. 1975, an example of a self-docking biolab that demonstrated the USSR plan for assembling complex space objects from separately launched modules. (CSM, 26 Feb 76, 6)
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
First of 4 U.S.-West German rocket launches to investigate the source of the aurora borealis, in a study called Project Porcupine, would be fired to an altitude of 500 km from northern Sweden, NASA announced. Two identical 250-kg payloads would be flown at twilight between 17 Mar. and 4 Apr. when moonlight interference would be at a minimum; a second pair of rockets would be launched in 1977. The instrument packages would have 12 quill-like booms sticking out to gather data for aurora-probe experiments beyond the orbits of the U.S. Skylab and USSR Salyut space stations. At about 450 km altitude, canisters of barium would be exploded to identify magnetic-field lines and plasma drifts; a NASA jet from Ames Research Center would be in flight over Greece to photograph the clouds released from the rockets. Data from Project Porcupine would be compared with energetic-particle and magnetic-field data gathered by NASA’s Ats 6. The payloads, largest and most complex to be fired on sounding rockets, would he the first flown on the new Aries rocket, modified from Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile parts provided by the U.S. Air Force. Project Porcupine would be part of the 1976-78 International Magnetospheric Study, a 40-nation effort to explore the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 76-44; NYT, 28 Mar 76, 21)
The organizational structure of a large earth-orbiting space station was the topic of a doctoral study at Fla. State Univ. for Dr. James Ragusa of Kennedy Space Center’s Science and Applications Office. The study was an offshoot of work on future space projects (with Gene McCoy of KSC’s Shuttle Payload Integration Office) before Dr. Ragusa left to work on his Ph.D. The topic was one about which little had been written, and was timely in that the structure should be included in plans for such a mission. Spacelab, with a 7-man crew, needed no complex organizational structure; a space colony with a projected population of thousands would require a government rather than an organizational structure. A space base housing 50 to 100 persons would bring together people of varying backgrounds for extended periods of time—the station being designed with a 10-yr operating life—and large-group behavior would be a factor in considering the best type of organization. Ragusa investigated the organizational structures used on submarines and destroyers, interviewing the submarine captains and taking cruises on the nuclear sub Nathanael Greene and the research sub Benjamin Franklin. Among those interviewed for the study were Dr. Wernher von Braun; Arthur Clarke, author of 2001 and father of the communications satellite; several astronauts; and Gene Roddenberry, creator of the TV series “Star Trek.” Ragusa found that the organization on Roddenberry’s U.S.S. Enterprise was modeled after that used on 18th century English ships, which in turn was based on that used on Phoenician ships 2500 years ago, in which the ship was considered an extension of the country itself and abided by the laws and traditions of the homeland; the captain was king, and his word was law. The structure best fitting the needs of a space base was the “total matrix model” with four levels of hierarchy, best for efficient and orderly management of the crew because of its adaptability. Of 8 models, the “Star Trek” structure ranked fifth because of its lack of flexibility and efficiency. (Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 5)
The Soyuz 21 manned mission to space station Salyut 5 ended abruptly after cosmonauts Vitaly Zholobov and Boris Volynov had been in orbit 48 da. Although the first manned space flight since Apollo-Soyuz failed to break the U.S. 84-day record, no problem was mentioned by the Tass news agency; the first hint of termination came about 10 hr before the landing. The Soyuz 21 descent module landed by parachute on the Karl Marx collective farm near Tselinograd in Kazakhstan at 9:33 pm Moscow time (1:33 pm EST); general condition of the cosmonauts was “satisfactory,” said Tass. Experiments returned to earth for analysis were of 3 kinds: geophysical and astrophysical observations, technological, and biological. Technology experiments used processes potentially useful in constructing a larger space station, such as studies of the behavior of gases and liquids in space and a soldering technique using a chemical reaction to produce the necessary heat. Cytological and genetic experiments should provide additional data on the nature and hazards of solar radiation in prolonged space flight. (Nature, 26 Aug 76, 735; Av Wk, 30 Aug 76, 23; FBIS, Tass in English, 24 Aug 76; NYT, 25 Aug 76, 20; W Post, 25 Aug 76, B-9)
The USSR had made good use of observations from its manned space stations, Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov said, citing photographs taken by Salyut 3 showing 67 locations where oil and natural gas could be found in the Caspian Sea region and 84 in Uzbekistan. The satellite did in 3 mo a job that had taken 60 yr of ground prospecting to reveal 102 deposits, he said. Published in the Feb. issue of the British magazine Spaceflight, the report by Sedov mentioned contributions to agriculture from a space survey that revealed millions of gallons of water “just below the surface” of arid lands near the Caspian Sea, showing areas that might be suitable for “oasis farming” or grazing livestock. Discussing changes in the environment made possible by space technology, Sedov said such influences should “bear a global character,” to avoid a repetition of the “notorious experiment” (the so-called West Ford) in which the U.S. released a cloud of copper fibers in orbit in 1963 for communications experiments; West Ford caused worldwide complaints by radio astronomers. (Spaceflight, Feb 76, 54) March 1976
NASA selected Grumman Aerospace Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp. to negotiate fixed-price contracts for parallel systems analyses of concepts for space stations in low- and synchronous-altitude earth orbits, including orbit-to-orbit transportation. The 2 studies, each to last 18 mo and cost about $700 000, would be managed by MSFC for Grumman and by JSC for McDonnell Douglas; the work would begin 1 Apr. The studies would define an operational base in space to serve as a space laboratory, of modular construction with potential for growth over the years. Proposals were also received from Rockwell International Space Div. and Boeing Aerospace Co. (NASA Release 76-41; JSC Release 76-19; MSFC Release 76-50)
Calling the Space Shuttle “clearly . . . the. next logical step” in tapping the scientific and commercial possibilities of space, the Baltimore Sun said in an editorial that criticisms of the Shuttle program from an economic point of view should be balanced with the rewards that would come only from experience. The first Shuttle was never intended to be selfsupporting, the editorial said, and the rewards would include increased knowledge to serve as the basis for more sophisticated programs and the increased likelihood of constructing a permanently staffed permanently orbiting space station. Complaints from prospective users—ComSat and DOD—that Shuttle fees would be too high “before NASA even has announced these fees” were an obvious ploy to keep the fees as low as possible, the editorial said. (B Sun, 13 April 76)
Soyuz 21 cosmonauts Boris Volynov and Vitaly Zholobov, who landed safely 24 Aug. from a 48-day mission to Soviet space station Salyut 5, returned to Moscow from the Baykonur cosmodrome near Tyuratam where they had been resting after their flight. The two received the title of Hero of the Soviet Union, Volynov for the second time. The news agency Tass reported that Salyut 5 was flying in a “controlled automatic regime.” In a Pravda interview, Academician Georgy Petrov emphasized the importance of orbiting stations, which he said would serve in preparing for space flights to other planets as well as in studying the earth from outer space. Petrov predicted the building of space stations with changeable crews of 20 to 30, serving for periods of time up to decades, and later the establishment of “super-large multipurpose orbital complexes with crews consisting of a hundred members and more.” A special role would be that of stations for moon study in selenocentric orbits, from which crews would land on the moon’s surface in “small expeditionary spacecraft.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 1-6 Sept 76)
NASA issued 2 major reports—SP-386, “Outlook for Space,” and SP-387, “A Forecast of Space Technology 1980-2000”—prepared by a task group initiated by Administrator James C. Fletcher in June 1974 to examine the civilian role of the U.S. space program during the coming 25 yr. The group included 20 representatives of NASA and 1 from the USAF. “Outlook for Space,” according to the foreword by Fletcher, was “an impressive analysis of the services that space systems and technology might provide the world of today and tomorrow,” and related this analysis directly to national needs and human purposes. “A Forecast of Space Technology,” according to a preface by study director Donald P. Hearth, “was an important element of the study and provided key inputs to the study and its conclusions.” The technology forecast was conducted by a team from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, supported by representatives of other NASA centers; Jack N. James and Rob Roy McDonald of JPL led the technology team. This report forecast developments in technology of acquiring, processing, transferring, and storing information, energy, and matter. “Outlook,” on the other hand, identified future objectives of space programs and prepared background information that could serve as a basis for development of program plans. Objectives were established as earth-oriented or extraterrestrial; categories of need were either physical (provision of food, shelter, health, security, education, good environment, and the work necessary to obtain these) or needs of mind and spirit (the quest for knowledge, the need to explore the unknown, the sense of accomplishment in the face of challenge). The 3 conclusions of the report were that a space program could help fill the need to improve food production and distribution, to develop new energy sources, to meet new challenges to the environment, and to predict and deal with natural and manmade disasters; that the space program could answer the need for intellectual challenge, exploration, and knowledge that would help humanity understand its relation to the universe; and that those in charge of the space program must make it recognized as meeting these public needs. Efforts recommended by the study group would be in data management, predictive modeling of future missions, advanced communications, space processing, and a permanent space station. (Text) February 1976
The 2 Soyuz 21 cosmonauts aboard space station Salyut 5, first manned space mission since last July’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, were experiencing “a state of sensory deprivation, a sort of sensory hunger,” according to the government newspaper Izvestia. Although Col. Boris Volynov and Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov continued to carry out their scientific and medico-biological experiments as they entered the 7th wk of their stay on Salyut 5—the halfway mark toward breaking the U.S. endurance record of 84 days in space set by 3 Skylab 4 astronauts in 1973—and despite their years of training to combat the problem, Izvestia said “the organism still reacts in a peculiar way to space conditions.” One symptom of “the increase in their need for communication” was that the cosmonauts were asking ground control more and more often for news from earth. On the advice of psychologists, ground control had begun playing music to the cosmonauts, Izvestia said. (UPI, in W Star, 17 Aug 76, A-4)
The failure of Soyuz 23 to rendezvous with Salyut 5 indicated that the USSR was still encountering the technical and procedural problems that had beset its manned space program for the past 15 yr, said Aviation Wk & Space Technology magazine. The failure was the seventh in 11 attempts to complete various space-station missions and the second in a row for Salyut; the unplanned water landing that concluded the failed mission was the first in Soviet space history, but was attributed to “nothing more than bad luck,” said Av Wk. The rendezvous-system failure was the fourth Soyuz mission plagued by procedural errors or hardware malfunctions associated with docking: Soyuz 3 failed to dock with Soyuz 2 in 1968, Soyuz 8 failed to dock with Soyuz 7 in 1969, and Soyuz 15 had been unable to rendezvous and dock with Salyut 3 in 1974. Because the failure of a system on the Soyuz 23 ended its mission rather than any problem with Salyut 5, Western observers wondered how soon the Soviets would attempt to reman the space station, which Av Wk referred to as “military.” (Av Wk, 25 Oct 76, 23)
A “tethered” satellite—suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle orbiter’s cargo bay—could serve to deploy and control materials used in constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80 and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles— sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites—could not remain in that region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)
Clocking the speed of plasma at 50 km per sec in the active regions of the sun was “among the most interesting results” of investigations carried out aboard the USSR space station Salyut 4, Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov wrote in the Bulletin of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Feoktistov, one of the cosmonauts on the flight of Voskhod 1 in Oct. 1964, was quoted in a Tass broadcast as saying that data from the two manned expeditions to Salyut 4 were still being processed, but that the missions had established man’s ability to “work well in conditions of weightlessness” for more than 2 mo. Citing the stay of Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov aboard the station from 25 May to 25 July last year, and describing the use of exercises and pressurized suits to maintain health during that time, Feoktistov said the mission results offered hope that orbital stations and piloted space flights would be further developed. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 May 76)
