The Soviet Union had radioed commands to its orbiting Salyut 5 space station to position it for rendezvous with a forthcoming Soyuz launch, according to a story in the Washington Post. Ideal time for a Soyuz launch would be within the next 5 days, the report said, and two Soviet tracking ships were already on station in the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea to keep in touch with the cosmonauts. (WPost, Jan 21/77, C8)
NASA announced that it and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed to continue joint technical, scientific, and operational activity developed in the Apollo-Soyuz mission July 1975 by starting studies of 2 programs, one for a joint orbited manned flight, the other for an international space station. The agreement signed May 6 by Acting NASA Administrator Dr. Alan • M. Lovelace and May 11 by Anatoly P. Aleksandrov, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, envisioned preliminary project documents within 6 to 12mo and definitive documents within a yr, noting that the working groups should proceed on the assumption of a first flight in 1981. Working groups to study experiments, basic and applied, and the operation of a Salyut-Shuttle mission would be named within 3 days after the agreement became effective; a third group, which would consider development of an international space platform, would be appointed within 2mo. NASA stressed that neither side would be committed beyond initial studies, and either could proceed with its own space station interests, (NASA Release 77-98; NYT, May 18/77, A15)
FBIS reported that the USSR had launched space station Salyut 6 into an orbit with 275km apogee, 219km perigee, 89.1min period, 51.6° inclination. A control center near Moscow would process information from the station aided by tracking stations on Soviet territory and on Soviet Academy of Sciences ships in the Atlantic. Onboard systems were functioning normally. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 29/77) •
MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to build a tethered satellite system for launch on an orbiting Space Shuttle. The idea had been to provide long-duration measurement, observation, or performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude, where density would be insufficient to support the flight of aircraft or balloons, but too thick for free-flying satellites. Exploration here had been limited to short-term flight of sounding rockets or low-level satellites. One concept had been to use a 100km cable to “troll” a tethered satellite from an orbiting Shuttle; the pull of gravity, with constant tension on the cable, would keep the captive craft at the end of its string, oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be global mapping of earth’s magnetic or gravity fields; cargo transfer between space vehicles; retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle maneuvering; transfer of large amounts of energy to a remote experiment, or from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source to a space station. MSFC would manage tethered satellite activity for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-82)
U.S. aviation experts had changed their minds about the USSR’s MiG-25 “Foxbat” interceptor plane and now considered it superior to western planes of its type, the Chicago Tribune reported. New Scientist magazine had quoted aviation experts who had examined the Foxbat flown to Japan last Sept, by defecting pilot Viktor Belenko; their conclusions were completely opposed to earlier assessments that described the Foxbat as crude and outdated. Shortly after its landing in northern Japan, the Foxbat had been described as a “manned rocket” less advanced than previously thought. The magazine said that U.S. officials now considered it unsurpassed in ease of cockpit maintenance and a masterpiece of standardization unmatched in the U.S. The experts said they were impressed not only with the speed and rate of climb, but also with the electronics on the Foxbat, now believed to have the most powerful airborne fire-control radar in the world as well as a highly sophisticated computerized flight-communications system that could perform most of the missions without the pilot [see Jan. 26]. U.S. and Japanese experts had examined the Foxbat for 2mo before returning it to the USSR; Belenko, now in the U.S., was still being debriefed. (C Trib, Feb 7/77, 1-2) Orbit parameters reported Feb. 8 were: 281km apogee, 218km perigee, 89.2-min period, 51.6° inclination. This first manned launch of the year was part of a USSR program of earth-orbital research using the Soyuz capsules on a one-mission basis, according to NY Times reporter Christopher S. Wren, who noted that the USSR had continued manned flights while the U.S. was waiting until the Space Shuttle became available in 1979 or 1980. Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post that the cosmonauts might stay in orbit as long as 2mo; both pilots had been trained for space walks, and the choice of an all-Air Force crew indicated that Soyuz 24 might be a military mission. Tass reported successful docking and occupation of the Salyut 5; it later described housekeeping and biological experiments, plus communications with ocean-going vessels, studies of crystal growth and surface tension, and use of an infrared radiometer for long-distance nighttime observation of earth’s surface and temperatures. The cosmonauts continued exercising with special equipment to measure body functions. On Feb. 21, they tried a new system for recharging the space station atmosphere: Tass said the air was satisfactory, but the test would verify the system for future prolonged flights. A multifunctional system would supply compressed air to control stabilization or to compensate for leaks in the compartments. Tass announced Feb. 23 that the crew had begun preparations for leaving the station. (The unexpectedly early termination of the Soyuz 24 mission recalled reports that the Soyuz 21 mission ended ahead of time because the Salyut 5 environmental-control system had produced an “acrid odor” that “became unbearable” [A&A 76, Oct 18].) A commentary recorded by Gen. Shatalov for broadcast Feb. 24 on the Moscow Domestic Service noted “a whole series of cyclones and strong winds with snow” over the landing site in Kazakhstan. However, the cosmonauts landed safely at dusk Feb. 25 on a farm near Arkalyk on the Kustanay steppe, and were brought to the local airport by helicopter and flown from there to Baykonur. They held a press conference at Baykonur Feb. 24, in which Glazkov called the Salyut 5 spacecraft “a fine old work horse” that had brought them home safely. (NYT, Feb 9/77, 11, B6; WPost, Feb 8/77, A16; Feb 9/77, A12; C Trib, Feb 9/77, 1:12; FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7-26/77; Moscow Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 10-25/77; Moscow Inti Svc Rusn, Feb 9-25/77; W Star, Feb 25/77, A4)
Tass reported that Soviet space station Salyut 4, launched Dec. 26, 1974, to house cosmonauts working in space up to 90 days, disintegrated over the Pacific Ocean when it moved on ground command into “a descent trajectory” and burned up. Tass noted that the station had flown for 3mo joined to the unpiloted space capsule Soyuz 20. The longest, most successful career of a Salyut in the 16yr-old USSR space program had included what Tass called “an extensive program of medical and biological research” as well as study of the sun, stars, and planets in the electromagnetic spectrum; views of Soviet territory in the middle and southern latitudes; and a great amount of data on physical processes in earth atmosphere and in space. Cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Aleksey Gubarev had docked Soyuz 17 with Salyut 4 for 29 days between Jan. 10 and Feb. 9, 1975; Vasily Lazarev and Oleg Makarov failed to dock with Salyut 4 on Apr. 5 of that yr; and Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov had docked Soyuz 18 with Salyut 4 May 25 and remained for 63 days, during which they talked with their compatriots on the ASTP mission and returned July 24 with the Soviet duration record for a manned mission. Salyut 4 had completed 12,188 orbits around the earth before being destroyed, Tass said. (Today,, Feb 4/77, 10A; FBIS, Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 3/77)
NASA announced publication of the first book of a series on the Skylab mission, Skylab, Our First Space Station (NASA SP-400), a general introduction to and overview of the mission’s problems and successes. The 10 chapters tell how Skylab grew from existing technology; how it nearly failed when its micrometeorite shield and one of its solar panels were lost, and how it was saved; how 3 manned visits occurred, one of them for a record 84-day occupation; and how it proved the possibility of living and working for extended periods in a space environment. (NASA Release 77-135)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
NASA had decided to plan construction of an orbiting space station from existing hardware because the Carter and Ford administrations had refused funds for major space station development, AvWk reported. Four station concepts were under examination: increasing the duration of Space Shuttle missions, using Skylab Apollo telescope-mount components to supply additional electricity for any extended mission; making a Space Shuttle external fuel tank into a Skylab-type station [see Mar. 7]; launching unmanned platforms to be occupied in the future; and modifying the ESA-NASA Spacelab to fly as an independent orbiting laboratory, without Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 42)
MSFC announced it would consider using the Space Shuttle’s external fuel tank (ET) as a permanent space platform. James E. Kingsbury, head of MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate, proposed to replace 57m3 of an ET’s liquid oxygen with provisions for 90 days, then launch another Shuttle to bring a crew, a Skylab-airlock module and multipledocking adapter, and a solar electric-conversion wing to the orbiting ET to constitute a habitable space station. All the required equipment, now in storage or on display in the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, had been flight-tested. (MSFC Release 77-36; NASA Release 77-42; Htsvl Times, Feb 20/77, 8)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
The NY Times reported that “observers in the U.S. and abroad” were puzzling over a Soviet space vehicle called Cosmos 929 that had been orbiting for a mo and was large enough to be manned, but apparently carried no passengers. Orbital and radio telemetry characteristics of the vehicle were like those usually related to a manned mission; speculation was that the vehicle might be the first unit of a large space station to be assembled in orbit. Reports from Europe that the USSR would launch a space vehicle during the summer had assumed that the mission would be another Salyut, five of which had previously been orbited, the first early in 1971. Cosmos 929, launched July 17, had drawn attention because of its size and its unusual telemetry, apparently two distinct systems, as though it were two objects joined together. On Aug. 18, after a major change in orbit, one of the two radio transmissions had also changed “significantly,” and part of the vehicle might have been detached at that time. Members of the Kettering Group, an international group of nongovernment space watchers, had confirmed that the vehicle was as large as a Salyut and that its 51.6° orbital inclination had usually, though not exclusively, been used for manned flights as had its telemetry signals. Cosmos 929 had produced no voices, however, and the group was “virtually certain” that no crew was aboard. (NYT, Aug 26/77, A10)
The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save the Skylab space station “which is moving closer to earth and may fall in bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch a “remote-controlled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit, where it would be available for future astronaut visits. The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every 1,5hr at a 200mi altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still the world’s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77, A-10)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
