Latest word on Progress 1 refueling of the Salyut 6 propulsion system in orbit indicated that redesign of the space station had been more extensive than the USSR had previously revealed, Av Wk reported. The Soviets had made a fundamental change in the station’s rocket engine and fuel system by switching to pressure-fed from turbine-driven main engines, and adopting a common hypergolic propellant for both the main propulsion and reaction-control system engines. Before Salyut 6, the Soyuz and Salyut propulsion systems had been the same: in the reaction-control system, hydrogen peroxide thrusters had provided attitude adjustments and hydrogen peroxide had also driven turbines pumping hypergolic oxidizer and fuel to the main propulsion system. Fuels in the main propulsion system were a form of nitric acid and of hydrazine. This arrangement had required 3 sets of propulsion lines and tanks: 1 for the hydrogen peroxide, 1 for the main-engine oxidizer, and 1 for the main-engine fuel. Changing the Salyut 6 had allowed both the main engines and the reaction-control thrusters to use propellants from the same tanks, permitting much simpler and more effective orbital refueling than if it had to include hydrogen peroxide. The change had required design of an entirely new internal-tanking and propellant-line fuel system, and development of the pressure-fed engines and the hypergolic-thruster system. The aft section of the station containing the main engines and a concentration of reaction-control-system engines could now accommodate docking at that end by a second Soyuz transport vehicle. The Salyut’s standard forward port was able to accept both Soyuz and Progress-tanker spacecraft. (AvWk, May 1/78, 1)
If the flight of Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko aboard Salyut 6 space station continued to go well, they would establish a new space-duration record in the early morning of March 13, announced the Natl. Aeronautic Association, the organization maintaining official aviation and space records. The cosmonauts would surpass the previous record of 84 days set by U.S. astronauts Carr, Gibson, and Pogue aboard Skylab 4 in 1973. The Soviets had not indicated when the mission would end. On Feb. 10 the Soyuz 26 team equalled the previous USSR manned-spacecraft record of 63 days set by Soyuz 18. (NAA Release Mar 10/78)
The Washington Star reported that, despite Soviet efforts to suppress news of the incident, western sources said that in Feb. a Soviet cosmonaut had narrowly avoided hurtling off to his death in space. The near-mishap had occurred during an unauthorized spacewalk by cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko on the record-breaking 96-day orbital flight aboard the Salyut 6 space station. Only cosmonaut Georgy Grechko had been slated to make a spacewalk; however, both cosmonauts had been wearing a new type of spacesuit that included a radio and an hr’s supply of oxygen, with only a simple tether to the spacecraft to keep the cosmonaut from drifting away. During the Grechko spacewalk, after the Salyut had passed over the western Pacific and was out of range of Soviet ground stations, Romanenko (who was untethered) had jumped out of the open hatch. Why he did this remained unknown, although a U.S. space official speculated he might have gotten “space rapture.” Grechko had been able to grab the end of Romanenko’s safety line just before it passed out of his reach. (W Star, June 28/78, A4)
Cosmonaut Valery Kubasov had spoken of the possibility of joint experimental flights by the USSR’s Salyut-type orbital station and the U.S. Space Shuttle, according to a Tass report. Kubasov noted that such flights could use the joint approach and docking procedures worked out for the Apollo-Soyuz test project and tested during the joint Soviet-U.S. flight of Apollo and Soyuz in July 1975. A new agreement between the USSR and the U.S. on cooperation in space research for peaceful purposes had came into force the previous May, Kubasov pointed out. He added that millions of Americans, like the citizens of the USSR, had viewed the Soyuz-Apollo program as a display of goodwill by the two nations and the beginning of great cooperation between nations in space. However, Av Wk reported that any U.S. Space Shuttle/Soviet Salyut space station joint mission was in deep trouble, if not already dead, because of increased U.S. concern over technology transfer to the Soviets and the current abrasive political climate between the two countries. A NSC interagency committee had reevaluated the entire joint mission idea, while U.S./Soviet discussions on the project were in limbo. The project probably would have been discussed during a planned technology-oriented trip to the USSR by presidential science adviser Frank Press, but the White House had canceled the trip in disapproval of the Soviet treatment of dissidents. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, July 12/78; AvWk, July 17/78, 13)
Space station Salyut 6 would complete a thousand orbits on this date, Tass announced. During the day, cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko had installed and switched into operation a new life-support-system air filter delivered by Progress 1. Of great interest to Soviet scientists were the crew’s regular reports on natural calamities: dust storms, forest fires, and volcanic activity. Orbital complex Salyut 6/Soyuz 27 would continue its flight. (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 12/78)
AvWk reported that the third instead of the fifth Space Shuttle mission would attempt to raise the orbit of the abandoned Skylab space station, bettering chances of Skylab’s remaining in orbit until the Shuttle could come to the rescue. NASA had scheduled the third Shuttle flight for Oct. 1979; the fifth, for Feb. 1980. A Martin Marietta teleoperator propulsion unit carried on the Shuttle to boost Skylab to a higher orbit would be left in space for retrieval by the fifth Shuttle flight. MSFC would build a solar panel for the teleoperator to keep it in orbit for as long as necessary. (AvWk, Jan 23/78, 22)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had built and bombers drop-tested a new manned space vehicle similar to the U.S. Space Shuttle. The delta-winged reusable vehicle had been dropped from a Soviet Tupolev TU-95 Bear bomber in atmospheric tests of the spacecraft’s aerodynamic and handling qualities, like recent tests of the Space Shuttle. No known space testing of the delta-winged vehicle had occurred, although the Soviets might have begun orbital tests with a second new manned-flight craft with space-tug capabilities. Design characteristics of the test vehicle were apparently similar to those of both the U.S. Shuttle orbiter and the lifting-body research vehicles flight-tested earlier by the U.S. Air Force and NASA. The vehicle strongly resembled the USAF/Boeing X-20 DynaSoar concept, which had been viewed as a space station resupply vehicle before the program was canceled. The Soviet spacecraft was described as smaller than the 150 0001b NASA Shuttle orbiter, but larger than the Soyuz expendable manned transport. The NYT said the new vehicle indicated the USSR believed it had the technology to proceed with building reusable manned spacecraft. (NYT, Mar 21/78, 12)
NASA’s struggle to save 3 astronauts trapped in a foundering spaceship during the flight of Apollo 13 had begun the most harrowing 6 days in NASA’s history, NASA Activities reported in observing the 8th anniversary of the flight. The astronauts had heard a loud bang; when Fred Haise, Jr., scanned the instrument panel, he saw that one of the main electrical systems was deteriorating. The words Jack Swigert spoke to mission control long haunted NASA: “Houston, we’ve got a problem.” At the time of the explosion, Apollo 13 traveling at 2100mph was 205 OOOmi from earth and more than 50 OOOmi from the moon, with a dead mothership (Odyssey) that included the main propulsion engine. After moving the astronauts into the lunar module, NASA focused on getting the Apollo on course for home while conserving limited supplies of power, oxygen, and water. Not only had NASA employees worked round the clock, but also specialists and computers from North American Rockwell, the contractor; Grumman Aerospace Corp., manufacturer of the LM; TRW Systems, builder of the descent propulsion engine; and many others. NASA had decided to drop the service module and put the command module Aquarius into the correct attitude for earth-atmosphere reentry; when the latter entered earth’s gravity 216 277mi from home, it needed another course correction. The tnird descent-engine burn was successful, putting Aquarius into the proper reentry corridor. As the spacecraft drew closer to splashdown, one of the astronauts described to ground control what he was seeing: “There’s one whole side of that spacecraft missing . . . right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the engine . . . it’s really a mess . . . man, that’s just unbelievable—looks like a lot of debris is just hanging out of the side near the S-band antenna.” The astronauts had returned safely to earth 142hr, 54min, 41sec after launch. As Jim Lovell said, “We do not realize what we have on earth until we leave it.” (NASA Actv, Apr 78, 14)
NASA announced it would rotate the Skylab space station 180° in its orbit Nov. 3 because of low temperatures encountered by one of the control moment gyros (CMG) as a result of periodic long-term shading from the sun. The sun angle was a function of the orbit inclination (in Skylab’s case, 50° relative to the equator), the position of the earth around the sun, and certain other seasonal factors. When the CMG, essential to Skylab’s holding a stable attitude, was in shadow for ^xcessive periods, the bearing temperature dropped, interfering with lubrication and increasing friction on the bearings that could lead to possible CMG failure. Turning the Skylab in its orbit before mid-November would expose the CMG to more sun and maintain normal bearing temperatures. The reversed position was not expected to change Skylab’s orbital-life predictions significantly. The maneuver would use none of the remaining nitrogen thruster fuel now on reserve for docking with the teleoperator-retrieval system, planned for the second Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 78-172; Marshall Star, Nov 8/78, 2; JSC Roundup, Nov 10/78, 1; WPost, Nov 4/78, A-6; AvWk, Nov 13/78, 65)
Soyuz 31, carrying East Germany’s first cosmonaut and a Soviet commander, had docked with the Salyut 6 space station, the Washington Post reported. The USSR had launched Soyuz 31 Aug. 26 at 17:51 Moscow time. Sigmund Jahn of East Germany and Valery Bykovsky had joined the Soyuz 29 cosmonauts who had been circling earth in the space station since June 16. Tass said the crew was well and had begun implementation of tasks assigned to them. It added that the launch of Soyuz 31 had been part of the preparations for an historic event, the 30th anniversary of the creation of the first German socialist state. The flight had been intended as an example of the use of space for peaceful purposes, based on “disinterested international cooperation and comradely mutual assistance.” (WPost, Aug 27/78, A 21; FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 26/78)
The Washington Post reported that two Soviet cosmonauts had set a new Soviet space walk record on July 29, spending 125min outside the Salyut 6 space station testing a new type of suit and working with equipment mounted on the station, the accompanying Progress 2 supply ship, and their own Soyuz 29. Cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were the fourth team of cosmonauts to successfully board the Salyut 6 after it reached orbit the previous Sept. Kovalenok had filmed his colleague during part of the walk and had relayed the color footage to earth for broadcast on Moscow television. Tass, the Soviet news agency, said the two cosmonauts had dismantled instruments and devices on the outer shell of Salyut 6, loading them into Soyuz 29 for shipment to earth, and had mounted new instruments, including devices to measure radiation^ on the Salyut. Instruments being returned had measured micrometeor activities and had aided research on "polymers, optical and other structural material used in building advance spacecraft,” Tass said. The report did not give details on the new space suit, but the cosmonauts said that their “semistiff’ clothes were well designed and that life-support systems had been improved to facilitate movement and “better fixation outside the station.” U.S. experts had interpreted the length of the Salyut mission and repeated trips to it by Soviet cosmonauts as indicating a focus by the Soviet space program on building permanent orbital platforms. The report had not indicated when the two cosmonauts would return to earth, but observers suggested that the next mission (Soyuz 30) would probably come soon and would be a marathon stay aboard the orbiting station. (WPost, July 30/78, DIO; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/78)
NASA announced it had decided not to reboost or deorbit the Skylab space station in orbit around the earth because success was unlikely. Uncertainties that had developed in Skylab systems, Skylab lifetime, Space Shuttle schedule, and teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) delivery had made further planning for a rescue mission impractical. Factors leading to the decision included deterioration of systems aboard Skylab (recurring control-moment gyro anomalies, marginal power conditions, and minimal attitude-control impulse gas); high sunspot activity that was accelerating decay of Skylab’s orbit; and reviews showing that a Skylab-rescue mission would be difficult to arrange before April 1980. Skylab, currently orbiting at about 426km (265mi) altitude, was being maintained in a low-drag attitude and would be continually monitored while NASA assessed the possibilities of damage on reentry, now predicted to occur between mid-1979 and mid-1980. Most of the vehicle would burn up during reentry, but some fragments probably would reach earth’s surface. Skylab’s flight path was 75% over the ocean; the probability of injury or damage from it was less than that from meteorites, according to estimates. (NASA Release 78-191) At a press conference following the announcement, Bill Haines of the Chicago Sun Times asked: “Way back in the olden days I remember that there was a lot of talk about space rescue, and one of the philosophies seemed to be that if we got into trouble or the Russians got into trouble, the other side would come to the rescue. Have you made any approaches at all to the Russians to see if they could do anything about this? If not, why not? And do you intend to?” John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, answered: “This is a little different from the space rescues that we had talked about. As you know, part of the ASTP program was to design docking equipment that could be prototypes of that. And we still have a long-range plan with the Russians, albeit rather fuzzy, to some day have this capability. “With respect to Skylab: After our ASTP, working with the Russians, of course, we had a fairly good working knowledge of the capabilities, at least that we knew of that were done in that program. And at least a year ago we got our own heads together and talked about whether or not they could do anything that we couldn’t do. We concluded that there are many problems that we won’t go into that it probably is not feasible, so we did not ask them. However, they are being informed of what we are doing here and if they make any proposals that we haven’t thought of that could be useful, we will certainly entertain them.” (NASA press conf Dec 19/78)
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
In an interview on NASA’s 20th anniversary, JSC director Christopher Kraft, Jr., said that speeding up the space program would require private capital. “Production in space will become an important part of our competitive position and have a great deal to do with the balance of trade.” Speculating on the future at JSC, Kraft said he believed it “highly probable that we’ll see a well developed space industry in the next ten years. I have an intuitive feeling that the thing is going to mushroom on us.” First major project for JSC would be to make the space transportation system operational: “If we’re going to make this thing a routine operation, it’s got to go in a more matter-of-fact manner, more like an airline operation, than we’ve seen in the past.”Tor the first 6 or 10 Space Shuttle flights, center employees could expect a level of activity similar to that during Apollo and Skylab “but after that point we’re going to have to phase into this new mode.” He emphasized he wasn’t implying airline pilots would fly the Space Shuttle: “It will still require highly trained astronauts because it is a very complex vehicle. With development of the transport system, we will see a new kind of astronaut—techniques will go into space very rapidly. The need for specific talent and skills will develop.” Kraft predicted that, in the next few years, the U.S. would “recognize a need for permanency of man in space. The best way to do that is with a space station. We will probably develop a permanent space station that would be carried up as modules in the Space Shuttle.” (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 4)	.
Tass reported that, in an interview marking the first anniversary of the Salyut 6 launch, Pilot-Cosmonaut Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov had recommended designing a new orbiting scientific Salyut laboratory with a minimum of 7 or 8 docking units. The presence of only 2 docking units on Salyut 6 meant that, after a cargo vessel had arrived and its equipment was transferred, it had to undock to make room for another vehicle. This was irrational, Feoktistov said. When a cargo ship departed, the Salyut would lose one complete “room” of the cosmic house (with a volume of about 6m3) that could accommodate equipment and scientific instruments. To add even one more component to a Salyut was not simple, as virtually its entire surface was covered with solar batteries, windows, television cameras, and various sensors. The nose fairing covering the station in the active phase of the launch also had restricted designers. Feoktistov stressed, however, the need to equip future space stations with several mooring ports to handle units for specialized research: technological, astronomical, and geophysical. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 26/78)
Aerospace Daily reported that Progress 3, launched by the USSR to dock with Salyut 6, had carried 6171b of food, 9921b of oxygen-regeneration equipment, and 41gal of water to cosmonauts Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov, according to cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, one of the designers of the Progress resupply vehicles. UPI quoted a Novosti report that consumption of food, water, and air by a 2-man space crew would range from 44 to 661b per day; a 2-man space station would need about lOtons of these supplies to stay in full operation for a year. (A/D, Aug 16/78, 202)
The Marshall Star reported that a NASA decision to boost the Skylab space station to a higher orbit could lead to reactivation and use of Skylab’s onboard systems and instruments in a number of useful projects. MSFC had awarded parallel study contracts, each in the amount of $125 000, to Martin Marietta Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for independent reports on the possibilities and benefits of Skylab reuse. The 9-mo studies of the most effective ways to , use Skylab in further missions, experiments, and demonstrations would concentrate on the experiments or equipment already aboard Skylab, for firsthand evaluation of how materials and equipment were affected by 10 or more yr in space; on crew quarters and other support, for Spacelab missions and experiments that could benefit from long duration and an additional energy supply; and on opportunities offered by the Skylab in itself, or in conjunction with other hardware elements, for new missions or experiments. For example, the relatively large facility (comparable to a 3-bedroom home) might provide a convenient platform for fabricating and constructing large space structures, or could aid in converting such structures into useful demonstrations or operational systems. The ground station in Bermuda had begun operations Mar. 6 to 13 to reactivate Skylab, turning on command and telemetry systems and receiving data. Transfer of power from the airlock module to the Apollo telescope mount permitted reception of telemetry; the ATM solar arrays also provided power when turned toward the sun. Data received from the ATM computer indicated it was in good working order and had enough power. On Skylab’s last working pass, controllers had used about llmin to check the status of the trickle charge to batteries 2,4, and 5; the charge had been turned off on battery 7, which had remained fully charged and ready for the next mission. Controllers also had performed some systems checkoffs, Bermuda reporting the command receiver as strong throughout the pass. Plans were to reactivate Skylab in mid-April, using the TAC system to reduce atmospheric drag and prolong Skylab's orbital lifetime for several months. (Marshall Star, Mar 22/78, 1)
The USSR had decided to keep a permanent manned space station in earth orbit as a result of the current Salyut 6 space station mission, AvWk reported. Staffing this and follow-on Salyuts without major intervals between missions would be a milestone in manned spaceflight, and would demonstrate the USSR’s decision to invest major resources in space. The USSR had claimed the Salyut 6/Soyuz 27 mission was more scientific than military; its activities had included photographing the Soviet Union to explore for natural resources, detailed medical studies of cosmonaut blood circulation, and upper-atmosphere and micrometeorite monitoring. The crew had also devoted more time to system checkout and monitoring, because the design of Salyut 6 was a significant change from that of previous Salyut space stations: The USSR had not previously flown a spacecraft configuration like Salyut 6/Soyuz 26/Soyuz 27 to test the interaction of three large vehicles. It had tried various spacecraft attitudes to evaluate stresses during maneuvers on the docked system, and had transferred food and equipment from the Soyuz 27 resupply vehicle and film, biological samples, and records to the Soyuz 27. The Soyuz/Salyut mission had achieved three manned-spaceflight firsts: four-man space station, simultaneous docking of two transport spacecraft with an orbiting space station, and manned resupply of an occupied station. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 20; Jan 9/78, 25; Jan 16/78, 20; Jan 23/78, 19)
As the climax of a 4-mo attempt to stabilize and trim the orbital position of Skylab, a NASA team of engineers and controllers from JSC, MSFC, IBM, and three tracking stations (Bermuda; Madrid; and Goldstone, Calif.) had successfully put the space station in an orbital position they hoped would prolong its lifetime in space, JSC announced. Maneuvers in June had put the space station in an attitude intended to reduce atmospheric drag at its orbital height of 389km (242 statute mi). Assuming that the gyros continued to function, NASA hoped the new attitude would extend the orbital lifetime of Skylab by 6 to 12mo to late 1979 or early 1980, giving NASA time to arrange an early Space Shuttle test flight to reboost Skylab into higher orbit, or deorbit it into a remote ocean area. Maneuvers had begun in Mar. when engineers and flight controllers at the Bermuda tracking station checked out Skylab systems and brought its batteries to a fully charged state. On June 8, flight controllers had turned on the dormant control-moment gyros in the Skylab attitude-control system. (The other part of the system, the thruster attitude-control system, would expel nitrogen gas through nozzles to move Skylab into various attitudes in its orbit.) A computer with various sensors to indicate position had controlled both systems. Although one gyro that failed during the last Skylab mission in 1974 could not be used, the other two gyros were activated and worked as expected. On June 9, controllers had commanded Skylab into a solar inertial attitude in which the spacecraft’s solar cells always faced the sun. On June 11, they had maneuvered it into the desired “end-on velocity-vector” attitude, docking port forward and long axis parallel to the ground along the flight path. Skylab had remained in that position while engineers continued to monitor it, periodically transmitting minor corrections to the onboard computer controlling Skylab’s position. (JSC Release 78-25; Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; June 14/78,1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78,1; June 23/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, June 2/78, 2; June 30/78, 2; W Post, June 12/78, A-19))
NASA had not yet decided when to command the Skylab space station into a cartwheel maneuver that could extend its orbital life by 9 to 14mo, Science magazine reported. The maneuver could increase chances of a Space Shuttle mission either boosting Skylab or propelling it into controlled reentry. Major factor in the decision would be assessment of how long the station’s control-moment gyros could sustain the maneuver before failing; without the cartwheel, NASA believed reentry would occur between May 1979 and July 1980. According to Science, however, Skylab’s chances of remaining in the sky until NASA could get to it with a Space Shuttle were no better than 1 in 2. {Science, Apr 7/78, 28; AvWk, Apr 24/78, 15)
Mstislav Keldysh, Soviet scientist and mathematician who had been spokesman for the USSR’s space program as head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died June 24 at the age of 67, the Washington Post reported. Soviet news agency Tass described the death as sudden. Dr. Michael DeBakey had traveled to the Soviet Union 5yr ago to operate on Keldysh’s circulatory system. Recognized in a wide range of scientific and mathematical disciplines bearing on aviation and rocketry, Keldysh had proved his administrative ability by rising to the top of his country’s scientific establishment. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences from 1961 to 1975, Keldysh had been not only USSR science spokesman but also a key figure in organizing and developing scientific research throughout the Soviet Union. He had won the Stalin Prize in 1942 for “The Theory of Calculating and Developing Methods of Reducing Various Types of Vibrations in Aircraft,” and in 1946 for “The Front-Wheel Shimmy of the Tricycle (Aircraft) Landing Gear.” In 1943, Keldysh had become head of a top secret aircraft-development institute with increasing administrative responsibilities. As head of the Academy of Sciences, he announced in Oct. 1969, shortly after the U.S. had put men on the moon, that the USSR had abandoned plans to do likewise and would concentrate on putting manned space stations into orbit around the earth. He acknowledged that the Soviet Union had been debating space expenditures, and said, “My personal view is that, when a man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (WPost, June 27/78, B6; FBIS, Tass Inti Serv in Russian, June 26/78)	•
U.S. analysts believed the USSR would continue to fly manned military space station reconnaissance missions even though the Soviets had not launched any such Salyuts since June 1976, Av Wk reported. Salyut 3, launched in June 1974, and Salyut 5, launched in June 1976, were successful military missions; the Salyut 2 spacecraft, which failed in orbit in April 1973, was also apparently a military Salyut. Significant design differences between the military and scientific versions included docking configuration, overall structure, and solar-panel placement. Introduction of the military configuration as early as the second Salyut flight was considered to be evidence of USSR emphasis on military-man-in-space planning and engineering. Photo reconnaissance was the prime objective of Salyut military missions; other military activities such as high energy research for possible weapons application were secondary. (AvWk, Dec 4/78, 17)
