The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 32 from the Baykonur site at 2:54 p.m. local time, carrying a two-man crew to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 space station for the first time since November 1978, when the Soyuz 29 astronauts returned after a record 139 days in space. Soyuz 32 was manned by Lt. Col. Vladimir Lyakhov, 37, acting as commander on his first flight, and civilian flight engineer Valery Ryumin, 39, who was aboard Soyuz 25 when it failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and had to return to Earth 2 days later. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, head of the USSR’s space training program, said Salyut 6 had been “an effective platform for work in space,” having been occupied for 8 of the 16 months since its launch in September 1977. It had seen five successful manned dockings (three by international crews including cosmonauts from Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Poland as part of the Intercosmos program), as well as dockings by a number of unmanned supply vessels delivering food and fuel. (NY Times, Feb 26/79, A-14; W Post, Feb 26/79) During February: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported that the Federation Aeronautique International (FAI) had admitted the People’s Republic of China as an active member effective January 1. (NAA News, Jan-Feb 79)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
The New York Times said that Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, had told a House subcommittee that problems with the Space Shuttle would delay flight of the Galileo mission for two years. NASA now planned to launch the mission in 1984 in two parts: one Shuttle flight would take a Galileo orbiter into Earth orbit for launch toward Jupiter, and another Shuttle flight would take another spacecraft for launch into the atmosphere of Jupiter carrying instruments to record its composition. Earlier mission plans were for a 1982 Shuttle launch carrying a single Galileo package including orbiter and Jupiter probe; the change would add more than $184 million to the cost of the project, previously estimated at about $450 million. NASA had had problems not only with the Shuttle insulating tiles but also with the rocket engines. An improved engine was to be standard after the first test flights. Angelo Guastaferro, NASA’s head of planetary programs, said that the 4,600-pound Galileo spacecraft would be too heavy for the Shuttle to carry into Earth orbit without the improved engines. (NY Times, Oct 18/79, A-15)
Neil Armstrong, “America’s reluctant space hero,” said the United States should develop a permanent manned orbiting space station for long-duration exposure of people and equipment to the space environment. At an interview about the 10th anniversary of the moon landing, the University of Cincinnati engineering professor who in 1969 had been the first man to walk on the moon said that, if the United States had an ongoing manned space program, “we could have solved the problems” with Skylab. {Today, June 12/79, 16A)
Flight controllers at JSC reported that they would halt their 24-hour Skylab watch February 2, following NASA’s decision to abandon attempts to boost or deorbit the space station. The January 25 maneuver that positioned Skylab’s solar panels for constant sun tracking had removed it from the minimum-drag position and would result in speeding up its orbital decay. The repositioning was intended to increase power available to controllers to alter the path of Skylab’s descent, now expected between June and August. (JSC Release 79-03)
The Washington Post said the empty Soviet spacecraft that linked up December 19 with Salyut 6 was probably a three-person version of the vehicle the Soviet Union had been launching for 10 years. The Soyuz T (probably for Transport) docked on ground command at one end of the two-part space station in the fourth unmanned test of the new configuration (the first was Cosmos 869, November-December 1976; the second, Cosmos 1001, April 1978; the third, Cosmos 1074, January, 31-March 1, 1979). The Washington Post said the interior of the Soyuz “command craft” probably was changed to accommodate three instead of two cosmonauts;, making it easier for the Soviet Union to use the Salyut as a permanent orbital station with interchangeable crews, difficult with only two men at a time. (WPost, Dec 20/79, A-27)
August 19 saw the end of the record-breaking flight in the Salyut 6 space station of Soyuz 32 cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Valery Ryumin, returned safely in the Soyuz 34 capsule after 175 days in space since launch February 25. FBIS had carried daily reports of their progress. Besides the experiments in materials processing (alloys and coating processes) and the intensive physical routines designed to assist long-term assignments in space, the crew in their last days in orbit had worked with the KRT-10 radiotelescope sent last month by cargo craft and unfurled in space to study extraterrestrial radio sources and nonatmospheric radioastronomy. As early as August 15, they had begun to pack the return capsule with items demonstrating the results of their space stay. Difficulty with the radiotelescope had presented another challenge to the crew; upon completion April 9 of the scheduled scans, the antenna was to be jettisoned, leaving the docking unit free. “Space sprung another surprise,” Tass reported, when the antenna became entangled with a projection on Salyufs surface. The crew tried to free it by “a minor jerk of the station,” which was not successful. A space walk was already scheduled to check the exterior of the station, dismantle outside scientific equipment, and retrieve samples of materials exposed for a long time to outer space. Ground control wanted to spare the cosmonauts the stress of an extra task in outer space, but the crew insisted it was the only sure way to solve the problem. On August 15, the crew in “full pressure suits” opened the hatch, and flight engineer Ryumin moved to the attachment point, releasing the 10-meter (30-foot) antenna with pliers, and “imparted the antennae acceleration relative to the station” (in other words, pushed it away toward the Earth for reentry). Then, Ryumin and Lyakhov disassembled and brought in the micrometeorite registration instruments and the panels with samples of structural, optical, insulation, and polymer materials, some of which were in orbit since Salyut 6’s launch in September 1977, others installed by the Soyuz 29 crew in July 1978. Total time of the space walk was 1 hour, 23 minutes: Tass noted that the suits, “fitted out with metal shielding against cosmic radiation and possible concussions” from meteorites, had previously served Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov of Soyuz 29 and Grechko and Romanenko of Soyuz 26. The cosmonauts landed safely August 19 and appeared to be in the best shape yet: they wanted to walk but were not allowed to do so immediately, although they did get brief dips in the hotel swimming pool. Later reports praised the exercise routine for its good effects on the crew, who agreed that even longer flights were possible. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 1-25/79; CSM, Aug 14/79, 2; NY Times, Aug 16/79, A-19)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, on March 29 signed a memorandum of understanding in Washington, D.C., on a joint international solar-polar mission to be launched in 1983. NASA and ESA would each provide a spacecraft, and ESA would supply software and personnel to support ESA’s flight operations in the United States. NASA would be responsible for mission control, launch operations, and tracking and data acquisition, and for several experiments. JPL would manage the NASA scientific effort and development of a NASA spacecraft; JSC would manage the Shuttle launch portion of the mission; ESTEC would manage the European effort. The objectives of the mission would be to study the structure and emissions of the Sun as a function of latitude from the solar equator to the solar poles and to study the interplanetary medium Earth-to-Jupiter and the Jovian magnetosphere. Launched from a Shuttle, the two craft, each propelled by an upper-stage booster, would take a path in the ecliptic plane (that containing all the planets in Earth’s system) toward Jupiter, using its gravity to propel them out of the ecliptic toward the Sun on trajectories to pass one over the north and one over the south solar poles, retrace the ecliptic track, pass over the opposite poles, and fly back toward Jupiter. Mission lifetime would be about five years. (NASA Release 79-37; ESA anno Mar 30/79) During March: FBIS carried regular reports on the progress of the Soyuz 32 cosmonauts aboard the Salyut 6 orbiting space station. Upon arrival February 26, the crew had begun reactivating the thermal regulators, water regeneration system, and ventilation. On March 1, they had begun checkout of individual consoles and scientific instruments, tested the manual attitude control system, and corrected the flight path of Salyut 6 using Soyuz 32 propulsion. The following day the crew did baseline medical checkups using Polynom apparatus; the flight engineer was tested in the morning, and the commander was tested in the afternoon. In an interview March 4, the crew’s doctor reported that Lyakhov had needed 1.5 days to adapt to weightlessness but was now feeling well. The crew had asked to begin their exercise program on trainer machines and cycles several days ahead of schedule. Lyakhov’s regime emphasized his “vestibular system”; Ryumin’s, the cardiovascular. On March 5, Tass, the Soviet news agency, said that the doctors were keeping close watch on Commander Lyakhov, “a thick-set man...on his first flight in outer space.” The commentator said “unhasty adaptation” was important during the first few days on the space station, which imposed three peak loads at one time: adaptation to weightlessness, complicated docking and transfer procedures, and emotional strain. More time had been allowed on this flight than usual for the crew to check all the station systems, both those governing flight and those controlling living conditions (the “boost week,” a term used by cosmonaut Vladimir Kovalenok, one of the communications team keeping in touch with the Soyuz 32 crew). A March 6 broadcast interview with a “scientific employee at the Flight Center” on repair and servicing of the Salyut said that the intensive activity “did not mean that anything is broken or needs mending.” On Salyut 6, unlike its predecessors, individual items of equipment for the first time could be exchanged when their resources were exhausted. The station had been in orbit for 18 months and carried almost 1,000 different instruments, the reporter said. Important systems, such as life support, had been designed to be practically failure proof by using interchangeable units within easy reach, facilitating periodic exchange of equipment. Introduction of the Progress automated cargo ships meant that new instruments, equipment, and tools were available upon crew request. Progress 2 had brought the Soyuz 29 crew a globe indicator for the control panel to show the station’s location in relation to Earth; it had also brought new computer units for the Delta automated navigation system. The first job in reactivating the Salyut 6 station had been to check out the docking unit on the transfer module, with its opening into outer space; the Soyuz 26 crew had done this last year. Lyakhov and Ryumin would have to test each on-board system and plug in reserve circuits or replace units. The reporter pointed out that, notwithstanding the long use of the station, “not one reserve circuit in any system has so far been switched on.” The current crew would replace ventilators in the thermal system, light bulbs, cables in the television and communications systems, components of the exercise equipment, and filters and regenerators in the life-support systems. On March 12, Progress 5 was launched with a load of fuel for the Salyut 6 propulsion unit and materials for its on-board systems. A commentator said that portable cables and other mobile elements of radiocommunication “wear out heavily” on long flights; the crew had replaced headsets, cables, and switches. They had also set up and operated an on-board videotape recorder and a video monitoring device. An interview March 13 with cosmonaut Vladimir Aksenov said that the Salyut represented a new stage of technology, not only because it could be supplied but also because it could be overhauled in space with components and assemblies flown there by freight and crew transport vessels. Aksenov noted that the crew had used an ordinary soldering iron, said to be an enormous departure for repairs in a closed weightless space. Also, he said, basic scientific apparatus had heretofore been assembled in a ground workshop and checked out in a ground station; for the first time, the installation and test of new apparatus would take place on an operating space station in orbit. This was made possible by a wide selection of tools designed especially for use in space: pliers, screwdrivers, clamps, and special instruments to handle special nuts and bolts. Upon the arrival March 14 of the Progress 5, bringing fuel, equipment, experiment materials, and mail, the crew’s doctor said in an interview that previous flights had indicated that weightlessness had some tricky aspects and that the consequences of exposure to it could be very serious. The current crew were apparently beginning to feel at home in the new surroundings, however. After unloading the ferry, the crew had the job of dismantling the Kristall electric furnace used for more than 40 experiments in space processing of materials and installing new apparatus better designed to operate in weightlessness; they had also plugged in a new chemical battery to reinvigorate the power system. By March 21, the unloading of the supply ship was completed, and the crew was ahead of schedule using the new equipment, especially a color television camera to show the interior of the station with equipment replacements including new sensors installed in the work area to detect minimal air pollution in the station’s atmosphere. On March 24, the crew communicated by television with the flight control center “in the direction from earth to the spaceship.. .for the first time in the history of space flight.” The control center could now transmit drawings, plans, and working documents from the ground to the Salyut; “in principle,” said the report, “any central TV transmission can be sent to the spaceship.” By month’s end, Tass said that the crew had adapted to weightlessness and were proceeding with scheduled tasks. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 1-28/79)
