The Soviet Union launched a redesigned spacecraft, Soyuz 13, carrying three cosmonauts in what the New York Times called a possible bid to break the 185-day endurance record set in October. Launch at 5:18 p.m. Moscow time was from the cosmodrome at Baykonur in Soviet central Asia; Tass reported that all systems were working well. The pilot of the flight was Lt. Col. Leonid Kizim, 39, a first-time flyer in space; flight engineer Oleg Makarov, 47, had flown on Soyuz 12 in September 1973 and Soyuz 27 in January 1978, as well as the “anomaly” of April 1973. Research engineer Gennady Strekalov, 40, also a rookie, had worked for 20 years in spacecraft design. This was the first three-person flight launched by the Soviet Union in nine years, since the crew of Soyuz 11 died during reentry in June 1971 when their capsule sprang a leak and lost pressure. The cosmonauts had not worn their space suits because of crowded conditions on the capsule. Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said that Soyuz T3 had “all the latest accomplishments of science and technology” including a fast onboard computer to free the crew “to the maximum from . . . .routine operations.” The system was said to perform all calculations needed to dock with another craft such as Salyut 6. However, Radio Moscow did not say how long the flight would last, and Moscow media did not say whether Soyuz T3 would link with Salyut 6, which had been in orbit three years—only that the crew would test a new spacecraft. Soyuz T3 was first of that type to carry a three person crew, 39th in the Soyuz series, and sixth manned craft to be launched in 1980. Two tests of the new design had been successful: an unmanned Soyuz 7"had docked with space station Salyut 6 in December 1979, and Soyuz T2 carrying Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V. Aksyonov had joined the Soyuz 36 crew (record-holders Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov) there in June of this year. Salyut 6, designed to last only 18 months, had supported four expeditions over its three years in orbit. When Ryumin and Popov left it six weeks ago, after a thorough overhaul of its equipment, they said that it was fit for further use. (NY Times, Nov 27/80, A-3; W Post, Nov 28/80, A-28) During November: MSFC announced that Dr. William R. Lucas, center director, had appointed Thomas J. (Jack) Lee deputy director, effective December 1. Lee had worked at the center and its predecessor since 1958 and for the past six years had managed the Spacelab program, working with ESA on this Shuttle payload. John W. Thomas, Lee’s deputy, would succeed as manager of the Spacelab office. Lucas named John S. Potate, associate director for management, to a new position as associate director. Potate had come to MSFC in 1973 from the Apollo lunar-landing program at KSC and at Headquarters. (MSFC Release 80-149)
Tass reported that Soyuz 38, launched September 18, carried a Cuban cosmonaut and a Soviet mission commander to join cosmonaut Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who were within two weeks of breaking a space-endurance record on the orbiting Salyut 6 space station. Armando Tamayo Mendez, 38, was the seventh non-Soviet citizen to fly in the USSR’s Intercosmos program. His companion on Soyuz 38 was veteran cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko. (W Post, Sept 19/80, A-30)
.The longest spaceflight in history ended at 12:50 Moscow time when cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin landed near Dzhezkazgan in the. descent module of Soyuz 37 after 185 days aboard the Salyut 6 space station. A previous record of 175 days was set last year by Ryumin and Vladimir Lyakhov; shown on Soviet television immediately after landing, they seemed to have trouble walking and talking. The Soviet Union did not have television coverage of the Ryumin-Popov landing, but the two appeared on television at 9 p.m.. local time in recliners, being interviewed. A Reuters report from the landing, carried by the New_ York Times, said that the two men appeared well when they climbed from their capsule in the rain, Ryumin noting “it’s always pleasant to have a soft landing.” He joked with journalists and insisted on walking two yards unaided “almost without staggering,” said Trud, a trade-union newspaper. Doctors said that neither man seemed to show the physical deterioration suffered by other long-mission crews; Popov had gained 6.5 pounds, Ryumin almost 11. They had kept up their strength in space with exercises. (The New York Times noted that the new record far outdistanced the longest U.S. space mission, the 84-day mission of Skylab 4 with Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue, that ended in 1974. In the absence of U.S. space exploits since the Moon landings, Western observers said that the new Soviet feat might indicate that the Soviet Union had regained the lead in space; coupled with the delay in the U.S. Shuttle program and public awareness of growing Soviet military might, the Salyut accomplishment might translate into political advantage.) Salyut 6 had been orbiting for three years, being manned for about half that time. Four main and eight visiting expeditions had been working there, backed by automatic cargo craft bringing fuel and supplies. Tass said that the preventive maintenance and resupply procedures carried out by the crews were a big step toward “lasting manned complexes for scientific and national economic purpose.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 11/80; NY Times, Oct 12/80, 23; Oct 13/80, A-13)
NASA announced that a sunspot hotline set up at GSFC would keep the public informed about solar flares during the 1980 peak cycle of activity. Daily recorded messages would contain information on sunspots, solar flares, geomagnetic storms, and the impact of solar activity on radio transmissions, for instance. The recordings provided jointly by NASA and NOAA through its space environment services center in Boulder, Colo., would originate in the SMM facility at GSFC. The “Solar Max” spacecraft launched February 14 was an orbiting solar observatory carrying seven instruments whose data, coordinated with data from scientists at ground-based observatories throughout the world, would permit the most comprehensive investigation of solar flares ever made. Information from these sources would be relayed to GSFC on a 24-hour basis so that NASA scientists could determine which active regions of the Sun to study during the next 24 hours. (NASA Release July 23:The Soviet Union launched Soyuz J7 at 9:33 p.m. Moscow time, carrying Col. Viktor Gorbatko and a 33-year-old Vietnamese air force pilot, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, first Asian space traveler and sixth citizen of an eastern-bloc country to be part of the USSR’s Intercosmos program. The Soyuz would link up within 24 hours with the orbiting Salyut 6 space station where Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin had been working for more than three months. The Salyut’s docking port had been cleared July 19 by jettisoning cargo ship Progress 10, which burned up reentry. (W Post, July 24/80, A-15; Today, July 24/80, 1A; W Star, July 20/80, 2; July 24/80, A-7)
Press reports said that the three cosmonauts launched November 27 in Soyuz 73 on a repair mission to the three-year-old space station Salyut 6 had returned safely from their 13-day flight December 10 at 12:26 p.m. Moscow time. Landing was in Kazakhstan in Soviet central Asia. Leonid Kizim, Oleg Makarov, and Gennady Strekalov were in perfect condition, Tass said. This was the sixth manned mission by the Soviet Union this year and the first three-person crew orbited since 1971, when three cosmonauts died during reentry after a valve blew on Soyuz 77. A new guidance system on Soyuz T3 took over after liftoff and guided it to smooth docking with Salyut 6. The spacecraft, third of an improved version of the Soyuz (mainstay of the Soviet space program since 1967), carried solar batteries, an. on-board computer, improved maneuvering rockets, and improvements in cabin comfort for the cosmonauts. The crew had performed repairs and maintenance oh Salyut 6 telemetry, refueling systems, and temperature controls. (W Post, Dec 10/80, A-2; Dec 11/80, A-13; NY Times, Dec 11/80, A-23)
Cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin set a new record for spaceflight duration, breaking the mark of 175 days, 36 minutes set last year by a crew in Soyuz 32. Ryumin had been on that record mission also; he had stayed on Earth for only 236 days since February 25, 1979. Popov, 40, and Ryumin, 34, had set out April 9, 1980, in Soyuz 35 to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 launched September 29, 1977, one of 13 crews to visit the 20-ton 49-foot-long space station. Three times during the spring and summer visiting crews brought the “permanent occupants” food and experiment materials, life-support equipment, and companionship. These relief missions included the first Vietnamese, Hungarian, and Cuban cosmonauts. Earlier this week, an unmanned cargo ship Progress 11 arrived with fresh supplies of food, fuel, and technical equipment for the cosmonauts. The Soviet Union had not set a time limit for the Salyut-Soyuz flight; Popov and Ryumin reported themselves healthy. (NY Times, Oct 2/80, A-17)
Progress reports on the continuing flight of Leonid Ryumin and Valery Popov in the Salyut 6-Soyuz 37 orbiting space station noted that their mission had lasted 115 days as of August 1. The cosmonauts were busy redocking Soyuz 37 (which Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko had used to get to the Salyut) to make room for more supply-ship missions. The visitors had returned to Earth safely July 31 in the Soyuz 36 craft; next on the list for the long-term occupants was “cleaning of the premises of the orbital complex” and physical training, Tass said. On August 5 Tass reported completion of various crystal experiments using Splav and Kristall apparatus in “cosmic material studies” of semiconductors cast from gallium arsenide, and crystals of indium antimonide and gadolinium cobalt, a magnetic material. Tass August 9 reported a first: crystallization of a substance from a smelt in “directional microgravitation.” The idea was to form crystals at more than “minimum microacceleration.” The crew put into the Splav an ampule of raw material and activated it; they then used the space station’s motors in a twisting maneuver during which the station became “a sort of centrifuge” for a few hours. Acceleration, zero at the center, “near the transfer compartment and transfer chamber. . .was at its maximum.” Previous experiments had always been during sleep periods, as movement of people around the station affected the results. For more data on crystal formation in orbit, the crew tried it in the span between Earth gravity and zero gravity. Tass called the test a first step in a new science of “weightlessness physics” whose practical conclusions were already being felt. On August 12 Tass noted the crew had been in space for 18 weeks; further tests were going on, making special glass in zero gravity and monocrystals of germanium. On August 22, Moscow radio said that this expedition had had more technological tests than any previous ones: the lsparitel apparatus alone had provided more than 186 samples, most of them deli vered to scientists on Earth by Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko. One substance, a solidified solution of cadmium telluroid and mercury telluroid, would be impossible to obtain on Earth where “when molten they separate out as oil and vinegar do when poured into the same glass.” The large crystals of this obtainable in space would permit “heat viewing” or detection of negligible variations in temperature, important to industry and to medicine. (FBIS, Tass in English; Moscow Dom Svc, Aug 1-26/80)
The Wfashington Star carried a Tass report that cosmonauts Vladimir Aksyonov and Yuri Malyshev had soft-landed in Central Asia after a visit to orbiting space station Salyut 6. The two were launched June 5 in a new transport vehicle called Soyuz T-2. Salyut 6 had been occupied since April 9 by Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who would probably remain in orbit to greet visitors to the Moscow Olympics, the dispatch said. (WStar, June 10/80, A-8)
