NASA Administrator James M. Beggs established a space station task force, directed by John D. Hodge, to be responsible for developing program aspects, including mission analysis, definition of requirements, an program management. Hodge would report to Philip E. Culbertson, associate deputy administrator, and would draw on space-station activities at each program office and field center. (NASA anno, May 20/82)
NASA announced that MSFC had selected four of the eight aerospace firms making space-station mission analyses for Headquarters to negotiate contracts exploring early uses of a space station. Each MSFC contract would address a specific area: Boeing would describe building large structures in orbit, such as huge communications antennas; both Martin Marietta and TRW would study servicing and maintenance of satellites by a manned facility in space; and General Dynamics would study operations of a Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) serviced in space by a manned facility to move payloads from lower to higher orbits. William R. Marshall, MSFC director of program development, said that the studies would posit a space station in orbit by 1990 and the kinds of experimental operations to be carried out there that would lead to a fully operational station by the end of the century. (NASA Release 82-134)
At 9:57 local time May 23 the Soviet Union launched supply ship Progress 13, which docked automatically with Salyut Ts service module at 11:57 Moscow time May 25, bringing 660 kilograms of fuel and 290 liters of water as well as air, food, equipment, and mail. On May 28, Tass described the unloading and refueling procedures. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 13-28/82; NY Times, May 19/82, A-4)
The Soviet news agency Tass reported that the Soviet Union had launched space station Salyut 7 apparently to replace Salyut 6, home in space for cosmonauts since September 1977, for a joint French-Soviet manned flight this summer. Orbital parameters were 278-kilometer apogee, 219-kilometer perigee (between 136 and 172 miles), 89.2 minute period, 51.5° inclination. Agence France-Presse said that a Soviet-French team would shortly be launched in a Soyuz-T craft to link up with Salyut 7. Lt. Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, France’s “spacecraft” who had had “intensive training in Soviet facilities” with his backup, Col. Patrick Baudry, would fly to Salyut 7 with two Soviet cosmonauts about June 22. The report said that the French preferred the neutral word spacenaut because the Soviets used “cosmonaut” and the Americans “astronaut.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/82; Paris AFP in English, Apr 20/82; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-18) The New York Times reporter in Moscow said that the French-Soviet mission would be the first launch of a noncommunist in a Soviet spacecraft and the first East-West spaceflight since Apollo-Soyuz in 1975. Flight commander Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Aleksandr Ivanchenkov would occupy Salyut 7 a few days earlier. An three-man crew on another spacecraft—two cosmonauts, Leonid Kizim and Vladimir Solovyev, and Jean-Loup Chretien—would join them. The Soviet Union had released few details on the mission. The USSR’s goal was said to be deployment of a 12-man station weighing more than 100 tons, permanently occupied by rotating crews. Salyut 6’s lifetime had included two “marathon missions” of 185 and 175 days; the U.S. record was 84 days during the Skylab program of 1973 and 1974. Soon after the last mission on Salyut 6 the Soviet Union had sent a large craft (Cosmos 1267) to link with it and test “methods of assembly of orbital complexes of great size and weight.” No one said what would become of the Salyut-Cosmos; Western observers believed that the assembly, even with a combined weight of 36 tons could safely burn up on reentry. The U.S. Skylab that scattered debris on western Australia in 1979 during its uncontrolled plunge to Earth had weighed 77.5 tons. (FBIS Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/83; NY Times, Apr 21/82, A-12)
NASA said that it had selected eight companies to negotiate fixed-price contracts of less than $1 million each for space-station mission studies. The companies were Boeing Aerospace, General Dynamics, Grumman Aerospace, Lockheed, Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell, and TRW. The eight-month studies to be covered by the contracts would identify and analyze the scientific, commercial, national security, and space operations missions that could be conducted most efficiently by a space station. Contractors would use the studies to develop alternative concepts for the station, with specific mission requirements and architectural options to be incorporated in NASA’s Shuttle-tended permanent orbiting facility. (NASA Release 82-121; MSFC Release 82-75)
