Tass said that Venera 15, launched June 2, had reached Venus October 10 and fired its engine to assume an elongated elliptical orbit around the planet with a 24-hour period of revolution. Venera 16, still on its way, was scheduled to arrive about October 14. (FBIS, Tas;s in English, Oct 10/83) The New York Times said that Soviet officials had “privately admitted” that one of their rockets exploded on the launch pad as three cosmonauts prepared to join the crew on orbiting space station Salyut 7. However, “in the absence of any public accounting of the incident,” questions remained as to the damage done to the Soviet Union’s space program or its effect on the mission of the crew now in their fourth month aboard Salyut 7. The private sources said that the 160-foot A-2 rocket began to topple on the launch pad before its liquid oxygen and kerosene fuel exploded. The accounts were contradictory, some saying that a woman was in the crew and others that the crew was either injured or merely shaken up by the experience. The explosion could amount to a major setback, in view of a Soyuz crew’s failure to dock with the Salyut last April at the end of a “harrowing 17-hour struggle.” The Washington Post said that the crew sustained “unspecified injuries” and that the event was important because the visitors to the Salyut would have returned to Earth in the capsule that took occupants Aleksandr Aleksandrov and Vladimir Lyakhov to the station June 28, leaving their module for the “permanent crew” to use on their return. No immediate concern was expressed about the latter, as the original capsule was still usable. A later report noted that Aleksandrov and Lyakhov had been endangered September 9 by a leak of nitrogen tetroxide propellant into space; the cosmonauts had put on their space suits in case the toxic gas entered the cabin. They were allowed to remain in orbit after they found no traces of the gas. But the leak had left 16 of the station’s 32 control jets unusable, and less than 1,000	pounds of the gas in its single operating tank, meaning that a new crew could not operate the station in a normal mode. A new crew could fly a different type of space tug to one of the docking ports, however, and use its control jets to maneuver the station. The New York Times reported October 18 that a Soviet official with direct contact to senior mission control that said two experienced cosmonauts were recuperating from effects of acceleration when emergency rockets blew their capsule clear of the exploding A-2 launch vehicle and that the crew did not include a woman. The Washington Post said October 20 that the two cosmonauts on Salyut 7 were “in no danger,” according to Eugeny Tabakaev of the Soviet academy of sciences; the statement followed a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) report that the station was crippled because of a propellant leak. British teacher Geoffrey Perry, a regular listener to Soviet radio transmissions, told AP that he had detected no signs of stress and that the cosmonauts “sound fine.” James Oberg, U.S. specialist on Soviet space programs, said that the Salyut 7 crew could get back to Earth in the Soyuz that took them into space, but the Soviet Union had not used the Soyuz craft after 115 to 120 days in space because batteries and other systems could deteriorate over time. Oberg said that Lyakhov and Aleksandrov were to have returned late in September after another crew arrived but were delayed by the launch-pad explosion. The Soviet Union launched a supply ship, Progress 18, from Baykonur at 4:59 a.m. EDT October 20 to rendezvous with Salyut 7, claiming that the cosmonauts there were “living normally.” Lyakhov and Aleksandrov appeared on Moscow television October 16 and appeared to be “in high spirits.” However, their flight had reached its 116th day October 21, and the previous record for a stay in space was the 114 days set last year in the course of a 211-day endurance flight. It would take 10 days to 2 weeks for the cosmonauts to unload Progress 18, which would be burned on reentry. Nature magazine, published in Great Britain, said that the crisis was exaggerated and concern for the crew came not from Soviet engineers but from physicians, who had seen significant declines in activity and efficiency after four months in space. Nature described as “fanciful” a suggestion that the Soviet Union wanted to keep the cosmonauts in orbit until they could be rescued by the U.S. Shuttle on its November flight. (FBIS, Paris AFP in English, Oct 10/83; Tass in English, Oct 14, 20, 21, 22, 28/83; NY Times, Oct 12/83, A-7; Oct 18/83, C-2; W Post, Oct 12/83, A-19; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 20/83, A-39; Oct 21/83, A-7; Nature, Oct 27/83, 756)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2) Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch. First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years. After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.” On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each. Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.” The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space. Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures. Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cbuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two intervening missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.” Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts. The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A-l; June 23/83, A-l; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; WPost, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A-l; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs told a symposium of several hundred government, industry, military, and foreign space-station planners that President Reagan would approve a manned U.S. space station within the next 12 months. Dr. George A. Keyworth, presidential science adviser, had dropped opposition to the space station and asked NASA to come up with a “grand vision.” NASA hoped to get from the administration and Congress “seed money” of about $200 million for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1984; Beggs said that it would cost $6 to $8 billion to get a permanent station with four to six persons aboard into orbit by 1991. The station would enhance U.S. economic well-being by providing new areas for research. (NY Times, July 19/83, C-3; C Trib, July 18/83, 1)
Tass reported that the two cosmonauts aboard Salyut 7 had opened doors to a large attached module, Cosmos 1443, and were working in essentially a three-part assembly consisting of a Salyut, a Cosmos, and the Soyuz T-9 in which they arrived at the space station June 28. When the Cosmos docked automatically March 10 with the Salyut, U.S. space experts said that it would double the size of the 21-ton Salyut and had carried 3 tons of cargo, such as scientific gear, experiments, and life-support materials. Cosmos had sets of small thrusters generally used to change the orbit of the entire complex, which weighed in total about 50 tons. The Cosmos itself, 43 feet long and 13 feet in diameter with solar-cell panels to generate electricity, consisted of an orbital module and a descent module. The descent module could return to Earth unmanned and land by parachute carrying experimental data and materials no longer needed on the Salyut, giving the same sort of round-trip supply service instead for the U.S. Shuttle without being reusable. Tass said that the cosmonauts, Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov, were unloading Cosmos 1443 and reactivating systems on Salyut 7, putting film into cameras and turning on observation instruments, such as an East German mass spectrometer, which would photograph and measure “vast tracts of Soviet territory in middle and southern latitudes.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 1/83; NY Times, July 1/83, A-l)
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz T-9 descent module after a 150-day flight on board the Salyut-7-Soyuz orbital space station. The two landed at 3:00 p.m. EST (in the middle of the night in the Soviet Union), 16 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan in that country. U.S. intelligence sources said that the two were expected to return in September, when an exchange crew of cosmonauts was due to visit them. However, they were forced to stay in orbit an additional six weeks when an explosion at the launch pad almost killed the two other crewmen. And at about the same time that the launch pad accident forced the extension of their flight, the two cosmonauts had to deal with a fuel leak aboard the Salyut that left the space station with less than half of its normal navigating propellant. The two men had to live in space suits, because the fuel that leaked was nitrogen tetroxide, which was so toxic it might have killed them if it penetrated the cabin of the space station. Western space observers had noted that the six-week extension in space might cripple the Soyuz T-9 spacecraft because it had been in orbit longer than 115 days and this length of time could possibly cause its nonrechargeable batteries to burn out, allowing the corrosive nitrogen textroxide fuel the Soyuz used to navigate to eat through engine valves and jeopardize the flight home. Western space experts were also interested in the night landing. The cosmonauts, earliest day landing would have been December 15, which might have been too long for them to trust the Soyuz T-9 to return safely. The official Soviet news agency Tass said that, during the flight, the crew carried out a large volume of scientific-technical and medicobiological research and experiments and gathered data on the Earth’s natural resources, its atmosphere, seasonal changes, and the biological productivity of the world’s oceans. New research was carried out under the program of material studies in space. An Elektrotropgraf instrument on board the station provided data on the state of construction materials following exposure to open space. Tass also noted that an important part of the crew’s flight program was to carry out complex assembly work on the external surface of the Salyut 7 station. During two space walks of 5 hours and 45 minutes, the two cosmonauts installed additional solar batteries on the station, in addition to other construction tasks. Over the course of the flight, there were regular medical checkups of the crew, which confirmed the possibility of man’s active functioning in weightlessness. (FBIS Moscow Pravda in Russian, Nov 25/83; NY Times, Nov 3/83, A-8; W Post, Nov 12/83, A-2, Nov 24/83, A-12)
Tass announced the docking of Cosmos 1443, probably an advanced version of earlier Salyut craft, with Salyut 7 that had been orbiting since April 1982. Cosmos 1443, launched unmanned from Baykonur March 2, weighed about 20 tons and was larger than the Soyuz or Progress spacecraft. The 21-ton Salyut 7 was about the size of a small house trailer., said the New York Times. The linkup was thought to demonstrate the Soviet Union’s ability to assemble larger space stations. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 10, 11/83; NY Times, Mar 11/83, A-12; W Post, Mar 11/83, A-24)
NASA said that President Reagan asked his Senior Interagency Group for Space, chaired by William P. Clark, assistant to the president for national security affairs, to establish a basis for an administration decision on whether to proceed with NASA development of a permanently based manned space station. (NASA Release 83-51; MSFC Release 83-24)
The New York Times carried a report by “American intelligence sources” that three Soviet cosmonauts escaped death but might have been injured when a USSR launch vehicle exploded or caught fire September 27 at a site in Asia. The crew was saved when an escape rocket on top of the capsule pulled the spacecraft away from the booster. The incident, first of its kind in manned space programs, occurred as the liquid-fuel rocket was about to launch the crew to the orbiting Salyut 7 space station. (NY Times, Oct 3/83, B—13)
MFSC said that the Space Telescope, NASA’s future optical orbiting astronomical observatory, had been named the Edwin P. Hubble Space Telescope to honor a foremost U.S. astronomer who had died in 1953. Scientists had differed on the extent and dimensions of the universe: Earth’s solar system was considered part of a larger system of all stars visible to the naked eye. It was not known whether faint spiral nebulae were part of the Milky Way or distant universes, each composed of myriad stars. Hubble, working with the 100-inch telescope at Mt. Wilson, Calif., looked at individual stars in the Andromeda nebula and by the end of 1924 was able to show that Andromeda was many times farther away than any star in the Milky Way system. He later showed that the universe was expanding (evidence of the Big Bang theory), that external galaxies were moving away from earth, and that the more remote the galaxy the faster it was moving. This was called Hubble’s Law; the coefficient relating distance and velocity of the galaxy was called Hubble’s Constant. The newly named Space Telescope was scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1986. (MSFC Release 83-70)
