NASA named Neil B. Hutchinson manager and John W. Aaron deputy manager of the Space Station Program Office at JSC in Houston, Tex. Hutchinson was serving in a staff assignment to the Johnson director since his return in January 1984 from a one-year assignment at NASA Headquarters, where he was director, Space Shuttle Operations Office in the Office of Space Flight. Aaron had been chief of the Spacecraft Software Division at JSC since 1981. He also had served as avionics flight software project manager for the Shuttle approach and landing test and orbital flight test programs. (NASA Release
Charles Yost, a member of NASA’s Space Station task force, speaking at the Shuttle/Space Station business opportunities conference in Washington, said “There’s been an overhyping of the commercialization of space idea.” He added that it would take years before investments in many of the space-based opportunities being explored showed a significant return. However, he pointed out, “industry must be willing to risk its money up front,” and said that nine companies had applied for a joint endeavor agreement with the space agency. At the time, only four companies had actually signed with NASA to use the Space Shuttle for business ventures. Space industry analysts said that it would cost “a minimum of few million dollars” to begin exploiting the commercial potential of space. Though satellite communication had proved profitable, most space-based efforts faced an uncertain future. A Reagan administration recommendation to turn the nation’s Landsat remote-sensing and weather satellite systems over to private industry had met resistance in Congress, and some analysts believed there might not be a market for remote-sensing data. Many attendees at the conference questioned whether any company would make money in space manufacturing before 1990. (IV Post, Mar 7/84, D—16)
Cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov returned safely to Earth after 237 days in space. Soviet television broadcast the return, showing a parachute bearing the crew coming down about 500 miles northeast of Tashkent in Kazakhstan at 1:57 p.m. Moscow time. The three crew members had lived on the Salyut 7 orbiting space station since February 9. In television interviews, the cosmonauts said that they were glad to be back with friends on the “warm earth,” although one commented he was sad to leave the empty space station behind. The Soviet media had indicated recently that the crew was growing weary and to save energy had their working day cut by one hour. However, a medical checkup given the day after their return found the three to be in good health. In an interview in the newspaper Socialist Industry, a medical specialist said that recent endurance flights showed humans could live in space a year or more. The cosmonauts spent their last days on board transferring material to their Soyuz T-ll spacecraft and mothballing scientific equipment on the Salyut. The space station, launched in April 1982, would continue in orbit. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet awarded medals to the three cosmonauts; and Kizim, who headed a crew that linked up with an earlier space station in 1980, would be honored with a bronze bust, the Washington Post reported that Tass said. (W Post, Oct 3/84, A-23; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Oct 1/84, Oct 2/84; FBIS Moscow DomSvc in Russian, Oct 3/84)
Engineers at NASA’s GSFC completed checkout and activation of the Landsat-5 Earth resources satellite, launched from the Vandenberg Air Force Base complex in California on March 1, and turned over today operational control of the spacecraft to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The 1,950-kilogram (4,300-pound) spacecraft was placed in a 705-kilometer (438-statute miles) near-polar orbit. NASA engineers had checked out all computer, communications, telemetry, and other spacecraft systems and declared the spacecraft ready for operational use. With Landsat-4 still functioning, data acquisition over the same ground swath was possible on an eight-day repeat cycle. NASA planned to turn over to NOAA operational responsibility for Thematic Mapper operation and data processing in January 1985. (NASA Release 84-49; NASA Dly Ac tv Rept, Apr 9/84) —NASA announced that it had established an interim Space Station Program office as a result of President Reagan’s January 25, 1984, directive to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station and to do it within a decade. Philip E. Culbertson, in addition to his duties as associate deputy administrator, would assume the role of acting director of the interim office, with John D. Hodge (former director of the Space Station task force) as acting deputy. The interim office superseded the former Space Station task force and would be responsible for direction of the Space Station Program and for planning the organizational structure of a permanent Program Office. (NASA anno, Apr 6/84)
The Soviet Union was developing a large laser-equipped prototype military spacecraft for launch on its heavy Saturn-5-class booster, which was also competing development, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Soviet scientists were designing the spacecraft to attack U.S. satellites and would launch it on the booster within the next two years. The new booster’s primaiy mission was to place the 300,000- to 400,000-pound Soviet space station elements in orbit, but the U.S. DOD had been concerned for some time that it also could be used for the type of heavy, unmanned, prototype directed-energy weapon known to be under development. (AvWk, Mar 19/84, 13)
Because of the failure of two telecommunications satellites launched by the Space Shuttle, the insurance industry would receive more than $200 million in claims, and premiums would skyrocket when underwriters resumed writing satellite risk policies, the Washington Post reported. Analysts said that it was too early to determine what impact the satellites’ failures would have on their manufacturer, Hughes Aircraft Company, or McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which built the rocket motors that apparently failed on the two satellites. Western Union, owner of one satellite, was insured for $105 million to cover the cost of the satellite and potential revenue; Indonesia, owner of the other satellite, had $75 million in insurance to cover the cost of building and launching the payload. Robert J. Tirone, vice president of the large insurance broker Alexander & Alexander, said that underwriters would likely hold off issuing any new policies until they found out what went wrong with the two satellites. “Something went wrong,” he said, “and it went wrong twice.” A spokesman for McDonnell Douglas said that the company was puzzled by the apparent failure of the rockets that were supposed to lift both satellites into stationary orbits about 22,300 miles from Earth. The rockets, payload assist modules (PAM), had been successfully used in 16 previous commercial satellite launches—5 from the Space Shuttle and 11 by missiles. At the end of 1983, the insurance industry had collected $205 million in premiums and paid $210 million in claims. As a result of the two recent failures, claims would rise to about $420 million. An insurance broker, who asked not to be identified, said that he expected premiums to quadruple as a result of the loss of the two satellites. (W Post, Feb 8/84, D-2) —The Soviet Union launched today a three-man crew on board the Soyuz T-10 spacecraft, which successfully docked with the Salyut 7 space station on February 9. The crew consisted on Col. Leonid Kizim (commander), Vladimir Solovyev (flight engineer), and Oleg Atkov (cosmonaut-researcher). It appeared that only Kizim had previous space experience, having commanded the Soyuz T-3 in 1980 in the first three-man mission to test and dock the upgraded Soyuz-T and the Salyut 6. Because of the greater amount of instrumentation and power then in place, TASS noted that the current mission “will have broader possibilities for research than any of the previous ones.” Scientific, technical, medical, and biological studies were on the schedule of the current mission, and the cosmonauts were reactivating life support, power supply, and heat control systems and were inspecting on-board equipment as part of their “demothballing” process [See Oct 2/84 for return of crew], (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 14/84; FBIS, USSR Feb 9/84, Ul)
NASA issued a Requet for Proposal (RFP) for definition and preliminary design of a permanently manned Space Station to be operational in low-Earth orbit early in the 1990s. Proposals were due by November 15. The Space Station would support scientific and commercial endeavors in space, stimulate new technologies, enhance space-based operational capabilities, and maintain U.S. leadership in space. The RFP contained four “work packages” covering definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of Space Station elements. NASA planned to let competing contracts for each of the work packages and scheduled April 1, 1985, as the effective date of the contracts. (NASA Release 84-130)
NASA announced the start of the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), a new astronomy satellite project that would be launched into Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1988. The purpose of the explorer was to make the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) band of the electromagnetic spectrum, a band between ultraviolet and X-ray light. The EUVE, managed by JPL, with scientific instruments supplied by the University of California, Berkeley, was a true explorer in that it would conduct the first in-depth investigation of that critical band and was expected to discover stars and other celestial objects with unexpected characteristics. The EUVE would orbit Earth at an attitude of 340 statute miles and from that point above the atmosphere would be able to scan the sky for emissions of extreme ultraviolet radiation. EUVE would use four 40-centimeter (15.7-inc.h) ultraviolet telescopes to conduct the all-sky survey and a spectrometer to carry out detailed observations of the new sources and stars expected to be discovered. JPL was responsible for overall EUVE project responsibility. The UCB would supply the 1,100-pound science payload, consisting of the extreme ultraviolet telescopes and the spectrometer; and the university’s Space Sciences Laboratory would design and fabricate the payload. JPL would control flight operations, and the science operations center would be at the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. (NASA Release 84-125) Discovery was oriented with the port side in direct sunlight, so when the crew awoke the next morning they found about half of the large ice block had melted. Then, astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr., switched on heaters in the pipes leading to the nozzle and fired the orbiter’s thrusters to see if the vibrations would shake the ice free. Next, Hartsfield, assisted by Judith Resnik, took the controls of the mechanical arm and following procedures outlined by Sally K. Ride on the ground knocked off with little difficulty all but about 5 inches of the ice chunk. The remaining ice apparently then melted in the warmth of the sunlight. Discovery landed September 5 at Edwards Air Force Base, completing its six-day maiden flight. During the flight, crew deployed three communications satellites, LEASAT-1 (SYNCOM-1), Telestar-3, and SBS-D in the first three days of the flight; extended an experimental solar-powered array in a test for future Space Station construction; and processed a sample of a hormone that could lead to a commercial pharamaceutical product. Lt. Col. Richard M. Mullane, one of the astronauts on board, said that Discovery “performed superbly,” while NASA officials pointed out that all the mission’s objectives were accomplished. (W Post, Sept 4/84, A-6; NY Times, Sept 3/84, A-l, Sept 4/84, A-l, Sept 5/84, A-l; W Times, Sept 5/84, 4A)
NASA announced the establishment of seven intercenter teams to conduct advanced development activities for high potential technologies to be used in Space Station design and development. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would lead three of the intercenter teams; JSC, three of the teams; and a lead center for the seventh team would be assigned later. The teams would identify emerging technologies for advanced development for Space Station design and establish test beds into which prototype technology hardware could be integrated, tested, demonstrated, and evaluated. MSFC would be the lead center for the Attitude Control and Stabilization System, the Auxiliary Propulsion System, and Space Operations Mechanisms. JSC would be the lead center in the Data Management System, Environmental Control and Life Support System, and the Thermal Management System. The Electronic Power System would have a leader designated later. Assisting on various assignments would be the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Langley Research Center (LaRC), Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), KSC, ARC, National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), and Lewis Research Center (LeRC). (NASA Release 84-31). During February: The mission of ESA’s first preoperational remote-sensing satellite, ERS-1, would be mainly to monitor ice and coastal and ocean zones, the agency announced. Among the instruments in the ERS-1 payload would be an active microwave instrumentation package operating in the C-band and combining the functions of a synthetic aperture radar, a wave scatterometer, and wind scatterometer for the purpose of measuring wind fields and the wave image spectrum and taking all-weather high-resolution images of coastal zones, open oceans, ice areas, and (on an experimental basis) land. Germany, the Netherlands, France, and Canada, each built a C-bank scatterometer for comparison of data in order to evaluate the optimal technical characteristics of the C-band scatterometers on board ERS-1 and to check the mathematical models used for data processing. This experimental campaign organized by ESA would operate in the North Sea, in conjunction with a German scientific platform supplying “sea truth” data, and about 40 kilometers off the Brittany coast, in conjunction with a French oceanographic vessel supplied by the Centre National d’Exploitation des Oceans (National Center for Ocean Exploitation). This would allow comparison of the data acquired by the various scatterometers and data acquired by conventional means on board the platform and the oceanographic vessel. (ESA Release, Feb 6/84)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
Svetlana Savitskaya, a Soviet cosmonaut, today became the first woman to walk in space. Savitskaya, 36 years old, performed welding and soldering operations in the course of her walk in space, which lasted 3 hours and 35 minutes. She was also the first woman to make two spaceflights, her first being in August 1982 aboard the Soyuz T-7, which like the current flight linked with the Salyut 7 space station for a brief period. Savitskaya went into space July 18 along with Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Igor Volk aboard Soyuz T-12 and linked with the Salyut-7 space station, where three other cosmonauts had been in orbit for more than five months. Tass said that the main goal of the space walk was to test a new general-purpose handoperated tool designed “to carry out complex technological operations.” Dzhanibekov accompanied her on the space walk. Savitskaya, along with Dzhanibekov and Volk, returned to Earth July 29 aboard Soyuz T-12. They landed in an area 140 kilometers southeast of Dzhezkazgan. The three were reported to be feeling fine after landing. Remaining aboard Salyut 7 were cosmonauts Leonid Kisim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov. Savistskaya was born in Moscow and graduated from the Sergo Ordzhonikidze Aviation Institute in Moscow. She had worked as an instructor pilot and, since 1976, had been a test pilot on 20 types of aircraft, Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 17/84; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/84; NY Times, July 26/84, A-24; W Post, July 26/84, A-31)
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger today named Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA’s associate director for space flight, to be manager of what the Reagan administration called the strategic defense initiative, a program to explore the feasibility of building a space-based defense against nuclear ballistic missiles. President Reagan had suggested the program the previous year. Abrahamson’s job would be to direct and coordinate several research programs that had been under way for some time at DOD and in the Department of Energy (DOE). These included research on several kinds of laser and particle beam weapons, work on large mirrors needed for some lasers, advances in high-speed data processing, and methods of generating large amounts of electrical power in space. Abrahamson had been at NASA since November 1981 and had directed not only the Space Shuttle operation but also commercial sales of Shuttle services and relations with Congress and the space industry. He would begin his new duties on April 15 after the nation’s 11th Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch on April 6. (NY Times, Mar 28/84, A-19) —NASA announced that Jesse W. Moore would become acting associate administrator for spaceflight on April 15, succeeding Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who would become director of strategic defense at DOD. Moore, who had been Abrahamson’s deputy, had come to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as the deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. He was director of the Spacelab Flight Division until December 1981, when he assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division in the Office of Space Science and Applications. In February 1983 he was appointed to the position of deputy associate administrator for spaceflight. (NASA Release 84-40) —U.S. Ambassador to Portugal Allen Holmes and Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama signed today in Lisbon an accord that would provide for a satellite tracking station in Portugal. Under the accord, the United States would provide Portugal with $60 million annually, of which $20 million would be for military aid and $40 million for economic aid. The United States would use the station to track flying military targets; U.S. plans called for five satellite tracking stations in the world, and stations in New Mexico, Hawaii, and South Korea were completed. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua in English, Mar 28/84)	" During March: In an interview following his around-the-world trip to sell the U.S. Space Station idea to U.S. allies, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said, “I thought the trip went well, I thought it went extremely well.” He added that he had proposed that as much as one-fourth of the proposed $8 billion cost of the Space Station be borne by western Europe, Japan, and Canada. “They didn’t exactly stand up and cheer when I said I’d like them to think about contributing a couple of billion dollars, but they didn’t blink at the numbers either,” he said. Beggs said that the countries had about a year to decide if they wanted to join in a partnership with the United States, since NASA planned to begin awarding contracts for the Space Station’s final design in the spring of 1985. He noted that all of the countries had laid down conditions under which they would agree to participate: the station must provide technological challenges to their industries; they must have what Beggs called a “clearly defined role” in the direction of Space Station operations and selection of flight crews; they must have access to the entire station; and their industries must have the same access that U.S. industry had. (W Post, Mar 27/84, A-2)
NASA announced that approximately 200 people representing every NASA installation and the JPL were selected to augment the staff of JSC to help plan the next phase of NASA’s Space Station Program. This team had two major objectives: issue a request for proposals to industry for the definition of the specific elements of the Space Station and define a reference configuration or configurations to accompany the request for proposals. “The purpose of the reference configuration is to provide a framework to help industry understand how the various elements of the Space Station are related,” said Dr. Ralph Muraca, deputy head of LaRC, designated a “center of excellence” to help plan this next phase of the program. “In addition, it will help individual companies determine which of the elements or work packages they would be interested in competing for.” The group’s guidelines were to develop a configuration that would meet all the requirements associated with the final configuration of the Space Station, expected to be operational in the 1999-2000 time frame, and then scale that PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED back to an $8 billion configuration that would provide maximum mission capability in 1991. (LaRC Release 84-35)
NASA announced that it had selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington Beach., Calif., and TRW, Inc., Space and Technology Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., for negotiations that would lead to two parallel Space Station study contracts, each contract for a firm fixed price of approximately $2 million, covering a performance period of approximately 27 months, beginning in March. Contracts would be for the development of functional, performance, and technology requirements; the definition of system architecture for the Space Station data system; and the relationship of that system to the overall NASA end-to-end flight and ground information system. The studies would define the role of the Space Station data system and its relationship, and interfaces to the Space Station information systems elements. They would also define the data system to determine the environment in which both the user and facility subsystems interface and operate; address all avionics and other electrically automated Space Station functions; develop a clear understanding of system functional, operational, and interface requirements; identify major cost items to enable effective management decisions and development control; and define a program plan. NASA’s JSC would negotiate and administer the TRW contract; NASA’s GSFC, the McDonnell Douglas contract. (NASA Release 84-36)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced today that JSC was named “lead center” for the agency’s Space Station Program. In a letter to center director Gerald D. Griffin, Beggs said that he was requesting the center to form a program office to execute five basic program responsibilities: systems engineering and integration, business management, operations integration, customer integration, and support of NASA Headquarters Space Station Program Office. Beggs noted that he planned to form a new organization at NASA Headquarters to direct the Space Station Program and that he would make assignments to other centers under overall project management of JSC. Terry White, a NASA spokesman in Houston, said that space station work would probably not require a large increase in personnel there because people working on the Space Shuttle program would shift over to the Space Station, the New York Times reported.
President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said. NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries. NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said. At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
NASA announced that MSFC had awarded contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace Company Denver, and Boeing Aerospace Company, Seattle, to study a space vehicle to move payloads from low Earth orbits to higher orbits. The “parallel” studies, concurrent but independent studies in the same area of concentration, for an Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) would run for 15 months at about $1 million each. The companies would conduct conceptual studies to examine the possibilities of both space-based and ground-based transfer vehicles. The space-based version would be maintained and refueled at the Space Station; the ground-based vehicle would be carried into space by the Space Shuttle for deployment. The transfer vehicle, as it was conceived by Marshall engineers, would be an unmanned upper-stage in the beginning. The ultimate goal, however, would be to develop a manned vehicle capable of ferrying a crew capsule to geosynchronous orbit. The vehicle would then return the crew and capsule for other missions. (NASA Release 84-90)
The congressional Office of Technology Assessment released a report, “Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space,” which said that the kind of Space Station that NASA was planning could not be justified on scientific, economic, or military grounds. It went on to say that not just Congress, but the entire nation, ought to consider what the country wanted to do in the second quarter-century of the space era. The Space Station envisioned by NASA, the report said, “is only one alternative in a wide range of options.” Thomas F. Rogers, director of the two-year study, said that the time had come for the general public to play a greater role in space program goals. “We’ve been spending $7.5 billion a year, every year; we can do anything want to do,” he said. “It’s great, it’s exciting, but we’re missing large numbers of important activities by allowing all this to go on under technological drive— not policy drive, economic drive, social drive, the way everything else is done in this country at that level of public expenditure.” The report characterized the nation’s goals in space as shortsighted and narrow, reflecting the views only of the science and technology communities and not of the general public, which foots the bills. The study also said, “There is no compelling, objective, external case” for building a Space Station “to be used to support over 100 conceptual uses, few of which have been sharply defined or gained wide acceptance as important objectives of the space program.” The report concluded by spelling out the “kinds” of goals the nation should set: increase the efficiency of space activities and reduce their costs; involve the public; reap scientific, economic, social, and political benefits; increase international cooperation; and “spread life, in a responsible fashion, throughout the solar system.” (Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space, (D.C.: OTA, 1984; W Post, Nov 14/84, A.-4; NY Times, Nov 14/84, B-20)
NASA announced that three of its centers would participate with JSC, named earlier in the year to be the lead center, in definition and preliminary design studies of the Space Station. MSFC would be responsible for definition of the pressurized Space Station modules that would be built and equipped with appropriate systems for use as laboratories, the ward room and galley, and logistic transports. Development of this single “common” module design, with provisions for data distribution, power, environmental control, thermal control, and communications systems to be used in all pressurized areas in the station would provide significant savings in the overall program. LeRC would be responsible for the definition of the electrical power generation and conditioning and storage systems. Although most Space Station studies had focused on large solar arrays as the probable power generation system, Lewis would also examine and evaluate a number of alternative systems. GSFC would be responsible for definition of the automated free-flying platforms that would be part of the overall Space Station program and for provisions to service, maintain, and repair these platforms, as well as other free-flying spacecraft. Goddard would also define the provisions for instruments and payloads to be attached externally to the pressurized sections of the Space Station and the pressurized modules as a laboratory. In addition to its lead contractor role, JSC would be responsible for the definition of the structural framework to which the various elements of the Space Station would be attached and for the integration and installation of systems into this structure. The center would oversee the interfaces between the Space Station and the Space Shuttle and be responsible for mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems. JSC would also manage the attitude control, thermal control, communications, and data management systems and the equipping of a common module for crew use as a ward room and galley. Other NASA centers would support the definition and design activities, particularly in technology areas. KSC would be responsible for preflight and launch operations and be involved in logistic support activities. (NASA Release 84-85) The flight of Discovery was delayed on June 25 for at least 24 hours when its backup navigating computer failed less than 30 minutes before takeoff. Though it was not operational in space, the fifth backup computer was used during ascent to “watchdog” the other computers during the critical first 10 minutes of flight. Four seconds from launch on June 26, the flight of Discovery was automatically aborted by a computer due to malfunctioning of a fuel valve on the rear starboard engine, causing the engine to catch fire. The fire was extinguished after three attempts with heavy sprays of water. NASA placed Hartsfield and his five-member crew on leave for two days after experiencing this first launch abort in 12 Space Shuttle missions and only the second launch abort in American manned spaceflight history. Thomas E. Utsman, Shuttle operations manager at KSC, said that he had no idea when the maiden flight of Discovery could be rescheduled. It depended, he said, on how much damage had been done to the malfunctioning engine that caught fire and to the Space Shuttle’s protective tiles from the high-speed water jets that extinguished the fire on the aft part of the fuselage. Utsman said that the fire may have burned through the heat shield on the engine nozzle, meaning that the entire engine would have to be replaced. NASA announced on June 27 that Discovery’s maiden flight would not be attempted for at least two weeks in order to verify all three main engines. John Talone at KSC said, “I don’t think we’re talking about mid-July before we can get to the point of launching again.” Talone said that the only serious question remaining about the aborted launch was why the valve stayed closed when commanded to start the liftoff firing sequence. When the valve failed to open, a backup actuator automatically started the opening sequence, and the valve opened soon enough for the engine to build full power, although it did not. He said that Discovery probably would have reached orbit, but mission rules said that a Space Shuttle could not lift off without redundant valve, and when the Shuttle’s main computer sensed that one actuator system was out, the computer ordered engine cutoff. Photographic inspection of Discovery showed remarkably little damage from fire that broke out below the main engine nozzles after engine shutdown. The only structural damage to the Space Shuttle’ airframe was the speed brake just below the tail and half of the brake’s protective enamel was scorched off. {W Post, June 23/84, A-3, June 25/84, A-l, June 26/84, A-l, June 27/84, A-3) During June: ARC Director William F. Ballhaus announced that center aircraft and their operation would be transferred to the Ames Flight Operations Directorate. Martin A. Knutson, director of flight operations and site manager of the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, would be responsible for all flight activities at the Ames’s Moffett Field location in northern California and at the Ames Dryden Facility in southern California. The Flight Operations Directorate office would continue to be maintained at the Ames Dryden Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Factors in the management change were continued safety of flight and continuity of aircraft operations to be assured with all flight operations reporting through a single management chain. And the change served to integrate more fully the Ames Dryden Facility into the day-to-day operations of the parent Ames Center. The Ames Research Center and the former Dryden Flight Research Center, now Ames Dryden, were consolidated in 1981, a move that enhanced the capabilities of both organizations. Ames officials said that the latest move was a continuing part of the overall Ames-Dryden consolidation and would centralize all flight operations activities in terms of operations procedures, safety, and management philosophy. There were no plans to move any aircraft or personnel involved from either location. (ARC Release 84-15) Later, NASA announced that it was considering a plan to continue the 12th and 13th Space Shuttle missions as a way to avoid expensive delays that could push at least one mission scheduled for 1984 into 1985. The problem with combining missions was the inability to combine crews. Five crew members from the aborted flight or from the August flight would have to step down and wait for another turn. The possibility of combining missions arose when technicians at NASA’s engine test facility at Bay St. Louis, Miss., were unable to duplicate the failure of Discovery’s starboard engine that had aborted the flight. “No matter what we did, we were unable to duplicate the failure,” a NASA source said. “And until we understand what went wrong, we don’t want to fly.” The failure of a rocket nozzle on a communications satellite during a test in St. Louis then further complicated NASA’s rescheduling decision. A final decision awaited analysis on the test of a Star^f8 solid-fuel rocket nozzle at the Astronautics Division of McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St. Louis. Star-48 rockets were on two communications satellites that would be part of the cargo on a combined mission. On July 12 NASA announced that the next Space Shuttle flight would consist of payloads from flights 41-D and 41-F and would be launched from KSC no earlier than August 24. The mission aboard the orbiter Discovery would retain the designation 41-D. The cargo would remain essentially the same, except that the large format camera and spartan would be replaced with the Satellite Business Systems (SBS) and Telstar payloads then scheduled for launch in the same time frame. The crew for mission 41-D would be the six-member team of Commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker. The crew of 41-F would be scheduled for a later flight. (NASA Release 84-95; WPost, July 3/84, A-12, July 10/84, A-5, July 11/84, A-6)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that engineers had determined the problem with two types of rocket motors that had caused the loss of two $75 million satellites and the near-loss of a third and had led to postponements of two Space Shuttle flights, the Washington Post reported. A report from McDonnell-Douglas said that a team had found a way to determine which rocket nozzle would fail in space and which would work. Such a procedure might have saved the two communications satellites that gone into useless orbits. However, the solution had come too late to put a Canadian communications satellite on the next Space Shuttle flight scheduled for June 19. (W Post, May 4/84, A-2) —In a continuing series of reports on orbiting cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov, who had been in space for 85 days aboard the Salyut-7, Tass said that the crew had completed planned operations with the cargo craft Progess-20, storing supplies and pumping drinking water into the station’s tanks. Kizim and Solovyev then made their fourth walk in open space. The two removed a heat-resistant coating that had been installed during a previous space walk, assembled a second conduit, and checked it for airtightness. The two then reinstalled the heat-resistant coating, put tools into a container, and returned to the station. Their walk lasted 2 hours and 45 minutes, bringing their total time in open space to 14 hours and 45 minutes during 4 walks in 12 days. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 4/84)
Soviet cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov aboard Salyut 7 equaled the record of 211 days in space, set by cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev in December 1982. The increasingly long flights, coupled with Western intelligence reports that the Soviets were experimenting with rockets capable of lifting heavy payloads into orbit, indicated that the country was moving toward a goal of establishing a permanent, manned space station. Soviet reports said that the flight of Salyut 7 was proceeding normally and that there was no indication how long the flight would last. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT l&ldS§ During the flight the cosmonauts had spent 22 hours and 50 minutes outside the craft in 6 space walks, breaking the U.S. record for a single mission by 29 minutes. The three have been visited by six other cosmonauts, including an Indian and the first woman to walk in space, Svetlana Savitskaya, who during her space walk used a welding machine that space analysts said could be used for building large Space Stations. The three cosmonauts had focused on the psychology of long periods in space as well as carried out important repairs outside the craft, demonstrating the crew’s ability to maintain their spacecraft in an extended flight. In a televised ceremony, Soviet leader Konstantin U. Chernenko honored the cosmonauts taking part in the flight and spoke of the great advances in knowledge and equipment since the first manned spaceflight by Yuri Gagarin, 23 years previously. “In the successes of cosmonautics we see a blend of the daring thinking of scientists, the remarkable skills of engineers, technicians and workers, and the great courage of cosmonauts,” he said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 6/84; FBIS, Moscow Tass in Engligh, Sept 7/84; NY Times, Sept 6/84, B-10)
President Reagan approved today National Space Strategy intended to implement the National Space Policy, which was supplemented by the President’s 1984 state of the union address. Concerning the STS, the Strategy pointed out that the STS was a critical factor in maintaining U.S. space leadership, and, therefore, it was NASA’s first priority to make the STS fully operational and cost effective in providing routine access to space. The Strategy further noted that the STS was to be fully operational by 1988. Regarding the civil space program, the Strategy indicated that NASA should develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade and that the United States should seek agreements with friends and allies to participate in the development and use of the Space Station. In the area of commercial space programs, the Strategy called for the United States to encourage and facilitate commercial expendable launch vehicle operations and minimize government regulation of these operations. Concerning national security space programs, it was mandated that the national security sector must pursue an improved assured launch capability to satisfy two specific requirements—“the need for launch system complementary to the STS to hedge against unforeseen technical and operational problems, and the need for a launch system suited for operations and crisis situations.” The Strategy further stated that to fulfill this requirement, the national security sector should pursue the use of a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the STS. (National Space Strategy, WH Fact Sheet, App F-4, Aug 15/84, 137)
