Martin Marietta, in competition for a contract to build the Space Station, unveiled a fullscale model depicting its plans at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. The intended crew module has eight sleeping quarters, each with a video recorder and a computer giving crew members direct access to home and the Space Station's main computer. (C Trib, Nov
NASA and the Science and Technology Agency of Japan announced an agreement reached on the hardware that Japan will carry into Phase B Space Station definition and preliminary design. According to the agreement, the preliminary design activities were to include: (1) a pressurized module to provide shirtsleeve work space for station crews; (2) an exposed work deck; (3) a scientific/equipment airlock; (4) a local remote manipulator arm; (5) and an experiment logistics model. The multipurpose laboratory called for accommodation of general scientific and technology development research, including microgravity research, as well as control panels for operating the Space Station's mobil remote manipulator system and attached payloads. (NASA Release 8631)
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced that Andrew J. Stofan had been appointed Associate Administrator for the Space Station. He also announced a number of organizational and management structural changes for the program and transfer of its supervision from the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to Washington, D.C. The changes followed recommendations from a committee headed by former Apollo Program Manager Samuel C. Phillips that were consistent with findings from the Rogers Commission, which investigated the Challenger accident. Phillips examined the Space Station program from both a technical and management perspective and Dr. Fletcher, in turn, made changes that assured the flow of important information to'*0*proper decisionmaking levels. Another result was the procurement of a versatile computerbased information network to link NASA and contractor facilities and to provide engineering services. (NASA Release 8684; W Post Jul 1/86; NY Times, Jul 1/86; W Times, Jul 1/86; C Trib, Jul 2/86)
Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney announced Canada's decision to proceed with Space Station participation when he visited with President Ronald Reagan. Canada agreed to perform preliminary design of a Mobile Servicing Center during Phase B of the Space Station definition and preliminary design study that would consist of a base structure with accommodations for payloads, orbital replacement units, utilities and thermal control. It would function as a multipurpose structure equipped with manipulator arms that would be used to help assemble and maintain the Space Station, as well as help keep instruments and experiments mounted on the Station's framework. (NASA Release 8633)
The former Soviet Union launched two veteran cosmonauts into orbit, scheduled to arrive at the Mir Space Station after two days. The launch, contrary to former Soviet practice, was both announced and televised. The launch, said James Oberg, author of several books about the Soviet space program, was done "with great propaganda benefit." In an effort to demonstrate their achievements, he stated further, "They have a greater selfconfidence in their program [and] it helps concentrate world attention on the benign part of their space program." U.S. experts acknowledged that Soviet Space Station technology was years ahead of us and that the mission might well begin man's permanent occupation of space. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), Mar 12/86; B Sun, Mar 14/86; P Inq, Mar 14/86; W Times, Mar 14/86; NY Times, Mar 14/86; W Post, Mar 14/86; C Trib, Mar 14/86)
In Space Station Phase B Program Level Agreement, NASA and the ESA announced agreement on hardware elements for a preliminary design of a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module and a polar orbiting platform, the latter for conducting Earth observations. Under the agreement, ESA would conduct research on a preliminary design of a mantended freeflyer (pressurized module and resource module) for international utilization, primarily in the fields of material and life sciences and fluid physics, that would require both a longduration and undisturbed microgravity environment. (NASA Release 86104) '10*August 5: Preliminary data from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE), a threesatellite project that began in October 1984, indicated that clouds reflect more heat than they retain and appear to cool Earth's climate, possibly offsetting the "greenhouse effect." Incomplete coverage and sporadic observations have limited decades of study on global heat flows done with sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites. In a broader attempt, the ERBE instruments measured the average monthly heat budget on regional, zonal, and global scales; tracked the seasonal movement of heat from the tropics to the poles; and determined the average daily variation in heat on a 620mile regional monthly scale. An ERBE package contained two radiometer instruments. One, a scanner, was used for narrow fieldofview scanning with shortwave measurements of reflected solar energy and longwave measurements of Earthemitted energy. The other, a nonscanner, was used for wide fieldofview of the entire disc of the Earth, a 10degree region of Earth, and the total output of the sun's radiant energy. (NASA Release 86105)
NASA ruled out a recommendation to supplement its Shuttle flights with untended launch vehicles for building the Space Station. The combination would accelerate assembly by up to nine months, said Space Station manager John Dunning, but the time savings would be offset by a 10 to 40 percent increase in potentially dangerous space walks. Using expendable launch vehicles, he went on, would also require an orbital maneuvering rocket to keep the parts in place. (NY Times, Dec 28/86)
TRW, Inc. was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for design and delivery of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV's primary uses would be spacecraft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and close proximity visual observation beyond the operating range of a Space Shuttle. The OMV, "space tug," was also to be made to adapt for use in Space Station activities. (NASA Release 8681; WSJ, Jun 26/86; LA Times, Jun 27/86)')0** The first flight of an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility with a modified F15. The integration of engine and flight control (Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control) between the system's computers could increase performance 2 to 10 percent. (NASA Release 8682)
A House panel, the Science and Technology Committee's subcommittee on space science and applications, approved a $7.6 billion NASA budget request. The authorization bill still needed review by the full Committee before being sent to the House floor. No funds were allotted for a new Shuttle, but supporters in Congress hoped that NASA would request a supplemental $500 million as first payment for "Challenger II." The physics and astronomy portion of NASA's budget, including $27.9 million for the Hubble Space Telescope, had not yet been reviewed. (B Sun, Apr 18/86)
NASA and the Space Telescope Science Institute announced that U.S. amateur astronomers would be given a small'20*amount of observing time with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Amateur astronomers have made significant contributions to astronomy, and, at this point, there are at least a quarter million of these astronomers. With a 941/2inch mirror, the HST would be the largest astronomical telescope ever placed in space; it serves as an example of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 86108)
NASA announced that it would cease implementation of work package realignment for a period of up to 90 days while two teams composed of NASA personnel, Phase B contractors, and representatives from user groups and international partners reviewed Space Station design and work package assignments and functions. The task force, headed by W. Ray Hook, Manager, Space Station Office, would critically examine all aspects of the current Space Station baseline configuration in terms of the amount of extravehicular activity required for assembly and maintenance, launch capacity of the Shuttle fleet, assembly sequence of the baseline configuration, resultant impact to the utilization of the station, potential impact on international partners, and overall technical performance and integrity of the Station. The Executive Technical Committee, headed by NASA Associate Administrator Andrew J. Stofan, would approve the assumptions, engineering, and technical constraints identified by'50*the task force and oversee their activities. (NASA Release 86116)
Representative Edward P. Bolland, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, advised NASA that it needed to make some difficult choices in its bigticket items. The Congressman specifically asked Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher how he would choose between a new Shuttle and the Space Station, to which he responded that the two projects were inseparable. Fletcher further pointed out that a fourth Shuttle was necessary because another accident would leave the Nation with only two, crippling the space program. The subcommittee, said Bolland, was most concerned about the cost of the Space Station. (B Sun, May
NASA announced the termination of a contract with TRW to design a baseline hybrid power system for the Phase B Space Station electrical power system. TRW expressed their wish not to pursue the project, but remained a major contributor to three other work packages. (NASA Release 8655)
Analysis conducted by the Office of Space Station in the areas of Space Station management, use of expendable launch vehicles, and cost impacts resulting from design changes was accepted by NASA. Changes included replacing the nodes and tunnels that connected pressurized modules with larger resource nodes, revising the assembly sequence to provide early scientific return and reduce extravehicular activity, achieving an initial power level of 37.5 kilowatts, achieving permanent human capability, and placing fixed servicing capabilities closer to the modules. Realignment of certain work package responsibilities was also recommended; the total cost increase would be around $49 million. (NASA Release 86180; 86181)
NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station, established in March 1984 and chaired by Stanford University Professor Peter M. Banks, released its second major report for planning the scientific utility of the Space Station. The report pointed out that spacebased scientific progress had been slower than planned because of short time in orbit, rigid time lines, long periods between flights, and that the Space Station had the obvious potential of overcoming these Two major conclusions noted that Space Station facilities must be operated with the goal of producing outstanding scientific results; the station would be judged with respect to cost and research capability and the need for wellequipped, permanently habitable laboratories able to support a broad range of fundamental research in space. 0*The task force recommended that the Space Station emulate the adaptive science methodology used in terrestrial laboratories, introduce "telescience" (the ability to conduct research remotely), review safety standards to achieve a reasonable state of personal and system security, work with a crew size of 10, and develop "space mail" for delivering small samples of materials to ground laboratories. Other recommendations: (1) Attached payloads are an important part of the core Space Station, and NASA needs a more productive plan for converting observation experiments developed for Spacelab to Space Station; (2) freeflying platforms are essential for conducting many important scientific endeavors for the Space Station era (i.e. several platforms operating in different orbits); (3) NASA should enhance biological research activities in the preinitial orbit configuration period using Spacelabs and other attached payloads on the Space Shuttle to gain experience for conducting biological science research programs; (4) development of a humantended mode of scientific activity aboard a Space Station would be of little value and a need exists for a truly longterm, human capability; (5) it is essential that NASA look ahead to the activities that are anticipated over the 2530 year life span of the core facility and its associated elements; (6) the Space Station will facilitate development of a new type of research termed "science in space"; (7) the science operations of the Space Station should be separated from the operational management of the overall facilities; (8) and NASA must be prepared to change many of its nationally oriented selection, funding, and management procedures because of the important hardware and scientific contributions that will be made by international partners. (Written Statement to the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Committee on Science and Technology from Peter M. Banks, Apr 9/90; NASA Release 8643)
Thomas L. Moser was named Director of the Space Station Program Office in Washington, D.C., a position created to conduct a longrange assessment of overall NASA capabilities and requirements. Moser began his career with NASA in 1963 as a mechanical systems design and analysis engineer, and served further as a structural subsystem manager for the Apollo command module; project manager for the Shuttle Structures and Mechanics Division; head of structural design and manager for the orbiter structure and thermal protection system; technical assistant to the director and deputy manager for the Orbiter Project Office; Director of Engineering at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 86152)
The European Space Agency announced that it planned to fly four missions relating to the Space Station project. The maiden flight for the Spaceplane Hermes, said Director General Dr. Reimer Lust, would be launched between 1996 and 1998, by a new Ariane 5 rocket. (NY Times, Oct 6/86)
After more than a year of study by NASA centers and contract teams, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced a baseline configuration for the permanently crewtended Space Station that would guide preliminary design activities for the remaining eight months of the Phase B studies. The contract called for development of the Space Station to begin in October 1986, ending with a permanently tended habitable station in 1994. A total of 14 Space Shuttle flights were thought to be required for Major features of the design included two vertical keels 361 feet long and connected by upper and lower horizontal booms 146 feet long (the Space Station measured 503 feet at its widest point); two 44.5foot long, 13.8foot interior diameter U.S. supplied modules, with external interconnects for laboratory functions and crew quarters for eight members and two smaller logistics modules to alternate between the ground and the station; modules located near the station's center of gravity to provide the best possible microgravity environment for experiments, with raft patterns having four nodes and two tunnels to serve as module interconnects; internal module pressure of 14.7 per square inch and 80/20 nitrogen/oxygen mixture ratio to approximate sea level Earth atmospheric conditions, with a closed loop environmental control and life support system where oxygen and water could be recycled and nitrogen and food could be resupplied; hybrid solar power system with 75 kilowatts of power, where 25 kilowatts would be provided by photovoltaic system and the remaining 50 by the solar dynamics system; five locations on the structure for placing attached payloads and a facility for servicing free flying spacecraft and platforms with a telerobotic servicer; polar platform with useful payload on single Shuttle launch and a coorbiting platform to support astrophysics and materials processing; gaseous hydrogen/oxygen propulsion system for altitude control (assembly would be at 220 nautical miles and operational altitude at 250 nautical miles minimum); metric as standard unit of measurement; and inclusion of international elements into the overall design, including the Canadian Mobile Servicing Center and hardware provided by Japan and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 8661; NY Times, May 15/86; W Times, May 15/86)'!0*May 15: NASA and Boeing Aerospace Company entered into an agreement concerning materials processing experiments. Crystals of a size and quality impossible to create on Earth would be attempted aboard three Space Shuttle flights. Working with the University of Alabama, Boeing agreed to fund the experiments, including a chemical vapor transport crystal growth furnace installed in the galley area. These crystals were expected to be of the type valuable in the commercial production of semiconductor and electrooptic devices. The experiments would underscore NASA's commitment to the development of commercial endeavors in space, and would continue with the Space Station. (NASA Release 8662)
The Pentagon, which had previously voiced objection to the Space Station, asked for a postponement in negotiations between NASA and foreign participants because the Department of Defense (DoD) hoped to use the orbiting laboratory for some of its Strategic Defense Initiative experiments. The DoD envisioned only a very limited need for the facility, but other countries would no doubt vehemently object because the project was intended only for peaceful purposes. (WSJ, Dec 22/86; NY Times, Dec 20/86)
NASA announced the formation of an operations task force for the Space Station, cochaired by Carl B. Shelly and Dr. Peter T. Lyman. The task force was to explore alternative approaches to operating and managing a deployed Space Station that had to integrate a diverse set of U.S. and International hardware elements to accommodate a wide range of tended and untended user activities and to recommend an effective concept for operating the system. (NASA Release 86129)
Dr. James C. Fletcher released to members of Congress a statement indicating that employment at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, would increase from 12,600 to 14,000 employees during Space Station development, with a potential for another 1,000 jobs should JSC take on additional Space Station tasks. "Another way to look at this," he warned "is that without the Space Station program, JSC's employment level likely will not grow significantly over the next few years." The projected increase notwithstanding, officials at the JSC were concerned with their status because of the recent decision to move the habitation module's development to the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville Alabama. They were assured, however, that the move had to do with coordinating the habitation module and the module structure and that "the Johnson Space Center's role as NASA's preeminent center of excellence in manned spacecraft systems is not changing." (NASA Release 8698; NY `"Times, Jul 26/86; W Post, Jul 26/86)
NASA announced that the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the launch of the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the new schedule, the Space Telescope would be launched on October 27, 1986, and the Earth Observation Mission would lift off on August 18, 1986. The change was made to provide additional time for delivery of the Space Telescope from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space Telescope would be deployed into orbit from Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was expected to see 7 times farther and 10 times more clearly than any telescope on Earth. (NASA Release 862)
NASA considered both a crewtended station and one that would be permanently tended. The Phase B study period for the Space Station identified and evaluated alternative systems, components and philosophies that would result in a configuration responsive to the needs of potential users, be costeffective to operate and maintain, and flexible in terms of growth, size, and capabilities. A crewtended station could have people aboard only when a Shuttle orbiter docked to it; the orbiter would provide the habitable facilities. While Congress directed NASA to examine an option "which phases in permanent crew features of the Station," NASA pointed out that the "phased approach would force postponement of experiments important to advancement of manned spaceflight and would increase the total cost of developing the permanently manned Space Station." NASA went on to argue that the savings achieved by the phased approach would be offset by the cost of operating the Station in a crewtended mode for several years and by the cost of maintaining the industrial base during the delay period before resuming assembly of the permanently tended station. Savings of the crewtended phase were estimated at $284 million in 1984 dollars and total cost prior to permanently crewtended capability at $1 billion. (NASA Release 8659)
Having examined NASA's 1986 schedule of launches, missions into space, and other space science events, U.S. media predicted that 1986 would "open an extensive new chapter in space exploration," and would rival the era of space exploration "that began with Galileo's first peak through a telescope 400 years ago." Predicting 1986 to be "a banner year," the Christian Science Monitor pictured an expanding role for the United States in space exploration because the year promised to put NASA on the cutting edge. Although theLos Angeles Times predicted "a year of spectaculars," it warned that no new starts for planetary missions beyond 1986 were on the horizon. The Times also noted that the projected $8 billion orbiting Space Station would likely take a big bite out of NASA funds and that increased military applications equated to less sharing of knowledge with the public. (CSM, Jan 2/86; LA Times, Jan 2/8)
As of this date, two companies (Boeing Aerospace Operations and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company) had submitted proposals for the Payload Ground Operations Contract, a threeyear costplusawardfee contract with optional extensions of up to 15 years. The selected contractor would be responsible for preparing all payload for launch aboard Space Shuttles and expendable launch vehicles, as well as operations, maintenance, and engineering of the related processing facilities. The contract would consolidate work that was performed under separate, onsite contracts involving about 900 people. Space Station components requiring launch from the Kennedy Space Center and preparation of NASA payloads at the Vandenberg Launch Site in California were to be included. (NASA Release 86109)
Leaders from the 11membernation European Space Agency (ESA) met with NASA officials to discuss their $2 billion contribution to the Space Station project and to seek a greater management role and benefits from it. One European official noted, "NASA must realize that ESA is a mature space agency that can manage manned space flight alone if necessary." Although the statement appeared to be a threat to withdraw, Richard Barnes, NASA Director of International Affairs, saw no intent on the part of Europe to pull out. Leaders from both sides, however, agreed to a joint statement saying, "While recognizing that differences currently exist, Professor Luest and Dr. Fletcher jointly concluded that these differences are not irreconcilable." (NY Times, Nov 22/86; AvWk, Nov 24/86)
With a request for proposals issued to approximately 250 firms, NASA planned to implement a Technical and Management Information System (TMIS) to support overall functions of the Space Station, including design, development, and operation. The TMIS would link the various NASA centers involved with the program and would automate the generation and interchange of documents, correspondence, schedules, engineering data and drawing, budget data, and other management information. Carried out in implements, the first would be operational less than one year after the contract award date. (NASA Release 8688)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, responding to negotiations with the White House budget office earlier in the week, warned that the planned $8 billion Space Station and a new'G0*replacement Shuttle were in jeopardy of not meeting scheduled completions. He stated that the 35 percent increased budget for fiscal year 1987 was earmarked only for costs resulting from the Challenger crash and could not be benchmarked for future budgets. The strict budget, he added, could afford no new projects. In a separate statement, Fletcher agreed to remove himself from any future Shuttle booster rocket contracts. Senators called for an investigation of the contract awarded to Morton Thiokol in 1973, a decision in which Fletcher had considerable influence. (W Times, Dec 8/86; NY Times, Dec 8/86)
In a statement released by the White House Press Secretary, President Ronald Reagan announced "two steps that will ensure America's leadership in space exploration and utilization." His first target was the building of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary for accomplishments in space (especially the Space Station). He also announced that NASA would ease out of the business of launching commercial satellites by allowing the private sector to assume the responsibility, which, he said, would eventually be done "better and cheaper." NASA, he stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of space. (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President, Aug 15/86)
NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space Station that Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher predicted would be finished by 1994. The new design cut the amount of space walks during construction in half, increased the amount of living and laboratory space, and kept all human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The Space Station, according to plans for assembly, would need 17 Space Shuttle flights between 1993 and 1994. In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a
NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting debris left from nuclear powered satellites and wreckage from antisatellite weapons testing. Considering the high speed of orbiting craft, scientists reported that even a fleck of paint could be dangerous, the probable culprit that caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S. Shuttle flight. Because slightly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct 13/86)
Following the release of the Presidential Commission's report, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would adopt most of the recommendations. He stated, "The whole agency needs a major reexamination." He further said that he still expected the Shuttle fleet to resume operation by July 1987, that the President will opt for a replacement Shuttle, and that he remained committed to the Teacher in Space Program. Congress, however, pointed out that fiscal restraints would render it nearly impossible to make all the Committee's suggested repairs while building a new orbiter and pursuing the Space Station and the aerospace plane. (NASA Release: Statement of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, Jun 9/86; W Post, Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 10/86)
A Presidential panel report was to be released April 11, but details that aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by 1994, called for establishing a lunar base after the year 2000 for mining and production of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially0*useful asteroids, and a "network of spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian colony by the year 2027." (W Post, Mar 24/86; NY Times, Mar 25/86; CSM May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86)
Ground testing of auxiliary thrusters designed to allow the Space Station to maintain a proper orbit and altitude demonstrated that the thrusters can operate for long periods of time with no hardware degradation. Fueled by water broken down into hydrogen and oxygen, the thrusters ran for as long as 22,000 seconds, and, with a target of 10 years of Space Station life, the goal was for them to run 40,000 to 60,000 seconds. Bell Aerospace Textron and Aerojet TechSystem Corporation conducted the tests for NASA. (NASA Release 8665)
Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said at a Board of'#0*Governors meeting that he expected President Ronald Reagan's approval for a replacement Shuttle. He reiterated what he told the President earlier and averred, "We need a fourth orbiter right away, as soon as we can build it." Fletcher also warned that if it were not built and if we do not begin operating the Space Station by 1994, "that could be very dire, indeed, for the future of American science and technology and the American economy." (Remarks prepared for Delivery: Aerospace Industries Association of America, Board of Governors Meeting, Williamsburg, Virginia, May 22/86; P Inq, May 23/86; W Times, May 23/86; B Sun, May 23/86)
The Soviet Union launched what it said was a "third generation" Space Station named Mir, the Russian word for peace. The Mir was larger than their Salyut7 Space Station and had six docking ports for habitable modules. With the addition of Salyut laboratories, Russia would have an orbiting complex large enough for permanent crew habitation. (B Sun, Feb 21/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; W Times, Mar 4/86; CSM Mar 7/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a Senate subcommittee and testified that the $7.7 billion budget for NASA was "barely adequate" and could further delay Shuttle flights while possibly stripping the private sector of some 25,000 jobs. He also said that the currently designed Space Station was intended to be built using four Shuttles. With only three Shuttles, the Station would need to go back to the drawing board. The Senate appeared to be looking at a civilian sponsored space program for commercial launches as a way to reduce costs. (W Post, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
Soviet cosmonauts made a historic trip between Space Stations as they traveled 1,800 miles in their Soyus T15 transport module from the recently launched Mir to the Salyut7 station. The mission was broadcast on state television. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), May 6/86; B Sun, May 7/86; NY Times, May 8/86)
NASA announced a sevenyear schedule of tasks for the Shuttle fleet, and that Shuttles would resume flying in early 1988. The schedule reflected President Ronald Reagan's directive to phase out commercial and foreign launches, inasmuch as 24 of the 44 contracts had been voided. This left only 12 percent of the Shuttle missions devoted to commercial and foreign launches. An increase to 41 percent of the payloads, as opposed to 31 percent, would be given to Department of Defense missions. The remaining 47 percent of the schedule was reserved for the space agency's own missions, 33 percent for scientific studies and other needs, and 14 percent for the Space Station. The first year, said NASA, would see only 5 flights; that number would, it was hoped, increase to 16 flights per year by the 1990s. (WSJ, Oct 6/86; W Post, Oct 4/86; P Inq, Oct 4/86; B Sun, Oct 4/86; NY Times, Oct 4/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher acknowledged that NASA did not sufficiently consult Congress on decisions pertaining to Space Station management prior to the June 30 announcement and said he would postpone plans for moving Space Station management from Houston to the Washington, D.C. headquarters. Because "considerable misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the'00*intent of the decision on the Space Station work package realignment has resulted," said Fletcher "I intend to conduct a thorough review of all aspects of Space Station design, work package assignments and functions, and conduct extensive conversations with members of Congress." (NASA Release 86103; USA Today, Aug 1/86)
NASA looked ahead to the launching of four new generation space observatories that promised a new era for astronomy. The Gamma Ray Observatory, providing a greater wavelength range, could determine if arriving gamma radiation originated in quasars and pulsars or from other sources. The Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility would study highly energetic environments found in nearly every object in the universe, including stars, planets, neutron stars, black holes, quasars, and cores of active galaxies. The Space Infrared Telescope Facility could span the infrared part of the spectrum with a 1000fold increase in sensitivity, enabling it to search for planets around stars. The Hubble Space Telescope, penetrating the universe in visible and ultraviolet light, was predicted to expand the observable universe by hundreds of times, see objects with ten times the clarity of ground observatories, and detect objects 1,000 times dimmer than those observed by previous spacecraft. (NASA Release 86168)
