A NASA report, titled "Space Science Operations Management Concepts Study," was submitted to the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. The report, prepared by a 60member study team of personnel from NASA Headquarters, field centers, other Federal agencies, and university officials, examined options for the management of Space Station science. (NASA Note to Editors, Oct 1/1987)
The Christian Science Monitor cited Soviet news agency TASS as reporting that the two Soviet cosmonauts aboard Soyuz TM2 had successfully linked up with the Soviet space station Mir. CSM, Feb 9/87)
The Soviet Union launched another cargo ship with supplies for the space station Mir. According to Tass, the cargo ship Progress 30, the third supply ship launched since cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Alexander Laveikin had occupied the space station in February `"1987, was functioning normally after the launch. (LA Times, May
NASA announced plans to study the feasibility of building an untended rocket to carry heavy materials for use in Space Station construction. The proposed concept calls for a space freighter capable of carrying more than three times as much cargo as the Space Shuttle. The vehicle would use the same type of solid fuel boosters as the Space Shuttle. NASA surmised that such a vehicle, whose estimated costs were put at $1.5 billion, could be delivered in 1993. (H Chron, Aug 6/87; H Post, Aug 6/87; W Times, Aug 6/87; USA Today, Aug 6/87)
The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz TM4 from Baikonur Space Center in Soviet Central Asia. The spacecraft, scheduled to dock with the Soviet space station Mir on December 23, 1987, carried three Soviet cosmonauts: mission commander Vladimir Titov, flight engineer Musakhi Manarov, and research scientist Anatoly Levchenko. They were expected to work together with the crew already aboard Mir for about a week, then Levchenko would return to Earth with Yuri Romanenko, who had been in the space station for 322 days. The new crew aboard Mir was expected to remain for a year, breaking Romanenko's record. (B Sun, Dec 22/87 & Dec 29/87; CSM, Dec 30/87; LA Times, Dec 26/87; NY Times, Dec 22/87, Dec 27/87, Dec 29/87; P Inq, Dec 22/87, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87)
Despite the efforts of Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin, who had tended the space station since February 7, 1987, the first attempts to dock the Soviet Union's Kvant space module with the space station Mir failed. The Kvant, a selfcontained astronomical observatory, was to be the first experimental module to link with Mir. (NY Times, Apr 10/87; W Times, Apr 9/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and European Space Agency (ESA) Director General Reimar Luest announced that the Space Shuttle would be used for the launch of the joint NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the Sun in October 1990. At the same time, they announced that the launch, also from the Space Shuttle, of the Galileo mission to Jupiter had been moved up to October/November 1989. Since the distance to the Sun is considerably shorter than to Jupiter, the Ulysses spacecraft would begin to transmit data in 1994, a year earlier than the Galileo spacecraft. (NASA Release 8751) 0*0*0*April 6: NASA selected Boeing Computer Services Company, Seattle, Washington, for negotiating a technical and management information system contract in support of the Space Station program. (NASA Release 8752)
NASA issued Requests for Proposals to U.S. industry for a detailed design and construction of a permanently habitable Space Station. The two options proposals were due by July 21, 1987. Option one was for a phased program calling for a permanentlyh)0*0*0*tended Space Station to be operational by 1996. Option two was the enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. (NASA Release 8765; LA Times, Apr 25/87; NY Times, Apr 25/87)
NASA announced that it was proceeding toward design and development of a Space Station that would establish a permanent U.S. human presence in space by the mid1990's. It would seek proposals from industry for a phased development of the Space Station, including estimates for an enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. NASA reported that the first phase of the Space Station development, the revised baseline configuration, which would provide an initial, permanently habitable research capability by 1996, had been approved by the President. It would include a laboratory and habitation modules, four resource nodes, a polar orbiting platform, and experiment provisions outside of the pressurized modules. (NASA Release 8750; LA Times, Apr 4/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
NASA began a threeday ground system test of the scientific instruments to be carried on the Hubble Space Telescopeh) 0*0*0*(HST). The five scientific instruments to be carried aboard the HST were the widefield and planetary camera, the high resolution spectrograph, the faint object spectrograph, the high speed photometer, and a faint object camera. (NASA Release 8735)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
The United States and potential foreign partners agreed to resume negotiations aimed at building a Space Station in the 1990s. After a twoday meeting between representatives from the United States, Canada, Japan, and the 11nation European Space Agency, agreement was reached that the project would remain a civilian endeavor. NASA negotiators emphasized, however, that they saw no conflict between the "peaceful purposes" of Space Station and potential use by the Pentagon for "nonaggressive" activities. h)0*0*0*NY Times, Feb 13/87; USA Today, Feb 13/87)
NASA officials declared that Space Station deployment, scheduled for 1994, could be delayed up to two years or the Station could be scaled down. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher said that the cost of the Space Station, once estimated at $8 billion, was now estimated at between $13 and $14.5 billion. Fletcher, who said that the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union in human space flight, predicted that a U.S. crewtended Space Station would help the country catch up to the Soviets. Testifying before the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Dr. Fletcher stressed that the Space Station program retained high priority with the Reagan administration. (LA Times, Feb 4/87; USA `"Today, Feb 4/87; NY Times, Feb 5/8)
Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin left their space station and successfully tightened the seal between the research module Kvant and the space station. Kvant had failed to dock on two previous tries. (NY Times, Apr 13/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Canadian Science Minister Frank Oberle approved the agreement on Canadian participation in the U.S. Space Station program. The terms of the preliminary agreement were spelled out in a memorandum of understanding worked out by negotiators from NASA and the Canadian Ministry of State for Science and Technology. The agreement called for cooperation between the two nations in the detailed design, development, operation, and use of the Space Station. The agreement would then be submitted for approval to the governments of the two countries. (NASA Release 87182; NY Times, Dec 12/87)
NASA announced formation of a group of scientists to examine potential Space Station activities, with the aim ofh)0*0*0*reducing the time between experiment concept development and publishable results. Chaired by Dr. David C. Black, NASA Headquarters Space Station chief scientist, the group was made up of scientists and researchers from NASA, the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, universities, and the private sector. (NASA Release 8727)
NASA released a report, requested by the U.S. Congress, on the extendedduration Space Shuttle orbiter. The report examined key aspects of a program that would allow the Space Shuttle to perform Earthorbital missions for as long as 16 days. An extendedduration orbiter, according to the report, would be of great benefit for space science and technology. It also could prove useful in developing experiments and crew procedures in preparation for the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87174)
The Soviet Union launched into orbit a Soyuz TM3 with two Soviet cosmonauts and a Syrian space traveler aboard. The liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome, in Soviet Kazakhstan, was the Soviet Union's third crewtended space launch since the U.S. Space Shuttle explosion on January 28, 1986. The Soyuz TM3, piloted by Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Alexandrov, was scheduled to dock with the Soviet Mir space station after two days of orbiting around the Earth. The Syrian space traveler, Lieutenant Colonel Mohammed Faris, was the second Arab in space. The first was the Saudi Prince Sultan bin Salman, a nephew of Saudi Arabia's King Fahd. Prince Sultan bin Salman was a payload specialist aboard the (#U.S. Shuttle Discovery in 1985. (H Chron, July 22/87)
President Ronald Reagan signed into law a $9.6 billion authorization bill that provided NASA full funding to begin work on the Space Station. (W Post, Oct 31/87)
NASA announced selection of the Astronautics Division of the Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, in Sunnyvale, California, for the design, development and implementation of the Software Support Environment (SSE) for the Space Station. The SSE contract was to be managed by the Space Station Program Office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 87107)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Lew Allen announced that Richard P. Laeser had been appointed to manage JPL's new support office in Washington, D.C., for NASA's Space Station Program. Laesar, who until his new appointment had been the manager of the Voyager mission to outer planets, would also serve as Director of the Office of Requisitions and Assessments for the Space Station. Norman R. Haynes was appointed the new manager of the Voyager mission. He formerly was manager of JPL's Systems Division. StarNews, Jan 5/87)
NASA agreed with most of the findings and recommendations listed in the report by the National Research Council Committee on Space Station. Agency officials disagreed, however, with the findings that the deployment of the Space Station with the current Space Transportation System was risky. NASA also found the Committee's cost estimate for backup hardware and test program enhancements to be too high. (NASA Release 87135; NY Times, Sept 15/87; LA Times, Sept 15/87; H Post, Sept 15/87)
NASA announced that on June 15, 1987, Dr. JohnDavid F. Bartoe began a 2year appointment as Chief Scientist of the Space Station program, advising the Associate Administrator on program plans, policies, and userrelated requirements. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Bartoe served with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in a variety of positions, most recently as Head of the Solar Spectroscopy section, Space Science Division. He expected to return to the NRL at the end of the Chief Scientist appointment. (NASA Release 87103)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Dr. Lew Allen selected a Virginia site for a Space Station Program office. The 110,000 square feet of leased space in Reston, Virginia, would house NASA's Space Station Program director and some 400 JPL and NASA personnel. Initial occupancy was planned for summer 1987. (NASA Release 8749)
Appearing before the Los Angeles World Affairs Council, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that building the Space Station was critical to the United States regaining initiative in space. "It is no longer a question of whether we should have longterm goals in space," Fletcher said. "The question is can we afford not to lead." (LA Times, Nov 7/87)
NASA announced that the longdelayed mission to Jupiter, originally scheduled for 1982, would be launched in 1989. The 5,870pound untended Galileo spacecraft was to be launched from the Shuttle Discovery. After the Challenger accident, NASA decided to use less powerful rockets than the originally planned Centaur rockets, which are fueled with volative hydrogen. The substitution required an "audacious" rerouting of the spacecraft in order to use the gravitational force of Venus and Earth to propel Galileo toward The Galileo mission was expected to reach Jupiter in 1995. Upon reaching Jupiter, the spacecraft was to release a 737pound probe that would penetrate the atmosphere of the giant gaseous planet. h)&0*0*0*In addition, the spacecraft was to spend two years orbiting Jupiter and making flybys of its four largest moons. (CSM, Dec 3/87; LA Times, Dec 3/87; USA Today, Dec 3/87; W Post, Dec 3/87)
NASA announced that it, together with the Universities Space Research Association, in Columbia, Maryland, and the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence in Space Data and Information Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new research facility would serve as the nerve center for a network of researchers from leading universities and from industry computer science departments. The emphasis would be on research in areas of potential longterm application to NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 8770)
NASA awarded contracts to the four aerospace firms it had selected on December 1, 1987, to design, develop, test, evaluate, and deliver the components and systems comprising the proposed crewtended Space Station, planned for orbit in the mid1990s. The contracts issued covered Phase I, the already approved elements of the Space Station program. Phase II would cover any potentially needed enhancements of the Space Station's capabilities. The four companies selected, each to perform a unique but interdependent portion of the total program, were Boeing Aerospace Company, Huntsville, Alabama; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, with locations in Huntington Beach, California and Houston, Texas; General Electric Company, AstroSpace Division, with locations in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania and East Windsor, New Jersey; and Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California. (NASA Release 87177; NASAh)(0*0*0*Release 87187; C Trib, Dec 2/87; LA Times, Dec 2/87; NY Times, Dec 2/87; WSJ, Dec 2/87; W Post, Dec 2/87)
NASA and the ESA announced solicitation of scientific investigation from the United States, European Space Agency member states, and Canada, for two missions. The four spacecraft CLUSTER mission would study basic plasma processes in the Earth's magnetosphere. The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission consisted of a spacecraft studying solar processes and solarterrestrial relationships. (NASA Release 8722)
The Soviet Union launched a 20ton, selfcontained astrophysical observatory whose mission was to dock with the orbiting Mir Space Station. Viktor Blagov, the deputy mission director, said that the observatory would "open a new chapter" in human space flight and would become a key building block of a permanently habitable scientific space complex. When docked with the Mir Space Station, the 19footlong observatory, with a 13.6 foot diameter, would double the working space available and would create a sort of a "high rise" structure in space. (P Inq, Apr 1/87; W Times, Apr 1/87) h)0*0*0*During March: India failed to launch an augmented satellite launch vehicle, developed by the Indian Space Research Organization, when the vehicle malfunctioned and fell into the Indian Ocean. The launch from Sriharikota, India, was the first of four such planned launches, and was to have placed a stretched Rohini series scientific satellite into a low Earth orbit. (AvWk, Mar 30/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
A Soyuz TM3, carrying Colonel Yuri V. Romanenko and two fellow Soviet cosmonauts, Aleksander P. Aleksandrov and Anatoly Levchenko, parachuted to Earth about 50 miles from the town of Arkalyk in Soviet Kazakhstan. The three returned from the Soviet space station Mir, where Romanenko had set a new record of 326 days in orbit. (NY Times, Dec 30/87)
NASA issued a request for proposal to U.S. industry for a program support contractor to assist the NASA Space Station Program Office, in Washington, D.C., with development of the Space Station. (NASA Release 878)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
NASA announced that in the next three years it would reduce Shuttle use by launching only 19 space flights. During the same time, it would launch 49 satellites on untended rockets. About 30 nonmilitary payloads originally planned to be carried into orbit by the Shuttle through 1995, will now be carried on untended rockets. NASA said that it would launch five science missions in 1989, some with international cooperation. Four of these missionsthe Magellan, to map Venus; the Hubble Space Telescope, in cooperation with the European Space Agency; and the ASTRO1 ultraviolet observatory and Galileo, in cooperation with Germany to make a comprehensive survey of Jupiter and its moonswould fly on the Shuttle. A fifth mission, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) toh)"0*0*0*investigate cosmic background noise, was to launch on a Delta. Another scheduled Shuttle launch was the cooperative ESA/NASA Ulysses mission to observe the polar region of the Sun. From 1990 through 1995, NASA expected to accelerate deployment of other space science missions by fully utilizing expendable launch vehicles. For example, NASA anticipated Delta launches of a Roentgen Satellite in February 1990 and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer in August 1991. (NASA Release 87158; LA Times, Oct 23/87; NY Times, Oct 23/87; W Times, Oct 23/87)
NASA granted the Space Station Program Support Division, of Grumman Aerospace Corporation in Bethpage, New York, a contract to provide systems engineering and integration for the Space Station. The contract also called for Grumman to provide a broad base of management support to the Space Station Program Office in the areas of program control and management; information systems; operations; program requirements and assessment; and safety, reliability, and quality assurance. (NASA Release 87110; WSJ, July 3/87; B Sun, July 3/87)
