A Soviet Proton launch vehicle carrying a Soyuz TM6 spacecraft, with three cosmonauts on board, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The threeman Soyuz crew, which included an Afghan and a Soviet physician, was scheduled to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station on the weeklong mission. The physician, Valery Polyakov, was to remain aboard Mir after the departure of his Soyuz crewmates and continue monitoring the health of the Mir cosmonauts, who were in the eighth month of a recordbreaking yearlong endurance mission. (FBISSov88168, Aug 30/88; SSR 1988 075A; UPI, Aug 30/88; W Post, Aug 30/88; CSM, Aug 30/88; P Inq, Aug 30/88)
Margaret G. Finarelli was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective December 12. Finarelli had been serving as Director of the Policy Division in the Office of Space Station. (NASA Release 88164)
NASA concluded negotiations with the ESA on a bilateral memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the design, development, operation, and use of the permanently crewtended civil international Space Station complex. Under the terms of the new MOU, ESA would provide the Columbus laboratory module to the international Space Station complex. This permanently attached, pressurized module would support approximately 40 single equipped racks for payloads and storage. ESA would also provide an untended, freeflying polar platform for Earth observation experiments, complementing the polar platform under development by the United States. As a third element, ESA would provide a mantended free flyer (MTFF) designed to accommodate longduration microgravity applications in the fields of fluid physics, life, and material sciences. (NASA Release 8844)
NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project with Germany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescope also maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro1, a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the study of Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS35 in November 1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights for September 1990a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and the first Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS1)0*mission. The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the projected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to study the Sun and its environment remained at the projected
The Canadian government announced that it would become an active partner in the international Space Station Program and would provide equipment worth $1.2 billion to the project. Canada's main equipment contribution to the Space Station would be a roving space robot that would serve as the "arms and legs" of the Station. The robot, which would be comparable to but more advanced than the "Canadarm" currently carried on U.S. Space Shuttles, would be a critical tool in Station construction and docking activities. In return for Canada's contribution, Canadian astronauts would be entitled to sixmonth tours of duty on the Station every two years. Canadian space officials announced plans to expand their astronaut corps in anticipation of the Canadian presence on the Space Station. (Tor Star, Apr 22/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received the International Technology Institute's (ITI) William F. Rockwell, Jr. Medal at the International Congress on Technology and Technology Exchange banquet, in Pittsburgh. The Rockwell Medal, awarded annually to a maximum of three individuals from different continents, recognizes contributions toward the generation, transfer, and application of technology for the betterment of mankind. (NASA Release 88139)'%0*October 20: Two of the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station took a fourhour spacewalk to replace a faulty component on an xray telescope attached to the station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, on a yearlong endurance mission aboard Mir, wore a new spacesuit design intended to increase flexibility. C Trib, Oct 21/88)
An untended Soviet spacecraft carrying fuel, food, equipment, and mail, docked with the Mir space station. Two Soviet0*cosmonauts, on a long duration mission, tended Mir. The cosmonauts, Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, arrived at the space station in December and were expected to stay in space for about a year, breaking the 325day endurance record set the previous year by Yuri Romanenko. (FBISSov88108, Jun 6/88; SSR 1988 038A; AP, May
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher voiced alarm over the House of Representative's resolution for funding of NASA's fiscal year 1989 budget. Speaking in Washington before a symposium on "Science Education: A Challenge for Excellence in America's Future," Dr. Fletcher issued his toughest warning yet about the consequences of reducing the NASA funding levels proposed by the Administration. The Administrator warned that "the civil space program will be stopped in its tracks" if the House funding figure of $10.2 billioncut by over $1 billion from the Administration proposalwere to be passed. More specifically, Dr. Fletcher predicted the reduced budget would kill the Space Station program and lead to the abrogation of several international commitments in space science and applications. (NASA Release 8860).
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
A Soyuz TM7 spacecraft, carrying a joint SovietFrench crew, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, for a monthlong tour in the Mir space station. With French President Franois Mitterand in attendance, the threeman crew, which included French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, lifted off from Baikonur on the second FrenchSoviet crewtended mission. '(0*Chretien had also been aboard the first joint mission in July 1983. The threeman Soyuz crew planned to join the twoman crew, aboard Mir since January, to perform a series of scientific experiments. Additionally, Chretien was scheduled to become the first West European to perform a spacewalk. (FBISSov88228; SSR 1988 104A; NY Times, Nov 27/88; W Post, Nov 27/88; CSM, Nov 28/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
NASA issued the newest update of its mixedfleet manifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launch vehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changes made to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launch windows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be a crucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" the Nation's space program. The proposed budget included funds to increase the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off" the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up of funding for Space Station hardware development was also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandment of development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation of that program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technology were not approved, the necessary technological foundation for future achievements would not be built, and the goal of longterm U.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream." (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 8831; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times Mar 23/88; LA Times Mar 23/88)
E. Ray Tanner was appointed Director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tanner had been serving as Manager of the Space Station Projects Office, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August 1988. Prior to that he was Deputy Director for Space Systems in the Science and Engineering Directorate. (NASA Release 88175; MSFC Release 88178)
NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date of December 1989. The earlier date was made possible following reassessment of a variety of factors, including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the period. (NASA Release 88143)
NASA and the ESA announced the selection of scientific investigations to be conducted on two spacecraft as part of a joint NASAESA solar terrestrial research program. More than 130 U.S. scientists were scheduled to participate in the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster missions. Two spacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instruments supplied by both ESA and NASA. The Cluster mission, involving a set of four satellites, was planned for launch on an ESA Ariane launch vehicle in December 1995. The Cluster would investigate the space plasma threedimensional microphysics phenomena in Earth's0*magnetic field environment, using four identical spacecraft in polar orbits. SOHO, planned for launch by NASA on the Shuttle or on an expendable launch vehicle in March 1995, would be placed at the EarthSun La Grangian point and investigate the physical processes that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to the solar wind. The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of the International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a major international program in solar and space physics organized in 1985 by NASA, the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 8848)
An untended Soviet Progress38 supply spacecraft, bound for the Mir space station, was launched from the Baikonur launch facility. The Tass News Agency reported the Progress38 ferried "expendable materials and various loads" for use by the Mir threeman crew. (SSR 1988 083A; C Trib, Sep 11/88;
The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
President Ronald Reagan christened the planned international Space Station "Freedom," to symbolize the values shared by the U.S. and its allies. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the name "Freedom" was recommended by NASA officials and representatives of Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency, project participants. (WH Release, Jul 18/88; UPI, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88)
Negotiations were completed among the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan on the framework for international cooperation in the Space Station program. Under the agreements, the United States would provide the overall Space Station framework: operating subsystems, including life support and 75 kilowatts of power; laboratory and habitat modules; and a freeflying platform that would be placed in polar orbit for Earth observation. Canada would provide a Mobile Servicing System, which would be used in conjunction with the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of Space Station elements. Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module, a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The European Space Agency would provide a pressurized laboratory module, which would be permanently attached to the crewtended base; a freeflying polar platform to work together with the U.S. polar platform; and an astronauttended free flyer to be serviced at the crewtended base. The United States anticipated spending approximately $16 billion (fiscal year 1989 dollars) to develop Space Station hardware. The total foreign commitment to the Space Station was in excess of $7 billion. Furthermore, the partners would cover more than 25 percent of the Space Station's expected annual operating costs throughout the 2030 year life of the program. Signature of the agreements was expected later in the summer. (NASA Release 8874)
Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reached agreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the permanently crew tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency would serve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU. Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)a permanently attached, pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The pressurized portion of the JEM would provide a shirtsleeve environment for the Space Station crew to perform research activities. The JEM's exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth observation, communications, advanced technology development and other activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experiment logistics module, which would provide transportation and storage of logistics items, would be transported to the Station by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8870)
A Soviet Proton launch vehicle, carrying a Soyuz TM5 spacecraft with a threeman SovietBulgarian crew, took off from the Baikonur launch facility. The Soyuz TM5 crew was to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station. The launch, which occurred at 10:04 a.m. EDT, was the first Soviet crewtended launch in 1988. The Mir visit was to be a 10day mission in which the visiting astronauts would perform over 40 experiments aboard the station. The two astronauts aboard Mir were to remain after the departure of their colleagues and continue a yearlong endurance0*mission that was expected to break the record established by Yuri Romanenko in 1987. (FBISSov88110, Jun 8/88; SSR 1988 048B; NY Times, Jun 8/88; B Sun, Jun 8/88)
After a tense 24hour delay of deorbit burn, a Soviet Soyuz TM5 capsule carrying two cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia. The Soyuz TM5, returning to Earth from a weeklong visit to the Mir space station, experienced premature shutdowns of its reentry motor during the first two deorbit burn attempts. The first shutdown had been caused by a malfunction in the automatic guidance system, whereas the second failure resulted from improper resetting of the flight computer. The problem was considered by some U.S. space experts as potentially life threatening because the Soyuz was estimated to have only 24 to 48 hours of oxygen left and a limited amount of fuel with which to attempt a third deorbit'"0*burn. The mission had been noted for the participation of an Afghani cosmonaut and the transfer to the Mir space station of a physician crew member. (FBISSOV88175, Sep 9/88; AP, Sep 7/88; NY Times, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 7/88; WSJ, Sep 7/88; W Times, Sep 7/88; B Sun, Sep 7/88)
In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
Thomas L. Moser was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Station by the head of the Space Station Office, James B. Odom. Moser had been serving as Director of the Space Station Freedom program in Reston, Virginia, since October 1986. (NASA Release 88163) During November: NASA continued its multifaceted program of observation of Supernova 1987a, using untended scientific balloons and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO): NASA launched two heavylift balloons from Australia in November to continue scientific studies of Supernova 1987a. A 28.4 million cubic foot balloon was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 1100 pounds, to measure gammaray and hard xray emissions. A second, 29.47 million cubic foot balloon also was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 3700 pounds, that would measure gammaray emissions, but over a different energy band. These scientific missions were part of the overall NASA Balloon Program managed by the Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 88154; MSFC Release 88160) ')0*NASA deployed the C141 Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), to observe Supernova 1987a. KAO completed a fiveweek deployment to New Zealand to conduct high altitude observations of charged particle and heavy metals emissions produced in the explosion of the giant blue star, first detected in February 1987. The
NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
NASA announced that Andrew J. Stofan, Associate Administrator for the Space Station, would retire from the Agency on April 1. Stofan's career with NASA spanned nearly 30 years. He had directed the Space Station program since June 1986. During his tenure, the program underwent a major cost review which culminated in an Administrationapproved plan to develop the Space Station in two phases. Stofan also oversaw the establishment of the Space Station program office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 8816)
NASA unveiled plans for an ambitious program to study the Earth as a single ecological system, the Los Angeles Times reported. Called the Earth Observing System, the U.S. portion of the multinational project would cost well above $2 billion and would use a wide range of orbiting laboratories, including free flying platforms and facilities aboard the international space station. The heart of the program would include four platformstwo from the United States, one from Europe, and one from Japanthat would be launched into polar orbit around the Earth by the participating countries. The program, which was still in the planning stage, was described by NASA science division spokesman Charles Redmond as "a critical element in NASA's strategic plan." LA Times, Mar 23/88)
Two Soviet cosmonauts and a French astronaut returned to Earth aboard a Soyuz TM6 capsule, following the completion by the Soviets of a record breaking yearlong endurance mission aboard the Mir space station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, launched into space on December 21, 1987, and French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, successfully landed their capsule in Kazakhstan. Titov and Manarov were to undergo extensive medical tests to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness. (FBISSov88245, Dec 21/88; NY Times, Dec 22/88; W Post, Dec 22/88; WSJ, Dec 22/88; CSM, Dec 22/88; B Sun, Dec 22/88; P Inq, Dec 22/88)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
