Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope for the first time had observed a faint object, a quasar billions of light years from Earth. Officials hoped that study of the image, known to astronomers as UM675, would give clues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe was born. (W Times, Nov 5/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
NASA released a call for proposals to lease a commercially developed and owned space module, the Commercial Middeck Augmentation Module, which would ride in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle and add about 50 lockers to the orbiter's capacity. The need for greater capacity resulted from NASA's Commercial Development of Space Program, which was designed to enlarge research opportunities for private use by conducting experiments in materials processing, protein crystal growth, `"biotechnology, and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 9046; Sp News, Mar 1218/90) During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed that designs for the planned Space Station Freedom needed significant changes that would drive up the initial cost. The study found an elaborate program of preventative maintenance that would require about 2,200 hours each year for space walks by astronauts and0*begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutions included use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designed spacesuits to ease space walks, and a redesign of Space Station parts that would make them easier to repair. (NY Times, Mar 19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
NASA named William W.L. Taylor of TRW Corporation as the Chief Scientist for the Space Station Freedom Program. Taylor, who was with NASA until 1978 when he joined TRW, was the third person chosen for the twoyear assignment and the first from industry. (NASA Release 9061)
NASA announced its Integrated System Preliminary Design Review for Space Station Freedom was completed. Preliminary figures for June 1990 showed Freedom's weight to be 143,000 pounds lighter than the allocated limit of 512,000 pounds and that the housekeeping power limit of 45 kilowatts was exceeded by 15 kilowatts. A summerlong resources scrub reduced weight estimates by 130,000 pounds and housekeeping power by 13 kilowatts. "What this means," said Deputy Manager Marc Bensimon, "is that the design is maturing and converging." (NASA Release During December: NASA awarded contracts to Centennial Contractors, SPACEHAB, and Dyncorp. Centennial was given a '(0*year $5 million contract for various minor constructions, modifications, and rehabilitation projects at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, SPACEHAB received a 5year $184,236,000 contract for providing commercial middeck augmentation module services: physical and operational integration of the module and the experiments; power, cooling, data management; and crew training in six Space Shuttle flights at sixmonth intervals. Dyncorp procured a $30 million contract for technical services that included operation and maintenance of radar, telecommunications, and optical services. (NASA Release C90gg; 90157; W Times, Dec 4/90)
NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science and Technology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during a meeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environment monitoring (realtime solar wind data), Space Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle. Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for building and utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in xray and infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph, reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, and satellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90106)
NASA said that the Hubble Space Telescope, which had been plagued with problems, was discovered to have a flawed mirror, causing the $1.5 billion instrument to be "near sighted." The mirrors, which were ground into the wrong shape, rendered useless the telescope's most important scientific instrument, a widefield planetary camera designed to explore the farthest reaches of the universe. Engineers said that instruments scheduled to be attached to the telescope in 1993, 1996, and 1997 could compensate for the flaw and added that these flight schedules might be advanced. Tests were not done on the effectiveness of the mirrors before the telescope was launched because engineers felt that the checks were cost prohibitive. (P Inq, Jun 28/90; NY Times, June 28/90; W Post, Jun 28/90)
detail of a young star system known as 30 Doradus, 160,000 light years from Earth. After scientists corrected the flawed mirror problem with computer enhancement, the telescope revealed 60 of what were yet the youngest and heaviest stars known. The "star nursery," was once thought to have only one large star; the most advanced telescope prior to the Hubble telescope had raised that number to 27. (W Post, Aug 14/90; W Times, Aug 14/90; P Inq, Aug 14/90; NASA Release 90111)
NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule for Space Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of the previously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged0*on a threeweek delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. This delay threatened the highpriority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward the Sun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite. Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
Astronauts who retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility in early January said, in a press briefing, that the satellite was in worse shape than engineers had expected after its nearly 6year orbit. The conclusion was that materials used for the planned Space Station would require greater scrutiny. (W Times, Jan 31/90)
NASA's Chief Scientist William Lenoir told a Senate committee that the Agency should have performed tests on the Hubble Space Telescope's mirrors. He said that the problem could have been caught by simpler, less costly tests than the "endtoend" test, rejected because of its high cost. (Hearing before the Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Jul 10/90; B Sun, Jul 11/90; W Post, Jul 11/90; NY Times, Jul 11/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly told a panel created by President George Bush that the Agency was facing serious problems, but not what most people believed them to be. The two obstacles standing in front of the Agency, he said, were "Governmentwide practices" that encumbered connections between programs and resources and the public's misunderstanding of the proposed Space Station Freedom. The Space Station's design flaws, he added, were either solved or close to a solution, "yet public understanding is to the contrary." In a related matter, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA planned to spend $1.9 billion over the next five years on its seven centers of excellence in the area of highperformance computing. The Centers would focus on training college and graduatelevel students, thereby educating the next generation of scientists in the field. Truly, who spoke at a conference on supercomputing in September noted, "NASA needs highperformance computing. Some of our missions depend on it." (W Post, Sep 14/90; Fed CoWk, Sep 10/90)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
The Senate, in a rush to agree on the 1991 spending plan, compromised on a $1.9 billion allocation for NASA's Space Station. Said Senator Barbara Mikulski, "The space program has been increased by 13 percent so it's not as if we gouged them." W Post, Oct 17/90; AvWk, Oct 22/90)
Charles Pellerin, director of astrophysics for NASA, announced that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope mirrors could easily be fixed in a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for mid1993. The mission would require replacing the telescope's widefield planetary camera with one designed to correct the flawed mirrors. (P Inq, Aug 17/90; W Times, Aug 17/90)
In an unreleased report, NASA determined that the proposed untended ShuttleC would prove too costly for use in building the Space Station. The original plan called for 18 Shuttle flights at a cost of $1.5 billion to erect the $25 billion station. Although using the ShuttleC would reduce the number of required flights to 10 because of its more than doubled cargo space, the price tag would jump to $3.7 billion, not including the $2 billion needed to develop the vehicle. (Sp News, Feb 26Mar 4/90)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee recommended an increase of NASA's budget from $12.3 billion to $17 billion for the next year, including the $2.9 billion earmarked for continued development of the Space Station. Committee members acknowledged that the final spending plan would probably be lower but wanted to show their support despite NASA's recent problems. (P Inq, Sep 20/90)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
NASA's 1991 budget would be cut by $1 billion dollars, warned Congress. The Space Station, planned explorations of the Moon and Mars, and the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle were slated to be trimmed. Money for the Earth Observation System was earmarked for an increase. (Sp News, Mar 26Apr 1/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of Investigation created by NASA met for the first time in Washington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for the telescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allen said, "The board now has a good base of information from which to0*proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)
The Hubble Telescope failed a test on this date as scientists attempted to direct it toward stars emanating a common brightness; the telescope was able to find none. It was later discovered that the problem originated from an error in the telescopes computer guidance system, and a new program with an updated star chart was sent up. (NY Times, May 10/90; W Post, May
NASA selected investigators and science teams from 11 U.S. universities, 3 NASA centers, 3 other U.S. laboratories, and 13 foreign countries for the Saturn orbiter portion of the Cassini mission scheduled for launch in 1996. The mission would include 62 investigations for analysis of Saturn's atmosphere, its ring particles, and moons within them. The orbiter would also send a probe to Saturn's moon, Titan, and later map it. (NASA Release
NASA considered a proposal for a major repair of the Hubble Space Telescope that would include the reinstating of full observation abilities. In addition to replacing the telescope's main camera in 1993, as already planned, astronauts would also replace another device with corrective optics for light that reached other important scientific instruments. The plan called for repairing or replacing the craft's solar panels, as well, because their vibrations had interfered with many sensitive observations. (NY Times, Oct 27/90)
Soviet cosmonauts ended a 22week mission when their Soyus TM8 capsule touched down on the Kazakhstan Steppe, southeast of Moscow. The fifth mission involving a crew living aboard the 20ton Mir Space Station included dozens of scientific experiments and testing of a "space motorcycle," a oneman vehicle designed for servicing satellites. (FBIS Moscow, Tass (Eng trans) Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90; P Inq, Feb 20/90)
Scientists, after taking their first long look at the Long Duration Exposure Facility recovered by Space Shuttle Columbia in January, said the varied surfaces of the satellite showed signs of pits, scars, and discoloration in some areas while being strangely unscathed in others. The surfaces revealed no "showstoppers" however. The satellite was an experiment meant to test materials for use in building spacecraft and the Space Station. (W Post, Feb 13/86; NASA Release 9023)
Rockwell Space Operations was selected by NASA for a $814 million, 10year station operation support contract. The contract would provide support for mission, flight crew, and facility operations for the Space Station and other flight programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Mar 7/90)
NASA engineers revealed that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope were even more difficult to correct than first expected. The most vexing problem was a 20minute vibration from the solar panels every 90 minutes as the craft passed from night to day. The onboard computer's attempt to compensate for the vibration only made the problem worse. Another problem was the telescope's frequent inability to lock onto the stars that it was commanded to seek. In addition, the reaction of the spacecraft to radiation over the South Atlantic, where the Van Allen belt dips closer than usual to the Earth, was more acute than expected; numerous data were lost and false computer signals were given. It was hoped that all three problems could be remedied via modifications to the telescope's computer. (NY Times, Jun 15/90; P Inq, Jun 15/90; B Sun, Jun 15/90)
The first scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view of the heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of a supernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in a distant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole. Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been offandon. The navigation problem had been0*narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus would be delayed two or three weeks. (NY Times, Aug 30/90; W Times, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90117; 90118) During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing and directing untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, and spacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire from the Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and be involved with daytoday processing of Space Shuttle vehicles. (NASA Release 90116; 90119)
The Galileo spacecraft, launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis October 18, 1989, fired its thrusters so it could come closer to Earth and use our planet's gravity to slingshot in December toward the Sun for a 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. The'$0*flyby would mark the first time Earth had been approached by a spacecraft from Venus, or anywhere inside Earth's orbit. The craft was scheduled to study Earth during the maneuver, slingshot the Sun and study our planet again on the return trip in 1992, and then study Jupiter's atmosphere for 2 more years after reaching the planet. The loop around the solar system was necessary because the rocket that launched the craft was too weak to propel Galileo directly on its 2year trip to Jupiter. (Fla Today, Nov 14/90; P Inq, Nov 14/90)
The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA's 1991 budget. The bill drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiative and cut $863.6 million from the planned Space Station. The measure was to go to a conference committee to iron out differences with the House appropriations bill before being sent to President George Bush. (WSJ Oct 4/90)
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
Engineers located two leaks in the Space Shuttle's fuel line that they determined could easily be fixed and stated that flights would resume soon. The problems, said William Lenoir, NASA's flight director, did not appear to be a result of any design flaw; he added that eight of the nine scheduled missions would likely be flown this year. In the meantime, investigators from a sixmember board of investigation created by NASA July 2 were seeking to find what had gone wrong with the Hubble Space Telescope. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who headed the board, promised a congressional committee that they would pinpoint the problem and fix responsibility. The investigation, he said, would be "very embarrassing to someone or some group." (W Post, Jul 14/90; NY Times, Jul 14/90)
The Galileo spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on October 18, 1989, looped 10,000 miles above the planet Venus in what NASA engineers termed a "gravity assisted maneuver" that increased its speed by almost 5,000 mph for its trek to Jupiter. After taking 16 pictures of Venusian cloud and wind patterns while searching for lightning, the craft was scheduled to take more pictures of the planet during its return journey. The second set of photographs, which were to be coupled with sensors, were to detect dust, infrared and visible light, and electrically charged particles. Scientists determined that the spacecraft would be within range of the Earth and able to send back data, in October, using its small antenna. It was expected to reach Jupiter in December 1995. (P Inq, Feb 12/90; B Sun, Feb 11/90; NY Times, Feb 11/90)
NASA canceled a contract with TRW Corporation for the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, aka Space Tug, a spacecraft intended to lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and a proposed Xray telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for the cancellation was recent budget pressure facing NASA. (WSJ, `"Jun 8/90; W Times, Jun 8/90; Sp News, Jun 1117/90; NASA Release
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
NASA scientists reported that despite its flaws, the Hubble Space Telescope was sending back some clear pictures, better than any a ground telescope could produce. The latest photographs of Jupiter and Pluto were better than any ever taken, but until the telescope's "near sightedness" was corrected images of distant, faint objects would continue to be unclear. (W Post, Oct 5/90; NY Times, Oct 5/90)
The Galileo spacecraft came to within 590 miles of Earth and received a push from Earth's gravity that increased its speed from 67,000 m.p.h. to 78,000 m.p.h. This was the first of two gravity assisted passes by Earth that were planned for the craft, enabling it to reach Jupiter in December 1995. It collected numerous data from Earth, as it would again on its second pass. (CSM Dec 10/90; NY Times, Dec 9/90)
Engineers at NASA ran tests of the Hubble Space Telescope to determine if vibrations were interfering with precise pointing at specific stars. The problem had been discovered two days earlier when sensors locked on to a "guide star" to orient the0*spacecraft. Engineers noticed a slight wobble, one sixhundredth of a degree up and down every minute, that interfered with both fine pointing mechanisms and star observations. (NY Times, May
A report released by NASA, concerning plans for the Space Station Freedom, said that 3,700 hours of maintenance would be required annually to keep it running. The final figure from the 6month study was up from the 2,200 hours that a preliminary version had given in March and dwarfed the original goal of 130 hours. The most alarming statistic was that 6,200 hours of maintenance would be needed before the station could even be habitable. "The significance is that there's no one up there to do this," said Dr. William J. Fisher, an astronaut who headed the 12member panel that did the estimate. (NY Times, Jul 21/90; W Post, Jul 21/90; WSJ, Jul 23/90)
Ground controllers adjusted commands on the Hubble Space Telescope for focusing on stars. Although other problems existed wobble from solar panels on the telescope and vibration as it went through spacethe first pictures were taken and sent to Earth on this day. (NY Times, May 21/90; W Times, May 21/90; W `"Post, May 21/90)
NASA's Office of Commercial Programs sponsored plans to develop a system for launching and recovering commercial spaceborne experiments. Assisted by numerous universities, the Commercial Experiment Transporter would be launched on an expendable rocket and contain both a recovery system and a service module. The two would then separate so that the experiments aboard the recovery system could land in the United States while those not requiring recovery could remain in orbit. (NASA Release 9083)
NASA announced the selection of 84 proposals for Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Aiming to stimulate technological innovation from small business, the contracts were allowed to reach $500,000 over a twoyear period. (NASA Release 90152) '%0*November 27: The sixmember Hubble Optical Systems Board of Investigation, formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena, California, released its final report, cumulating a 5month study. The report stated that both NASA and the PerkinElmer Corporation, then known as Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirror that prevented the Hubble Space Telescope from distinguishing very faint objects. Lower management at the Corporation discounted any information that conflicted with certified procedures for testing the mirror with newly designed equipment. Upper management at PerkinElmer and at NASA, the report went on, were left unaware of potential problems the mirror might have had in 1981. Dr. Allen and Leonard Fisk, NASA's Chief Scientist, agreed that NASA management operated under different procedures then and would have caught the problem in 1990. (NY Times, Nov 28/90; W Post, Nov 28/90) During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation held their first "Technology 2000" conference in Washington, D.C., to encourage marketing of space technology. Among the innovations showcased were an implant device for releasing insulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument called the "Video Harp"; a system to allow the hearing impaired to locate loud noises such as sirens; a digital audio signal processing system for fuller, more realistic sound called the "Convolvotron"; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System; and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with stepbystep instructions to a student. Hightech gear only a few years away, said USA Today, included a spaceage washer and dryer, refrigerator, and gloves. USA Today, Nov 29/90)
NASA responded to a request issued August 7 by the Office of Management and Budget asking for various Federal agencies to outline the effects of a $100 billion cut in the 1991 budget. The report submitted by NASA warned of a halt in Space Shuttle flights, suspended development of the Space Station, and delayed launch of the Mars Observer spacecraft. Although not expected, cuts acrosstheboard were a possible result of the GrammRudman deficit control law. (Sp News, Sep 913/90)
NASA launched the first of 10 expected Shuttle flights in 1990 (flight STS32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 10day mission to orbit a Navy communications satellite and to retrieve another. The liftoff, originally scheduled for December 18, had been delayed three times because of problems with the renovated launch pad and once because of low clouds. The Navy satellite was deployed January 10. On January 12, the spacecraft closed in on and retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), an 11ton satellite, into the cargo bay, using a 50foot robotic arm. The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April 1984 to provide vital information on the design of spacecraft and NASA's Space Station, as well as other experiments. The orbiting laboratory was scheduled to be recovered 10 months after its deployment, but the nearly 5year postponement caused by scheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in a decaying orbit that was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere by March of 1990. The 57 experiments aboard the 30footlong cylindrical satellite included an array of potential space building materials being tested for reactions to radiation, extreme temperature changes, and collisions with space matter. Also tested for prolonged space exposure were optical fibers, pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experiment involving tomato seeds. Interstellar gases and cosmic radiation were also trapped in an attempt to find clues into the formation of the Milky Way and the evolution of heavier elements. For the remainder of the mission, astronauts carried out other scientific and engineering work. Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning on
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
Officials announced that an advisory committee created by Vice President Dan Quayle and the National Space Council was set up to examine how to manage future efforts in space. The committee, made up of two former congressmen, a former astronaut, and several top industry executives, was to report to the National Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that he had urged the committee's creation because of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, grounding of the Shuttle fleet, and design flaws in the proposed Space Station. (NY Times, Aug 3/90)
