The Huntsville Times indicated that NASA and consumers in general had much in common, namely a situation of being caught in a recession when careful budgeting was necessary. Nonetheless, many NASA programs, such as Magellan's probe of Venus, and the Hubble Space Telescope, were continuing their good work. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 17/91)
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore announced that for financial reasons it was ending its participation in the Magellan Telescope project in Las Campanas, Chile as of June 30. It cited an inability to raise the $15 million, which was its project share. The role of the Astronomy Department at Johns Hopkins was enhanced through its space participation. The Hopkins Ultaviolet Telescope was successfully flown aboard the Space Shuttle and Johns Hopkins contains on campus the Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA's center for astronomy programs with the Hubble Space Telescope. (B Sun, Apr 3/91)
The New York Times carried an extensive article with diagrams describing many of the proposed reductions contemplated by NASA in the cost and role of its orbiting Space Station. The mission was to study the long-term effects of space on astronauts and other living things and to see whether the nearly weightless environment offers commercial possibilities. NASA was scheduled to deliver the modified proposal to Congress March 5. (NYT, Mar 5/91; W Times, Mar 5/91)
AP reported that the Baikonur Space Station in western Kazakhstan seemed ready to avoid the problems that harmed nuclear testing at Semipalatinsk. A Soviet space delegation visited the Kazakh capital of Alma Ata in April to conclude a program of scientific, technical, and economic cooperation between the two countries and to build a training school for young cosmonauts in Leninsk. (AP, Aug 30/91)
Major articles in the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times raised questions about NASA's proposed Space Station with regard to its cost, the functions it was supposed to perform, and the need for such space ventures in relation to other needed expenditures. The Los Angeles Times stated that Soviet Space Station experience showed that "at current levels of technology, reusable spaceships were more expensive than throwaway models." (NYT, May 26/91; LA Times, May 26/91)
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it was building a $337 million space robot, technically a Flight Telerobotic Servicer, to be used in constructing Space Station Freedom. The robot was to have artificial computer intelligence and video cameras on each wrist and the top of its body. (B Sun, Mar 15/91)
NASA revised its Space Station plan to include a centrifuge. The absence of a centrifuge in the scaled-down plan was criticized by a number of scientists, who considered it essential for the study of the effects of weightlessness. (NY Times, Apr 11/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, commended U.S. government-sponsored educational displays at the Experimental Aircraft Association's exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin. It specifically complimented NASA's Space Station and Space Shuttle displays and astronaut Steve Nagel's presentations as effectively communicating U.S. space leadership. (AvWk, Aug 5/91)
The media reported that a British woman, Helen Sharman, went into space in a Soyuz TM-12 rocket with two Soviet astronauts, destined for Space Station Mir. The astronauts were to remain on Mir to do repairs while Sharman was to return with the two Soviet astronauts now on Mir. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; NY Times, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91)
Soviet space program experts announced that the 40-ton Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 would break up and fall to earth in February. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had lost control of the station when it said the authorities would issue a "timely warning" to all countries on whose territory station "parts are likely to fall." Salyut 7 was launched in 1982 and last inhabited in 1986, holding up to six astronauts. The Soviet Union had planned to send a rescue mission with the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran but the Shuttle was delayed. (NY Times, Jan 1/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
NASA held a news briefing designed to show that Space Station Freedom was back on track. NASA Administrator Richard Truly indicated that the final design of the station would be streamlined in weight and electrical power and would rely on robots for repairs. (USA Today, Dec 6/91; W Post, Dec 6/91; W Times, Dec 6/91; AP, Dec 6/91)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
The media reported that the House Appropriations Subcommittee, by a six to three vote, had agreed to cut all but $100 million of the projected $2 billion Space Station budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1991. The $100 million was to be used to close the project and study two alternative space science projects. (W Post, May 16/91; WSJ, May 16/91; W Times, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
According to the press, two members of the House subcommittee that oversees NASA spending, Chairman Bob Traxler, Democrat of Michigan, and ranking minority member Bill Green, Republican of New York, asked NASA Administrator Richard Truly why NASA did not buy a Mir Space Station or other technology from the Soviet Union. NASA replied that the U.S. aerospace industry would not like it. (AP, Oct 25/91; B Sun, Oct 26/91; LA Times, Oct 27/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
NASA planners discovered that despite the problems it encountered, Astro-1 brought back much valuable data on December 10, 1990. However, there was no money in the FY 1992 budget for Astro-2. Instead, NASA appeared to be concentrating on such priorities as the Space Station program. The Astro program is Shuttle-dependent, with the assumption that the Shuttle would provide cheap and reliable space transportation. The Astro program needs to be reexamined. (CSM, Jan 9/91)
The media reported the successful efforts of two Soviet cosmonauts outside the Mir Space Station to replace a damaged antenna. (AP, Jun 25/91; UPI, Jun 25/91)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had made a supplemental agreement to the contract with McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California. The modification included the changes made in Space Station Freedom Program review activities. (NASA Release 91-124)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
The Washington Times carried an article on Baikonur, the rocket workers' town in the Soviet Union founded by the military in the same year as the Cosmodrome, 1955. No permanent residents were registered in Baikonur, known as Leninsk, but the city had 100,000 inhabitants crammed into a 4.5 square mile area. Tables of Soviet "space firsts" and "space endurance records" were included. Another article in the same issue described Soviet efforts to sell or rent space gear, including parts of the orbiting Mir Space Station, to ease the financial situation of the space program.
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
Business, county, and NASA officials met in Reston, Virginia, to announce a new hotline for anyone who wanted to keep the NASA Space Station Program in Reston. The Coalition for Space Station Continuity set up the hotline, following reports that the Texas Congressional delegation urged that NASA move to Houston. (McLean/Great Falls Connection, Apr 18/91)
The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors passed a resolution asking state and federal legislators to block a proposal to move NASA's Space Station program office out of Reston, Virginia. (Fairfax Journal Weekly, Feb 20-21/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator, of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, testified before the House Science Subcommittee that the redesign of Space Station Freedom had limited the scope of the laboratory, eliminating experiments in astronomy, physics, and earth sciences. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, wrote a guest column stressing the importance of the Space Station to manned flight and the opportunity it provided not only for space leadership but also for the development of weightless materials sciences and biotechnology. (Fla Today, Jul 16/91)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 was expected to fall today. Unexpectedly high solar activity in recent years had increased atmospheric drag on the station and speeded its orbital decay. (NY Times, Feb 6/91; USA Today, Feb 6/91; UPI, Feb 6/91)
The media covered the House vote of 240 to 173 overturning the House Appropriations Committee action halting the Space Station program and authorizing $1.9 billion to keep the program going. The role of the White House in pressuring Congress to support the project was stressed. Several articles also commented that the action was a boon to aerospace firms. The importance of the United States maintaining its space leadership and having a permanent presence in space, despite the high costs entailed, also were emphasized. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; WSJ, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; USA Today, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; C Trin, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; Htsvl Tms, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; Birmingham News, Jun 10/91)
NASA program scientist Edward Weiler said in a telephone interview with UPI that an emergency Shuttle mission to replace faulty gyroscopes and solar panels aboard the Hubble Space Telescope was not needed before a flight already set for 1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NASA engineers were perfecting computer control software that would stabilize the telescope if all its gyroscopes were to fail, until a Shuttle repair mission were mounted. (UPI, Aug 23/91)
The media reported that 14 major scientific organizations were joining forces to warn of the "excessive cost" of the planned $30 million Space Station that would "threaten the vitality" of essential scientific research programs and imperil U.S. leadership in world technology. The organizations urged a "balanced" space program but did not call for the Space Station to be killed. (LA Times, Jul 9/91; P Inq, Jul 10/91; W Post, Jul 10/91; NY Times, Jul 10/91; Science, Jul 19/91)
NASA announced the award of an avionics systems engineering and analysis support contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The work was to include work on Space Station Freedom as well as Space Shuttles and advanced spacecraft, manned and unmanned. (NASA Release C91-s)
According to the media, the Bush Administration was pressuring Congress to retain the appropriation for the Space Station. (NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91; USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; UPI, Jun 5/91)
The Soviet bank, Moscow Narodny, financing the May Anglo-Soviet mission aboard the Soviet Mir Space Station, announced that Helen Sharman, a chemist, would be Britain's first astronaut. (AP, Feb 22/91; LA Times, Feb 23/91)
The press reported hearings of the Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation at which NASA Administrator Richard Truly defended NASA against charges by the General Accounting Office (GAO) that it understated the cost of the planned Space Station and its operations through 2027 by at least $34 billion. Truly questioned GAO figures and stated it was time to begin building the station rather than submit it to further study or audit. (W Post, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; WSJ, May 2/91; B Sun, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91; Plain Dealer, May 5/91)
Grumman Corporation announced a cut of 110 more employees at its Space Station Program Support Division in Reston, Virginia. The cuts resulted from NASA's decision to reduce the scope of the Space Station project. (PR Newswire, Mar 13/91; W Times, Mar 14/91; NY Times, Mar 14/91)
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
The media reported that President Bush had informed two senators, Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, both on the Senate space subcommittee, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly that he would actively campaign to reverse the congressional panel's decision to scuttle the Space Station. (AP, May 23/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91)
According to a space publication, NASA's cost estimate for its Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program had increased to about $3 billion, and NASA formally announced that the main ASRM goal was to aid the construction of the Space Station. The ASRM was intended to launch an extra 8,000 pounds of Space Station equipment on each Shuttle flight carrying Space Station hardware. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91)
NASA was considering repairs costing at least $50 million to the Hubble Space Telescope. In addition to the telescope proper, the question was whether to compensate for flaws in three other instruments: two spectrographs and the faint-object camera. Such repairs would involve Costar (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement) and cost $30 million to $40 million, while the telescope repair cost would be $14 million. To test the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water tank at Marshall Space Flight Center would determine whether the work could be accomplished in the estimated 16 hours required. Despite the need for such repairs, Edward Weller (Wiler?), NASA program scientist for the observatory, stressed the achievements the Hubble telescope had made in revealing the universe. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; B Sun, Apr 23/91; Birmingham News, Apr 23/91; AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91)
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)
AP reported that House-Senate legislators agreed to provide $26 billion in 1992 for NASA's planned Space Station. (AP, Sep 26/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 28/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 29/91)
An editorial commended NASA for being more realistic in its revised plans for a Space Station and particularly for decreasing its emphasis on the role of humans in space. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 8/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
The media covered extensively NASA's receiving $2 billion for the planned Space Station in the House budget action but having a new launch system and the National Aerospace Plane cut drastically. The House voted to give NASA 14.3 billion in FY 1992 and the Senate later approved the compromise bill. (UPI, Oct 2/91; AP, Oct 3/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; NY Times, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 3/91; LA Times, Oct 3/91; USA Today, Oct 3/91; CSM, Oct 4/91)
Charles A. Bowsher, comptroller general of the General Accounting Office, estimated that NASA had underestimated by $10 billion the construction cost of the Space Station because it did not include the costs of flying the Shuttle during station construction, developing the crew lifeboat, conducting scientific projects, and installing certain equipment. NASA underestimated operations costs by $24 billion because it omitted Shuttle flight costs, salaries of ground-based personnel, the cost of research, and added electrical power. (AP, Apr 30/91)
Extensive media coverage of experiments performed by the astronauts aboard Atlantis continued. Among such experiments were testing of equipment to be used on the Space Station, such as fiber optic cables to transmit signals, a cooling system, and modifications in controls for computers. Another experiment involved lighting a small fire to learn how flames propagate in the absence of gravity. In addition, a NASA optometrist tested eye drops on himself and astronauts performed treadmill tests and blood experiments. Astronauts commented on the large amount of haze around the Earth, possibly from the Kuwaiti oil field fires or from the volcanic eruptions of Mount Pinatubo. (P Inq, Aug 6/91; NY Times, Aug 6/91; W Times, Aug 6/91; W Post, Aug 6/91; USA Today, Aug 6/91; AP, Aug 6/91; UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Times, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; AP, Aug 7/91; UPI, Aug 7/91; P Inq, Aug 8/91; NY Times, Aug 8/91; W Post, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 8/91; AP, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91; B Sun, Aug 9/91; W Times, Aug 9/91; AP, Aug 9/91; UPI, Aug 9/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that NASA engineers were trying to fix an intermittent power failure in the Hubble Space Telescope affecting one of the two ultraviolet detectors housed in the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph. As a result, some 30 percent of research planned for the spectrograph must be postponed. (B Sun, Sep 4/91; LA Times, Sep 9/91)
AP reported that the Council of Engineers and Scientists Organization, whose member unions represent 80,000 scientists, engineers, technical, and professional staff sent a letter to each senator endorsing the Space Station. (AP, Jul 16/91)
NASA's exhibit at the 39th Paris Air Show, June 13-23, was to feature a full-scale mockup of a Space Station Freedom module. The exhibit would also feature NASA programs Mission to Planet Earth and aeronautics research. (NASA Release 91-47)
According to UPI, an extraordinarily sharp picture of Jupiter taken by the Hubble Space Telescope showed the planet's turbulent atmosphere and the telescope's capabilities. (UPI, May 6/91)
An article in the Washington Post pointed out NASA's policy of spreading out its contracts for the Space Station and other space projects among numerous states, which helped gain the support of congressional figures for NASA funding. (W Post, Jul 16/91)
An article by Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic  discussed arguments by foes of the Space Station and concluded that a bold new initiative in the form of a moon base was a preferable next step in space. (P Inq, Jun 18/91)
The Washington Post cited the Synthesis Group unpublished report stating that although a Space Station in Earth orbit was preferable, if such could not be built in timely fashion and with the desired capabilities, one could consider using the moon as a preparatory environment for a Mars mission. (W Post, May 25/91)
The media carried comments by William B. Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, that if the congressional appropriations process did not restore the cut in the Space Station funding, it would kill the project and signal that the United States "was going out of the manned space business." In addition, some media articles commended Congress for its action or raised serious questions about NASA's new design or its education of the public about the need for a Space Station. (NY Times, May 21/91; AP, May 21/91; B Sun, May 21/91; SP News, May 20-26/91)
An editorial in the Christian Science Monitor commended the "modest, sober plan" of NASA for the revised Space Station, saying that it would enable the United States to make progress in space and should not be judged simply on its cost. (CSM, May 7/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that volunteers in a water taste test at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center had difficulty or were unable to distinguish recycled from regular water. The recycled water came from perspiration collected in a test chamber, and in which the salts, oils, and microorganisms were subsequently removed. The recycling process was designed to be used on the Space Station to minimize need for additional water. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 10/91; W Times, Jul 19/91)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, awarded a $112 million contract to General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc. in San Diego, California, for launch services connected with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). SOHO is part of a cooperative effort among NASA, the European Space Agency, and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science to conduct an examination of the sun and various solar phenomena through launches in 1992 through 1995. (NASA Release C91-m)
A British woman, Helen Sharman, was tentatively selected for the next international space flight with two Soviet cosmonauts to the Mir Space Station. (UPI, Apr 23/91)
Fairfax County Board Chairman Audrey Moore argued that if NASA's Space Station management facility were moved from its Reston, Virginia headquarters, at least half of its highly skilled workers would quit, delaying the Space Station program for months or years. The questioning about the status of the Reston facility resulted from a congressional order to NASA in 1990 that it overhaul the management structure for the Space Station project. (W Post, Mar 14/91)
William B. Lenoir said NASA's manned space flight division must cut expenses by 3 percent each year in the next five years to save $1 billion. The last alternative would be to reduce the number of space flights but that would be "a couple of years away." Later media comments indicated that NASA's budgetary discipline and the slimming down of the Space Station plans appeared to be paying off for NASA in relation to Congress. (AP, Oct 5/91; AvWk, Oct 21/91; W Post, Oct 28/91)
Atlantis made six passes by Soviet Space Station Mir as it prepared to land. The astronauts finished experiments and tested a manual system for chasing down targets in orbit. (P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Times, Apr 10/91; B Sun, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; NY Times, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 10/91; C Trin, Apr 10/91; AP, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91)
An international conference at the University of California San Diego, sponsored by the university's Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, the California Space Institute, and Los Alamos, New Mexico's National Laboratory Center for National Security Studies expressed concern over the rising cost of space exploration and the difficulty of justifying such costly ventures as sending humans to Mars. Roger Bonnet, chief scientist of the European Space Agency, which cooperates with the United States on the Space Station, regretted American hesitations on the Space Station. (LA Times, Jan 12/91)
NASA administrator Richard H. Truly announced additional actions to implement the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. Truly briefed the National Space Council on January 11 on the status of NASA's review. NASA decided as follows: Space science would remain NASA's priority and NASA would implement the existing strategic plan, as recommended by the advisory committee. In response to the committee's recommendation, NASA planned to form a special task force with the Department of Defense to assess over the next two months development of an evolutionary heavy-lift launch vehicle. Space Station Freedom restructuring activities, centering on life sciences on microgravity research and applications, conducted in concert with international partners, would be extended to incorporate the committee's recommendations. NASA would move with the Office of Personnel Management to structure a personnel management system that recognizes NASA's special needs to attract and retain top-flight scientists, engineers, and other specialists.
Robert Brown and Riccardo Giacconi of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore wrote an article favoring NASA's shift toward a more balanced program of small, intermediate, and large missions. The reason was that important research goals must be pursued with appropriate tools, including large spacecraft. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope, which was proving so valuable, needed a larger spacecraft as was to be the case with the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility under development. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
According to the media, in a General Accounting Office (GAO) report to be submitted to Congress, NASA underestimated the cost of building the redesigned Space Station by $10 billion and the cost of operating it through the year 2027 by about $24 billion. GAO is to submit the report, its first since the Space Station restructuring, to the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation. Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher in the report questioned the cost value because only one of the original eight Space Station uses, that of a research outpost, was being met. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
Eugene Kranz, Director of the Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) at Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the establishment of a Space Station Mission Operation Project Office within MOD. The new office, headed by Charles R. Lewis, was to have responsibility for the development and implementation of Space Station Freedom flight operations. (NASA Release 91-35)
NASA announced that contrary to a news report that appeared, NASA was not planning a mission to visit the Hubble Space Telescope any earlier than late 1993. The science community had discussed this possibility because of some observed erratic behavior of the Hubble in one of the maneuvering gyros. Alternative servicing strategies were being evaluated. The announcement contradicted a Washington Post article. (NASA Release 91-121; W Post, Jul 31/91; AP, Jul 31/91; UPI, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91; P Inq, Aug 1/91; USA Today, Aug 1/91)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
James R. Thompson, NASA Deputy Administrator, was quoted as praising NASA's preeminence in space and aeronautics technology but admitting its recent difficulties. In view of these, Thompson indicated he thought NASA should slow its push for the Space Station and instead adapt the Space Shuttle to fly longer missions to demonstrate why a Space Station would be valuable.  (Birmingham News, Aug 29/91)
An alert ground controller noticed that the Progress-7 cargo module was on a collision course with Soviet Space Station Mir and deflected the module. The two cosmonauts succeeded in docking the module and obtaining the food supplies. (AP, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 29/91; W Post, Mar 29/91)
The Houston Chronicle interviewed a number of experts concerning NASA's Space Station redesign, based on a congressional instruction that the design be reviewed. The consensus was that as much of the existing design would be kept as possible, with some experts fearing that the changes may be too timid. (H Chron, Jan 27/91)
UPI reported that ground had been broken for the $70 million Space Center Houston being built just outside Johnson Space Center. The center is to be an "experience center" providing visitors with a sense of daily Space Station life. (UPI, May 28/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, awarded Metric Constructors, Inc., of Tampa, a $56,215,000 contract to build the Space Station Processing Facility. The 457,000-square-foot facility was to contain preflight and processing points for Space Station Freedom as well as 63,000 square feet of dedicated payload processing space. (NASA Release C91-h)
An internal memorandum signed by four NASA officials as well as interviews with staff at the Reston, Virginia, facility indicated a strong opinion that moving the headquarters now would disrupt development of the $30 billion Space Station. At a recent meeting three-quarters of NASA staff were said to oppose a move. Despite this fact, NASA Assistant Administrator William B. Lenoir was said to have decided to recommend moving the headquarters. (H Chron, Apr 13/91)
NASA announced that its Galileo spacecraft would turn and fire its on-board thrusters on July 2 to set its course for an encounter with the asteroid Gaspra in October 1991. This would be the first flyby of an asteroid. (NASA Release 91-99)
The Huntsville Times reported that Boeing's top space scientist, Harvey Willenberg, who had returned from a trip to the Soviet Union, was convinced from the Mir experiments he saw that NASA needed to build Space Station Freedom. The experiments in the area of microgravity were especially impressive. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 11/91)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
Prior to the House vote, Thomas M. Donahue, Professor of Planetary Science at the University of Michigan, wrote an article published in the Christian Science Monitor. In it he sharply criticized NASA for making the Space Station its priority rather than scientific inquiry and urged Congress not to support the Space Station. CSM, Jun 7/91)
According to the Washington Post, the Hubble Space Telescope discovered evidence that dying stars can rejuvenate themselves when they collide with each other. The violent collision enables them to be reborn as a younger, brighter star. (W Post, Aug 22/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91)
The media reported the concern of Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station that the station and the space program in general might be sold because of Russia's economic plight. The role of the new Soviet republics with regard to space was also undetermined. Subsequently, Yuri Semyonov, general designer of the Energia team that managed Mir, said according to Tass, that the Space Station would remain the property of his collective. (NY Times, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 7/91; P Inq, Sep 8/91; B Sun, Sep 8/91; AP, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91)
Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, announced that the Space Studies Board has long opposed justifying Space Station Freedom solely on scientific merit. However, the Board recognizes, and NASA concurs, that "there are national considerations for building a Space Station other than scientific research." Congress and NASA decided to build the Station in an evolutionary way so that ultimately it would meet the principal scientific research requirements intended. The Station represents a significant part of the long-term goals for the civil space program set by the President. NASA was confident that this was the time to proceed. (NASA Editors' Note N91-17)
Nature magazine contained an article by its associate editor David Lindley that was extremely laudatory of the findings of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its flaws. He referred specifically to data obtained from the two spectrometers, designed to operate primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths to which the Earth's atmosphere is opaque. (Nature, Jun 6/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
The Los Angeles Times reported that in order to minimize the impact on California's economy of job losses in the aerospace industry, Governor Pete Wilson sent letters to Congress supporting the B-2 bomber and NASA's Space Station project. (LA Times, Sep 1/91)
The Bush Administration proposed $14.7 billion for NASA for FY1972, an increase of $1.2 billion. The proposal would allow starting a new family of rockets to lift heavy payloads. The budget would also authorize NASA and the Air Force to spend $175 million each to develop a new launching system by the end of the 1990s. The Administration also proposed almost $2 billion to continue development of a Space Station and almost $1 billion for NASA's "Mission to Planet Earth" as part of the study of global environmental change. (NY Times, Feb 5/91; USA Today, Feb 5/91; WSJ, Feb 5/91; UPI, Feb 4/91; UPI, Feb 5/91; Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
Robert F. Sekerka, Dean of the College of Science at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh and Chair of the Committee on Microgravity Research of the Space Studies Board, wrote an article in the Wall Street Journal sharply criticizing the appropriation for the Space Station. He questioned the purpose of the Space Station and its cost-effectiveness. (WSJ, Jun 10/91)
The Washington Post, quoting Edward Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble Space Telescope scientist, said that a computer programming error caused the Hubble to shut itself down temporarily on December 9. The problem was not considered serious and should result in losing only two days of scientific observations. NASA announced on December 12 that the Hubble resumed science data collection as of that morning and returned safely from its standby condition or safe mode, a capability built into all NASA spacecraft. In connection with the Hubble, the Baltimore Sun reported a problem with its spectrograph, which NASA believed it solved by leaving the power supply units for both ultraviolet detectors on all the time. (W Post, Dec 11/91; UPI, Dec 11/91; AP, Dec 11/91; W Times, Dec 12/91; NASA Release 91-204; C Trin, Dec 12/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; B Sun, Dec 13/91)
The press reported on Bush administration efforts to save Space Station Freedom in the light of actions of the House Appropriations Committee as well as the protests of participating nations that were angered at Congressional action, such as Japan, Canada, and the European Space Agency. (B Sun, Jun 3/91; W Post, Jun 3/91)
Red Star announced that pieces of the Soviet 40-ton Salyut 7 Space Station and the attached Cosmos-1686 cargo ferry will fall to Earth on February 6 or 7. The expected location of the fall site was not known. (LA Times, Feb 1/91; AP, Feb 2/91; C Trin, Feb 3/91; W Times, Feb 4/91)
UPI reported that workers at Baikonur Cosmodrome had rolled a Soyuz TM-12 rocket into place to take two Soviet cosmonauts and a British woman to the Mir Space Station in a commercial mission. (UPI, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, Boeing donated $300,000 on September 26 toward building a full-size mockup of Space Station Freedom at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
NASA announced that the Italian Space Agency (ASI) would design and develop two Mini Pressurized Logistics Modules for Space Station Freedom under a memorandum of understanding signed with NASA in Washington. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly signed on behalf of NASA and Luciano Guerriero, President of ASI, signed on its behalf. The two agencies also agreed to work toward expanding their relationship, including the provision of a Mini Laboratory. (NASA Release 91-200)
The subcommittee of NASA's Office of Astronautics and Exploration Technology said the redesign of the Space Station would still enable all proposed experiments to be handled. However, two major experiments might not be able to be conducted simultaneously because of power limitations. (Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
An interview featured Lawrence Ross, Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, a 30-year-old facility with 3,000 civil servants. Priorities at Lewis include research in propulsion, electric power generation, and advanced communications. Ross answered various questions about the Space Station, solar dynamic power systems, nuclear propulsion research, the continuing need for maintenance funds, and the role of Lewis in the National Aerospace Plane program. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
The National Research Council in its report The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, after two years of study recommended that more modest instruments than the Hubble Space Telescope and only a few large observatories be developed. The next instrument, the $617 million Gamma Ray Observatory, was to be launched in April 1991. During the 1990s, of more than 50 proposals made, the report endorsed only four: the $1.3 billion Space Infrared Telescope Facility; an $80 million infrared-optimized telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii; the $115 million Millimeter Array, a group of telescopes to cover star-forming regions and galaxies; and a $55 million optical telescope to operate in the Southern Hemisphere. The report recommended several more modest programs including the $230 million Stratospheric Observatory for Far-Infrared Astronomy; the $250 million Astrometric Interferometry Mission to map positions of celestial bodies more precisely; the $15 million Large Earth-based Solar Telescope; and a $70 million spacecraft dedicated to the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopy Explorer satellite and increasing to five the Explorer satellites to be launched on rockets. (UPI, Mar 19/91; W Post, Mar 20/91; W Times, Mar 20/91; NY Times, Mar 20/91; LA Times, Mar 20/91; B Sun, Mar 24/91)
NASA announced the selection of Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, to provide institutional and programmatic support services for Space Station Freedom Program and Operations Office, Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release C91-cc)
In an article written for the Houston Post, Republican Congressman Jack Fields strongly advocated Senate support of NASA's Space Station. Referring to various uses of the Space Station program in the fields of medicine, industrial production, and basic science, he stressed the United States commitment to space exploration. (H Post, Jun 20/91)
NASA announced that as part of the agreement between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev during the July 30-31 Summit in Moscow, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had agreed to expand space cooperation. This is to consist of flying a U.S. astronaut on a long-duration Soviet Space Station Mir mission and a Soviet cosmonaut on a U.S. Space Shuttle mission, increasing cooperation in monitoring the global environment from space, and initiating annual consultations between the two governments on civil space issues. (NASA Release 91-122; P Inq, Aug 1/91; NY Times, Aug 1/91; AP, Aug 1/91; W Post, Aug 1/91)
The media reported on NASA's plans to install corrective lenses on the Hubble Space Telescope in order to correct the faulty lens and at the same time to make other repairs. Details remained to be announced. (AP, Jul 2/91; NY Times, Jul 3/91; W Times, Jul 3/91)
The Senate on July 17 voted 64 to 35 to approve President Bush's $2.03 million request for the Space Station in the new fiscal year, $100 million more than the House appropriated. (W Post, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; UPI, Jul 18/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center asked for proposals for a follow-on system to its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). The system was to be used to manage data relating to payloads for Space Shuttles and ultimately for the Space Station. The new system was to include a relational data base management subsystem, a project management subsystem, a technical documentation subsystem, and a page printing subsystem and covers a 10-year period. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle stressed the importance of US space activities, including the fact that "A permanent U.S. Space Station is vital to our future technological development and economic prosperity." (H Chron, Mar 24/91)
Resigning astronaut Dr. William F. Fisher warned that the planned $37 billion NASA Space Station could be canceled if its redesign is superficial. He stated that the Space Station needed total rethinking, adding that both Congress and a White House panel also indicated such a need. (NY Times, Jan 9/91)
The Chicago Tribune carried an article dealing with the boon that the blurred vision of the Hubble Space Telescope was proving to researchers. Some dozen teams of scientists took Hubble data and using their computer enhancement programs produced clearer images. In the process they have raised their own profiles in a sometimes obscure research field. (C Trin, Dec 15/91)
An editorial in a trade journal commended Rockwell International for completing Space Shuttle Endeavour on time and under budget, stating that NASA should expect the same standards of performance with regard to the Space Station. (SP News, May 6-12/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)
The press cited concern over "millions of pieces of trash zooming around in space" and the fear that they might hit the Hubbell Space Telescope or some orbiting astronauts. The concern caused work on new debris-monitoring devices and a system to warn astronauts of impending collisions with space junk so they could take evasive action. The U.S. Space Command's space surveillance network already kept track of about 6,700 pieces of larger litter at least four inches in diameter that might damage a Space Station. (AP, May 10/91; W Times, May 24/91)
The Government Accounting Office issued a study criticizing NASA's system of testing spacecraft before launching. It called the system poorly organized with testing practices varying from one center to another because NASA lacked uniform policies. The study dealt with the Hubble Space Telescope and the weather satellites, as well as Space Shuttles. (AP, Sep 23/91; UPI, Sep 23/91; LA Times, Sep 23/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; WSJ, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
In their column, Jack Anderson and Dale van Atta commented on the strong efforts of Texas congressmen to have NASA move Space Station Freedom headquarters from Reston, Virginia to Houston. The headquarters were moved from Houston to Reston in 1987. The cost of such a move would be at least $26 million, and it would probably delay NASA's program at least a year. (W Post, Mar 12/91)
Grumman Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,900 jobs by the end of 1991. The major cause was reduced US government defense spending, which included reductions in NASA's budget, leading to a scaling down of Grumman's Space Station Support Division. (AP, Apr 2/91)
According to UPI, reporting from Soviet television, a small satellite launched from Mir Space Station had not operated since it was lifted one week previously. (UPI, Jun 23/91)
UPI quoted Krasnaya Zvesda (Red Star), the official Soviet armed forces daily, as saying that the Soviet Union would cancel one manned space mission, launch another without a flight engineer, and leave a cosmonaut on the Mir Space Station beyond his planned six-month stay to save money. (UPI, Jul 18/91)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had completed one year of operation on April 25. Joseph H. Rothenberg, Associate Director of Flight Projects for Hubble Space Telescope at Goddard, summarized the Hubble's achievements. These included the taking of various images and presentation of data from observations at key scientific meetings. Scientists planned to compensate for the spherical aberration by modifying the telescope's replacement instruments. These included the placement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II in 1993 and further servicing plans during astronaut space walks. (NASA Release - Hubble Space Telescope; LA Times, Apr 29/91)
AP reported that astronaut John Blaha, commander of the Atlantis mission, said he used the post-flight news conference to express his views on the space program and the importance of the Space Station, after reading criticism of the latter. (AP, Aug 21/91)
The Hubble Space Telescope proved more useful than expected despite the flaw in its mirror. The congressional appropriation of an additional $30 million in NASA's 1991 budget allowed some repairs to be made from the ground using computer processing and radio control. NASA plans additional repairs by astronauts in 1993, attaching new mirrors to the outside of the telescope. (W Times, Apr 11/91)
A space publication printed an adapted version of Senator Dale Bumpers' (Democrat from Arkansas) speech when he introduced legislation in July to cut funding on the NASA Space Station drastically. He favored solving U.S. problems on the ground, not in space. The same issue carried remarks of Senator Jim Sasser (Democrat from Tennessee) that the Space Station was something the United States could not afford. Furthermore, the magazine carried an interview with Jim Beggs, chairman of Spacehab Inc. and former NASA administrator, concerning his organization's relationship to NASA. (SP News, Sep 9-15/91)
According to the press, the Japanese government was angry that its participation in the proposed Space Station was threatened by congressional budget cuts. Reportedly, it issued a warning that it might refuse to contribute to U.S.-led major scientific projects in the future unless plans to build the Space Station remain intact. (NYT, May 28/91; UPI, May 28/91)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
Soviet media reported that two Soviet cosmonauts spent six hours on a spacewalk outside their Mir Space Station, completing the installation of two telescopic booms that would enable the transfer of solar batteries from one part of the Space Station to another. They also installed laser reflectors that could be used as beacons for unmanned space ferries and Space Shuttles arriving at Mir. (AP, Jan 26/91)
NASA's scaled-back design for Space Station Freedom was to be considered at a National Space Council meeting at the White House. The National Space Council members include members of the Cabinet, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, the White House Chief of Staff, the presidential science adviser, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (W Post, Mar 18/91)
Representative Barbara Boxer, Democrat from California, chair of the House Government Operations subcommittee on government activities and transportation, announced a hearing about the Space Station. Boxer said the General Accounting Office report and the analysis of her staff revealed "astronomical" differences between NASA cost estimates for the Space Station and "more objective, independent analyses." (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)
In an editorial entitled "Fiscal Realism at NASA," NASA was commended for its reported readiness to stress smaller, less costly missions. In this connection, the paper believed that Space Station Freedom should be scrapped as well as the Earth Observing System platforms. (CSM, Oct 1/91)
In an article on the budget proces, the Christian Science Monitor stated that despite it being a Bush Administration priority, the Space Station may go in the budget because of the deal to bring the federal deficit under control. (CSM, May 31/91)
An article in Congressional Quarterly described the careful trimming of various programs performed by Senator Barbara Mikulski in order to provide sufficient funds for the Space Station. (Congressional Quarterly, Jul 13/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center announced the award to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, of a modification to the Space Station Freedom Schedule A contract. Schedule A provided hardware components for the Space Station and the modification will encompass the Integration, Test, and Verification Environment and Ada Compiler. (NASA Release C91-pp)
Nationally syndicated economics columnist Warren Brookes questioned the administration's efforts to rescue NASA's Space Station and the new space program represented by the National Aerospace Plane. Brookes stated that possibly national security concerns justified both these programs but their economic justification was dubious. (W Times, May 29/91)
University of Colorado astronomer Jack Brandt talked of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its fuzzy focusing. Discoveries included proof that Pluto has a moon and dramatic photographs of a star spewing hot gases during its birth in the Orion constellation. (W Times, Feb 14/91)
Salyut 7, the Soviet Space Station, crashed into Earth's atmosphere near Argentina's border with Chile. Powered by solar energy and chemical batteries, it contained no nuclear fuel or other dangerous substances. (P Inq, Feb 7/91; AP, Feb 7/91; UPI, Feb 7/91; W Times, Feb 8/91; NY Times, Feb 8/91; UPI, Feb 8/91; AP. Feb 8/91; C Trin, Feb 8/91)
An article in the Washington Post commented that the House Appropriations Committee's decision to delete funding for NASA's Space Station from the 1992 budget represented a setback for a number of defense and space-related contractor companies that were counting on the project. (W Post, Jun 6/91)
George Rhee, an astronomer at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, in an article in Nature, discussed the observed rate at which space is expanding in all directions, known as the Hubble constant. Rhee stated that new measurement had produced the relatively low value of 50 kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light-years) for the Hubble constant, agreeing with the estimate of Allan R. Sandage of the Carnegie Institution's observatories in Pasadena, California. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
The media reported on Administration efforts to have the elimination of funding for the Space Station reversed in the House of Representatives. In this connection, the New York Times carried a major editorial urging that the Space Station not be funded. In response to that editorial, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter of support for the Space Station from Thomas Stafford, Chairman of the Synthesis Group, to Representative George Brown, Chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (USA Today, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; NASA Release N91-42; WSJ, Jun 6/91; CSM, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
NASA scientists connected with the Hubble Space Telescope correction project were quoted with reference to the amount of work to be done. The Hubble science team, subject to top-level NASA approval, was to build a second generation Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WFPC) with only four instead of eight of the powerful electronic light detectors known as charge-coupled devices (CCDs). The proposed change took account of tight money and time pressures but meant that the photographic operation might take 10 to 20 percent longer, according to Ed Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble scientist. The extent of repairs to be made would be decided by the end of 1991 but probably would involve Shuttle astronauts making three or four spacewalks of at least six hours each. (W Post, Oct 20/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston announced the award of a contract to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, modifying the Space Station Freedom Program Integration Support (Schedule B) contract. Schedule B involved the integration of Space Station components. (NASA Release C91-nn)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA personnel were warning elected officials across the country that the killing of the Space Station would mean lost jobs in their districts. (LA Times, May 25/91)
UPI reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had detected gas clouds that appear to be from the universe's early day much nearer Earth than previously thought possible. NASA also released pictures taken by Hubble of an unusual jet spouting from a massive, unstable star called Eta Carinae, which upset existing ideas about how the star spewed out matter. (UPI, May 17/91)
A lengthy article discussed the work of Dr. Allan R. Sandage, a former assistant of Edwin P. Hubble and his heir. Like Hubble, Sandage is an observational cosmologist concerned with investigating the galaxies and the implications of the expanding universe. Using the Carnegie Institution, which has telescopes at Mount Wilson, as his base, he was working on a two-volume atlas of galaxies. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
In response to the House-Senate Conference report on the FY 1992 budget, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA was very grateful for the funding for Space Station Freedom. However, it was disappointed that the total NASA appropriation did not keep up with inflation. (NASA Release 91-158)
NASA selected Ball Corporation of Muncie, Indiana, to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. (C Trin, Apr 18/91)
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)
NASA announced that it recently signed an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) to cooperate in developing the Cassini spacecraft to study Saturn. The Cassini spacecraft would consist of the Saturn Orbiter provided by NASA and the Huygens Probe System provided by ESA. It was currently scheduled for launch by NASA on a Titan IV/Centaur vehicle in April 1996. NASA would provide overall Cassini mission operations and ESA will support probe operations. The flight from launch to Saturn orbital insertion requires approximately seven years; once there, the mission baseline lifetime is four years. (NASA Release 91-1)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement following action by the House of Representatives to continue the development of Space Station Freedom. Truly commended the bipartisan vote in the House, expressed his confidence that Freedom would win support in the Senate, and expressed his commitment to shape the final NASA FY 1992 budget in a way that balanced the various research and project areas. (NASA Release 91-88)
The media carried the discovery, announced on August 23, by three astronomers, Donald P. Schneider of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Maarten Schmidt of the California Institute of Technology, and James E. Gunn of Princeton University of the oldest and most distant object yet found, a 900 million year-old quasar. The discovery resulted from the use of a supersensitive digital camera, developed by Gunn for the Hubble telescope. The camera was attached to Mount Palomar's Hale telescope and special filters were used. (B Sun, Aug 26/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91)
According to AP, the Hubble Space Telescope presents astrophysicists with a mystery: the existence of hydrogen clouds in space that should have dissipated billions of years ago. According to Ed Weiler, NASA's space telescope program manager, this was Hubble's most significant finding to date. (AP, Oct 23/91)
Tass announced that the first British astronaut and two Soviet cosmonauts had returned safely from Mir Space Station, landing on the steppes of Kazakhstan. Soviet space officials considered British participation valuable in terms of Soviet-British cooperation, although commercially the mission failed to gain British sponsorship. (UPI, May 27/91)
NASA broke ground at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a $56.2 million facility to prepare pieces of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Mar 26/91; USA Today, Mar 27/91; W Times, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; CSM, Mar 28/91)
The newspaper summarized the controversy over the revised NASA plans for Space Station Freedom between NASA and the National  Research Council, which maintained that the scaling back had gone too far to be valuable. (San Jose Mercury-News, Apr 2/91)
The Washington Post reported on growing congressional hesitations about supporting NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program. Legislators recently realized the mission would cost almost as much as the Space Station although it would carry only robots, not people. The Senate recommended cutting $50 million from the administration's 1992 Earth Observing System (EOS) budget request. The EOS, which would involve a series of large, sophisticated satellites, is to be the centerpiece of the mission. The House cut $145 million from the proposed budget request. Meanwhile, a panel of aerospace experts is reviewing the EOS engineering design and posing difficult questions. (W Post, Aug 9/91)
Time published an interview with NASA Administrator Richard Truly in which various questions were asked about the Space Station. Truly justified proposed expenditures by stressing the payoff in such areas as environmental control, life-support research, power generation, and health care technologies as well as the discoveries themselves. He also stated that Mission to Planet Earth was poorly understood but promised "unbelievable benefits." (Time, Jul 1/91)
A columnist compared NASA's cutting the plans and cost for the Space Station at congressional request with proposed programs of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). Whereas NASA cut its projections, to the point that some questioned the viability of the result, SDI appeared to have an undiminished appetite for funds. (LA Times, Apr 21/91)
An article on the Hubble Space Telescope commented that despite its flawed main mirror, the teamwork of the Hubble operational team combined with elaborate computer processing had enabled a rich scientific harvest. (CSM, Feb 20/91)
The press reported the House Appropriations Committee action voting to kill NASA's Space Station and ignoring a White House veto threat in that regard. (W Post, Jun 4/91; B Sun, Jun 4/91; USA Today, Jun 4/91; W Times, Jun 4/91; P Inq, Jun 4/91; WSJ, Jun 4/91; AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; SP News, Jun 3-9/91; LA Times, Jun 4/91)
An article by S. Fred Singer, guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, where he is completing a book on space policy, discussed the Space Station and the Stafford committee report. He advocated Martian moon exploration as NASA's best solution. (H Post, Jun 20/91; W Times, Jun 25/91)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
Daniel S. Greenberg, editor of Science and Government Report, a Washington newsletter, questioned the redesigned Space Station and expenditures to date on the station, citing the views of the Space Studies Board of the National Academy of Sciences. (P Inq, Apr 3/91)
NASA announced that the University of Tennessee-Calspan's Center for Advanced Space Propulsion (CASP), Tullahoma, had selected three firms for the launch and recovery of the unmanned, Earth-orbital Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET) space system. Space Industries, Inc., Houston, would be responsible for payload integration, orbital operations, and recovery system and services; Space Services, Inc., Houston, would be in charge of the launch vehicle and services; and Westinghouse Electric Company, Millersville, Maryland, would supervise systems engineering and the service module. The initial funding for COMET in 1991 was $10.5 million. (NASA Release 91-14)
A space journal editorial advocated that the Space Station be judged by Congress on its own merits and that space exploration was also a social need, medically, environmentally, and agriculturally. NASA did what Congress requested and the committee needed to explain its failure to approve the revised Space Station plans. (AvWk, May 27/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA researchers produced various vegetables in their imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The experiment, designed to prepare for Space Station existence, could not, however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Times, Aug 18/91)
Two Soviet cosmonauts who were running low on food and water left Space Station Mir in their Soyuz TM-11 capsule and flew to the port of their astrophysics lab, Kvant. Their cargo ship, Progress M-7, had failed twice to dock with Kvant. They linked their capsule with the port when the balky antenna was located. Another attempt will be made to attach Progress to Mir. (AP, Mar 26/91; W Times, Mar 27/91)
NASA engineers studied a tiny crack on the hinge mechanism of Shuttle Atlantis but planned to go ahead with a launch in April. Atlantis was scheduled to ferry into orbit the Gamma Ray Observatory, a Hubble Space Telescope-class astronomical instrument built to study extremely high energy radiation from deep space. (NASA Release, "STS-37 Mission Advisory"; UPI, Mar 6/91)
According to the Washington Post, new findings of astronomers tended to indicate that the universe was both smaller and younger than previously thought. The result, if the Hubble Space Telescope should be able to provide accurate readings on the matter, might prove that the calculations of the Hubble constant (regarding the age and size of the universe) needed to be revised. (W Post, Sep 30/91)
NASA General Counsel Edward Frankle announced that Johnson Space Center's Leo Monford was NASA's Inventor of the Year. The award, to be presented March 28, was for a docking alignment system called Targeting and Reflective Alignment Concept, or TRAC. Used in combination with another of Monford's inventions, a Magnetic End Effector, it could change the shape of future robot arms, satellites, and Space Stations.
An editorial in a space journal commented on the work of cosmonauts in the Soviet Mir Space Station who are conducting advanced materials and fluids experiments in at least five processing systems. In addition, Soviet engineers were preparing several evolutionary unmanned materials spacecraft that would provide Soviet scientists more processing time in unmanned spacecraft than their US counterparts. Whereas these Soviet facilities presented opportunities for use by American researchers for experimental purposes, which they were doing increasingly, a challenge was also presented to the United States. NASA bureaucracy and deficiencies in the US microgravity program, for example, resulted in it taking some researchers two years to book commercial processing flights on the Shuttle. Although NASA planned microgravity budget increases from $125 million in FY 1992 to $225 million in FY 1995, this would require White House and congressional support. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for NASA's office of Space Systems Development, met with all staff at the Reston, Virginia Space Station Freedom office. He said NASA intended to maintain a strong and effective team at Reston during the Space Station Freedom development period. (NASA Release 91-192; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 15/91; W Post, Nov 16/91; Washington Technology, Nov 21/91)
A space publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard Truly would forgo attendance at the 1991 Paris Air Show in order to remain in Washington to keep close watch on the congressional fight to keep the Space Station appropriation in the budget. In an editorial in the same journal, it was stated that maintaining the Space Station "at the cost of nearly everything else NASA does would be a major mistake." Subsequently, an editorial in the San Jose Mercury News expressed similar concern that NASA's other important programs would be sacrificed for the sake of the Space Station. (SP News, Jun 10-16/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 11/91)
Stephanie E. Meyers, Director of the Office of Commercial Space Transportation in the Office of Transportation, set forth the role of her office and the goals for commercial space. She saw the goals as the creation of space and ground systems essential to space operations in low Earth orbit. These ground systems needed to be adequate to support launches. Second, there must be government-owned and privately-owned launch vehicles to carry freight and passengers to the Space Station. In addition, commercial space companies faced obstacles in pursuing business in this very competitive industry and fair-trade relationships needed to be established. (Washington Technology, Dec 19/91)
The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council stated that a smaller, simpler new design for NASA's Space Station did not meet the basic research requirements for which it was to be built. This development came as NASA was preparing to solicit Congress for its annual funding and when the European Space Agency and other international partners had accepted NASA's new plan. (W Post, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91; B Sun, Mar 16/91; NY Times, Mar 16/91; C Trin, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled the most detailed images of Mars ever taken. Scientists said the telescope made possible a long-term program to monitor seasonal climate and surface changes on Mars that previously had been impossible. According to the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore, the images revealed Martian features as small as 31 miles across. (W Post, Mar 18/91; UPI, Mar 18/91; CSM, Mar 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that a Soviet spacecraft carrying supplies for the two cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station almost collided with the station during a docking attempt. (AP, Apr 12/91; C Trin, Apr 14/91)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, NASA's Advisory Council met following the House of Representatives vote to discuss plans for the Space Station and how to put the "A" for aeronautics back into NASA. Edward Starke Jr., chairman of the ad hoc committee on the High Speed Research Program reported on plans for a new supersonic jet to be used by the commercial aviation industry. (Htsvl Tms, Jun 8/91)
Douglas Birch authored a feature article on the Hubble telescope, its findings and its limitations because of the flawed main mirror. Reportedly, the Hubble repair mission is to occur in November or December 1993. Astronomers were also concerned about the telescope's age in terms of its effectiveness. Much of Birch's article centered on an interview with Douglas Duncan, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Institute on the campus of Johns Hopkins University, who used the Hubble telescope spectrograph data extensively. (B Sun Magazine, Oct 20/91)
The House of Representatives voted to authorize NASA to spend $14.9 billion in the next fiscal year, about $500 billion less than President Bush had requested. The approval included the full $2 billion Bush sought for Space Station Freedom. Concurrently, the House directed the National Academy of Sciences to study whether the goals of the Space Station could be achieved more cheaply by other means. (W Post, May 3/91; W Times, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91
The press carried accounts of administration statements, led by Vice President Dan Quayle, vowing to fight to save the Space Station despite the Appropriations Subcommittee action. (P Inq, May 17/91; W Post, May 17/91; B Sun, May 17/91; AP, May 17/91; UPI, May 17/91)
In an article entitled "Freedom's Wobbly Flight," Mark L. Goldstein criticized NASA's large spending on the Space Station at the expense of other NASA programs. He gave a history of the Freedom program, its costs, and its relationship to Congress as well as the criticisms by the scientific community. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
PR Newswire reported that engineers from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company would meet with representatives of NASA and its international partners from July 8 to 25 to review changes to the basic design of Space Station Freedom. Discussion is to center on Work Package 2 dealing with such factors as the propulsion assembly, resource node design, external thermal control, data management, communication and tracking, extravehicular systems and guidance, and navigation and control systems. (PR Newswire, Jul 8/91)
