Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), an international team of astronomers took a major step in redetermining the expansion rate of the universe. This rate, known as the Hubble Constant, is one of two critical numbers needed for making a precise determination of the size and age of the universe. The Constant is an estimate of the rate at which the universe is expanding and is expressed in kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light years). The results were reported by Drs. F. Duccio Macchetto, Nino Panagia and Abhijit Saha of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland; Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Institute of Washington; and Gustav Tammann of the University of Basel, Switzerland, at the internationl workshop "Science with the Hubble Space Telescope," held in Sardinia, Italy, June 29 through July 9, 1992. (NASA Release 92-97)
A newspaper reported that three NASA aquanauts submerged since May 6, 1992, in a research station 30 feet below the surface of Emerald Lagoon, Florida were doing well but missed sunshine and their family members. The exercise was part of preparation for months-long stays aboard space station Freedom. (USA Today, May 22/92)
A Russian-French crew docked with the Space Station Mir during the first of several joint missions intended to strengthen both countries' space programs. While aboard Mir, the crew was scheduled to conduct several experiments, including one into the chemistry of urine and saliva in weightlessness. They also would test vibrations and pressure on the human body. (AP, Jul 29/92)
At the Asia-Pacific International Space Year Conference in Tokyo, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Shatalov called for strengthened space monitoring to determine compliance of major military powers with strategic nuclear arms reduction treaties. Shatalov said such collaboration in space also would help uncover possible efforts by smaller countries to develop nuclear weapons. Japan announced a plan to allow Southeast Asian countries to use a module that will be built onto the future international space station for scientific experiments in orbit. (UPI, Nov 16/92)
NASA administrator Daniel Goldin announced in a number of recent speeches the first major reforms resulting from the internal review of NASA programs he had ordered. The Earth Observing System would be streamlined again, and incentives to Space Station Freedom contractors might be pooled to assure that they worked as a team. The reforms were designed to make U.S. civil space programs better, faster, and cheaper. Money saved would be applied to new missions using small spacecraft. (AvWk, Sept 28/92; Science, Oct 2/92)
Many scientists, concerned that there might not be enough money for basic research, question the wisdom of spending huge sums on projects such as the Space Station. Yet, research shows that the economic benefits of NASA's programs are greater than generally recognized. In 1987, NASA's procurement budget generated $17,800 million in total industry sales, had a "multiplier effect" on the economy of 2.1 million people, created 209,000 private-sector jobs and $2,900 million in business profits, and generated $5,600 million in federal, state and local government tax revenues. Furthermore, these benefits were widely distributed throughout the country. (Nature, Jan 9/92)
NASA announced that an exotic mix of materials and equipment would be exposed to the unique conditions of microgravity during Space Shuttle Columbia's 13-day mission scheduled for June 1992. The flight would be NASA's longest Shuttle mission and was the first of a series of missions leading to 90-day assignments aboard the planned Space Station Freedom. Astronaut Bonnie Dunbar and three scientists were scheduled spend most of their time in the pressurized Spacelab module in Columbia's cargo bay. (USA Today, May 27/92)
At a press conference of the 179th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Atlanta, astronomers reported that recent ultraviolet observations with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) suggest that what were thought to be randomly distributed, nearby primordial clouds of hydrogen may actually be associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 92-4)
NASA's funding remained flat as Congressional appropriations committees completed work on NASA's 1993 budget. Although some high-profile programs such as the Space Station and a  constellation of environmental monitoring satellites emerged virtually unscathed, newer or less visible efforts suffered setbacks. An advanced series of tracking satellites, robotic missions to the moon, and a new generation of launchers were among the efforts put on hold for at least the next year. Spending on space research and technology was reduced by 13 percent. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
It was reported that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was studying aurorae on the giant planet Jupiter. The HST made observations of Jupiter over a four-day period when ESA/NASA Ulysses spacecraft swung by the giant planet. While passing Jupiter, Ulysses made measurements of Jupiter's powerful magnetic field and the flow of subatomic particles along magnetic field lines. Simultaneously, HST was looking at aurorae, one visual manifestation of these electrical fireworks. These joint observations provided a unique opportunity to combine ultraviolet images and spectra with information on particles and fields. By studying the activity of Jupiter's aurorae, astronomers hoped to learn more about the dynamics of Jupiter's immense magnetic field, the structure of the giant planet's upper atmosphere, the effects of aurora on the chemistry of the polar regions on Jupiter, and Jupiter's interaction with the moon Io via a magnetic "flux tube." (NASA Release 92-22)
NASA announced that it had awarded about $15 million for 124 microgravity research grants to develop the research potential of Space Station Freedom as one of the nation's premiere science and technology assets. The grants represent an increase of 70 percent in the number of investigators sponsored by NASA's microgravity division. The division now sponsors nearly 200 scientific investigators and plans to expand to at least 300 before the agency's planned Space Station becomes operational in the late 1990s. (NASA Release 92-167; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts on Tuesday completed a series of spacewalks to install an engine and move an antenna on the Mir Space Station, partly in preparation for docking with a U.S. Space Shuttle in 1994. (AP, Sept 15/92)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope announced that they had spotted the gathering of swirling stars that is believed to be the gravitational signature of a black hole in a galaxy called M32. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories in Tucson, Arizona, and a scientist using the Hubble, said that based upon what he has seen so far, "I would be surprised if M32 turns out not to be a black hole." Concurrently the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory discovered 11 objects in space that constitute "a new class of objects--the gamma ray quasar." The new gamma ray quasars, some as far as 10 billion light-years away, are probably similar to the thousands of other quasars detected in recent years, but the nature of quasars is still debated. (AP, Apr 9/92; B Sun, Apr 9/92; LA Times, Apr 9/92; W Times, Apr 9/92; U Post, Apr 13/92; USA Today, Apr 9/92; CSM, Apr 14/92; NASA Release 92-46 and 92-47; NASA Note N92-28)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope revealed an unusual new optical jet in the nucleus of the elliptical galaxy NGC 3862. NGC 3862, also known as 3C264, is a bright radio source and x-ray source. It is the sixth brightest galaxy in a rich cluster of galaxies known as Abell 1367, located at a distance of about 260 million light-years away in the constellation Leo. (NASA Release 92-61)
American space scientists said the hottest star ever recorded--33 times hotter than the sun--had been photographed in a faraway galaxy by the Hubble Space Telescope. Burning at 360,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the white star at the heart of a glowing red nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy is going out in a "blaze of glory," said Sally Heap, an astrophysicist with NASA. (NY Times, Apr 21/92; AP, Apr 21/92; W Times, Apr 21/92; USA Today, Apr 21/92)
Russia launched a spaceship carrying two monkeys and insects into orbit to conduct radiation experiments on the creatures. Experts from the European Space Agency as well as Italian, German, and other foreign scientists were to oversee the biological experiments. The ITAR-Tass news agency also said that Cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyov and Sergei Avdeyev, who had spent five months aboard the Mir Space Station, were in good condition following routine medical examinations. (AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92)
NASA and NPO-Energia, A Russian company, planned to meet during the next two weeks for a final review on the feasibility of using the Soyuz TM spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard the Space Station. The Soyuz spacecraft was one of various concepts being considered for use as a return vehicle. (NASA Release 92-212)
In the summer 1992 issue of Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Richard H. Kohrs, director of Space Station Freedom in NASA's Office of Space Development, discussed the advantages and challenge of constructing Space Station Freedom. Aside from the international cooperation required to build and operate it, Kohrs gave three primary functions that the Space Station would perform in the U.S. civil space program: 1) it would enable humans to learn to live and work productively in space; 2) it would serve as an advanced research facility; and 3) it would provide experience and knowledge of building, operating, and maintaining large systems in space. The Space Station was also expected to be a vital component of the total U.S. civil space program, augmenting the planetary exploration program, astronomical research, life-sciences program, aeronautics research, and transportation program. (Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Summer 1992)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
NASA's Galileo spacecraft flew by the Earth at 10:09 a. m. EST, completing a three-year gravity-assist program and setting course to reach Jupiter in December 1995. The spacecraft was programmed to measure the near-Earth environment and to observe Earth and the moon during this flyby. (NASA Release 92-217; UPI, Dec 2/92, Dec 7/92, Dec 8/92; Dec 9/92; AP, Dec 1/92, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92; W Post, Dec 9/92; WP, Dec 9/92)
Lending their expertise with long-duration exposure to microgravity, the Skylab IV astronaut crew was scheduled to participate in a series of underwater tests that would help in the development of Space Station Freedom. The tests will be monitored by engineers represented by NASA, the Boeing Defense and Space Group, and international partners from the European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency. (NASA Note N92-42)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had revealed a chain of luminous knots in the core of the most distant known galaxy--one that existed in the infancy of the universe and is located more than 10 billion light-years from Earth. The new photos, taken with the telescope's wide field and planetary camera, reveal detail ten times better than photographs previously taken with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 92-203; W Times, Nov 14/92)
A space agency spokesman said that NASA had failed again to open the main antenna of its Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft. Engineers had heated the antenna with sunlight over three days in March, then cooled it in shade. They hoped the antenna would expand and then shrink enough to free its jammed parts, said Jim Wilson, a spokesman fot the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (P Inq, Apr 17/92; USA Today, Apr 17/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia commander Richard N. Richards made a pitch today for the Space Station Freedom, saying that astronauts on the Columbia Shuttle flight needed more time in orbit to conduct scheduled experiments. Such time would be available on the Space Station, which had experienced funding difficulties in Congress. Two Shuttle astronauts worked though part of their breaks as they rushed to complete experiments, one dealing with the growth of crystals and the other with dust particles. (W Post, Jul 4/92)
NASA announced that extended observations by the Hubble Space Telescope indicated that Jupiter's moon Io has a smaller atmosphere than previously thought, with very dense regions possibly over volcanoes and surface frost. The observations also showed that despite continual volcanic activity, Io's surface has remained largely unchanged since first photographed by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. (NASA Release 92-163)
Rockwell's Space Systems Division and NPO Energia announced that they had signed a contract that was the first step in building docking hardware for a U.S. Space Shuttle/Russian MIR Space Station mission planned for 1995. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Russian cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kalery worked outside the Mir Space Station on an unscheduled two-hour spacewalk to activate a pair of gyroscopes that help stabilize the Space Station. The gyroscopes had worn out naturally during the course of Mir's life and had to be replaced. (AP Jul 8/92)
Walter Jaffe of the Leiden Observatory in the Netherlands said that the Hubble Space Telescope had captured the most detailed view yet of an immense caldron of heat, violence, and energy surrounding what might be called a "black hole," a celestial object 10 million times more massive than the sun. Astronomers said the photograph provided powerful support for the theory of "black holes" by showing several of the features predicted to surround them. The galaxy belongs to the Virgo Cluster of galaxies about 45 million light-years from Earth. (W Times, Nov 20/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; W Post, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 20/92;)
It was reported that a Russian-German space crew will blast off from Kazakhstan on March 17, 1992, the first manned flight since the birth of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). German cosmonaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade was scheduled to travel aboard a Soyuz craft to the Mir Space Station, six weeks after his countryman Ulf Merbold returned from a successful eight-day mission aboard the U.S. Shuttle Discovery in January. Kayser-Threde GmbH, a small Munich high technology firm, would produce hardware for scientific tests during Flade's week-long mission. (Reuters, Feb 24/92)
In a mission called "La Chalupa 30," four men were to conduct investigations in an underwater habitat without any direct outside human contact for 30 days, giving the Behavior and Performance Laboratory at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, the opportunity to study team performance as part of its continuing investigation to identify pertinent psychological issues for long duration space flight. "The mission will serve as an environment which is analogous to future extended space missions on the Shuttle or Space Station," said Dr. Al Holland, Head of the Behavior and Performance Laboratory. (NASA Release 92-62)
A briefing and demonstration of a prototype low vision enhancement system (LVES), cooperatively developed by NASA and the Lions Vision Center at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, was scheduled for to be held May 13 at the Oncology Center Auditorium. The LVES technology, originally developed for possible use on Space Station Freedom, potentially could help millions of Americans afflicted with certain low vision problems. (NASA Note N92-43)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev returned to earth five months later than originally planned. The 33-year-old flight engineer's stint in space aboard the Mir Space Station had been originally scheduled to end in October. But because of the disintegration of the Soviet Union, money problems in Moscow, and Kazakh nationalism, he was asked to extend his space journey by almost five months, creating a predicament for him and making him a media celebrity. (NY Times, Mar 26/92; USA Today, Mar 26/92; W Post, Mar 26/92; WSJ, Mar 26/92; B Sun, Mar 26/92)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company received two NASA contracts worth $267 million for work on the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight systems contract, valued at $147 million, includes funds for servicing missions, the first of which was set for December 1993 and was to deliver an optical instrument to correct the telescope's flawed mirror. (WSJ, Sept 2/92)
Lockheed, a principal designer of NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, won $267 million in contracts to maintain, service, and help repair the orbiting observatory. (W Post, Sept 9/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers announced the detection of the rare element boron in an ancient star. This element may be "fossil" evidence of energetic events which accompanied the birth of the Milky Way galaxy. An alternative possibility is that this rare element may be even older, dating from the birth of the universe. If that is the case, then the HST findings may force some modifications in theories of the Big Bang. (NASA Release 92-5)
NASA announced that congressionally imposed funding limits for Space Station Freedom would delay its full operation by about nine months. Under a revised schedule, NASA would begin launching parts of the Space Station in March 1996, a four-month delay. The station would be ready for limited astronaut use in June 1997 and for full astronaut use in June 2000, a nine-month delay. (Space News, Sept 28-October 4/92)
NASA officials said that the Galileo spacecraft and its atmospheric probe had passed the half-way mark on their voyage to Jupiter. The first full test results on November 20 and December 2 since launch three years ago showed that the probe's systems were in good working order. Galileo was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter in early December 1995. A major milestone in space communications was achieved recently when NASA scientists successfully transmitted laser signals to Galileo at a distance of 1.3 million miles. (NASA Releases 92-224 and 92-225; AP, Dec 16/92)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealed a new class of object in the universe--a grouping of gigantic star clusters produced by the collision of galaxies. Images of the core of the peculiar galaxy Arp 220 show that stars are produced at a furious rate from the dust and gas supplied by the interaction of two galaxies. The discovery was made by Dr. Edward Shaya and graduate student Dan Dowling, University of Maryland, and the Wide Field/Planetary Camera Team. (NASA Release 92-80)
It was reported that for the first time in a generation, NASA and the Air Force were developing a new rocket engine and launch system. The National Launch System (NLS), which was to consist of three new vehicles, would become operational in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to Space Station Freedom. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
In remarks before the National Space Club, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the United States needs a laboratory in space so scientists can learn how to protect the health of humans living and working for long periods in space and improve the quality of life on Earth. "We can light up the sky with the inspirational work of Space Station Freedom, or we can stand by and watch the greatest technological bonfire of the century if it's canceled. We need Space Station Freedom and we need it now," said Goldin. (NASA Release 92-92)
Astronaut Kathryn Thornton became the second woman to walk in space when she floated into the open cargo bay of Endeavour and tested techniques for building a Space Station. Thornton was accompanied by Thomas Akers, one of three men who had captured a wayward satellite the day before. (C Trib, May 15/92)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, predicted a "Perils of Pauline" battle in Congress over the survival of Space Station Freedom, saying the outpost was an investment in the future that should not be squandered for short-term gains. Despite the high costs and frequent redesigns, Goldin said the station was vital to the future of America's space program. Although he refused to predict the outcome of congressional debate, he expressed guarded optimism that Freedom would survive the latest challenge. (UPI, Apr 29/92)
NASA and the National Institutes of Health signed an agreement to enhance each agency's biomedical research capabilities. The agencies pledged to develop programs that apply NASA's unique expertise to practical, medical needs on Earth and in space. The agreement was intended to stimulate new opportunities in the biomedical and behavioral research community because it provides for greater access to space-based facilities as well as involvement by university-based research centers. It was expected to increase support for Space Station Freedom, funding for which was under attack in Congress. (NASA Release 92-119; W Post, Jul 22/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
NASA astronomers announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had caught a clear glimpse of more than 300 galaxies clustered four billion light-years away, giving astronomers their first detailed view of galactic structure at a time when the solar system was just beginning. The Hubble images revealed that star-forming galaxies were far more prevalent in the clusters of the younger universe than in modern clusters of galaxies near us today. The findings have important implications for theories of how galaxies have evolved and are continuing to evolve at an apparently rapid rate. The observations also may have uncovered the most distant cluster of galaxies yet seen at a distance of 10 billion light-years, two-thirds of the way back to the presumed origin of the universe. (NASA Release 92-213; NY Times, Dec 2/92; LA Times, Dec 2/92; W Post, Dec 2/92; The Sun, Dec 2/92; USA Today, Dec 2/92; UPI, Dec 2/92)
The House of Representatives voted to spend $2.1 billion next year for work on NASA's Space Station Freedom as opponents ended their efforts to scuttle the project. (The Sun, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Dr. Jon Holtzman, of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, led a team of scientists in discovering new clues to cataclysmic events in the history of the peculiar galaxy NGC 1275, located approximately 200 million light-years from Earth. The scientists discovered about 50 bright objects at the center of the galaxy which appear to be young massive globular star clusters. This discovery was surprising because most globular clusters are among the oldest objects in the universe. (NASA Release 92-9)
The Senate approved funding of $2.1 billion for continuation of the Space Station after defeating a proposal to close down the project because of its expense. The Senate vote, together with House approval in July, assured continued funding and Congressional support for the Space Station. (W Post, Sept 10/92; LA Times, Sept 10/92; WSJ, Sept 10/92; AP, Sept 10/92)
China reported that it would send astronauts into space by the year 2000 as the first step toward launching its own Space Station. "Before the year 2000 China will have completed its research into experimental manned spacecraft and carrier rockets," said the State Commission on Science and Technology. (UPI, Apr 7/92; LA Times, Apr 8/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a French researcher landed safely in Kazakhstan after completing scientific experiments aboard the orbiting Mir Space Station. The 14-day mission brought to a close the third joint Russian-French flight since 1982. The three worked on experiments involving astrophysics, biology, and bioengineering. They also conducted geophysical research based on commercial contracts from several European countries and members of the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AP, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 10/92; The Sun, Aug 11/92)
Daniel S. Goldin, the newly appointed Administrator NASA said he was a strong supporter of the controversial Space Station Freedom, which was being developed in part at the NASA Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. The Space Station Freedom, whose price had soared from $8 billion to $40 billion, was a frequent target of lawmakers looking to trim NASA's budget. But Goldin said, "I believe that there is a crying need for human interaction in space. If we are to fulfill our role of NASA and to have humans seek their destiny in space, we must understand the interactions of humans in a hostile space environment, the long-term impacts of zero gravity, microgravity, radiation." (News-Herald, Apr 23/92; Plain Dealer, Apr 23/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
Rockwell International and a Russian company announced plans to collaborate on a system to enable the Space Shuttle  Atlantis to dock with Russia's MIR Space Station. Rockwell said it had signed an agreement under which NPO Energia would develop hardware for the system and build some components. (AP, Sept 9/92)
A joint Russian-French crew blasted off on a 12-day mission aimed at keeping the aging Space Station Mir in orbit until 1996.  The cosmonauts were slated to install a complex of stabilizing gyroscopes inside the Station and also to work in space to assemble an engine to make space navigation easier. (W Times, Jul 22/92; AP, Jul 21/92, Jul 27/92; UPI, Jul 27/92; The Sun, Jul 28/92; WSJ, Jul 28/92; W Post, Jul 28/92; NY Times, July 28/92; APn, Jul 27/92; UPn, Jul 27/92)
Yuri N. Koptev, a top Russian space official, declared in Izvestiya, that the six-year-old Space Station Mir must be replaced by 1994 and suggested turning to the West for technical and financial assistance. "We do not exclude attracting foreign capital and forming a joint stock company for joint use of the Mir Station," he said. (AP, Feb 28/92)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin charged a new team of agency officials with finding a cheaper way to build Space Station Freedom, even if that meant assembling much of it without the Space Shuttle. The team, comprised mainly of officials within NASA but outside the Station program, was asked to redesign the Station so that it can be completed on time despite congressionally imposed spending limits. Goldin's directive came in the wake of reduced Space Station funding in both the House of Representative and the Senate. Findings were due to Goldin by November. (Space News, Aug 17/92; AvWk, Aug 24/92)
Florida Today reported that the Hubble Space Telescope, despite a flawed primary mirror that prevented it from stargazing perfectly, nevertheless had shown astronomers enough of the universe to rattle their theories of creation and the nature of the universe. Circling the Earth every 90 minutes the Hubble has provided new insights into "globular clusters, the black hole, gaseous hydrogen isotopes, and a shell of gas moving from a giant star in another galaxy." (Florida Today, Feb 2/92)
The Air Force and NASA announced that they were developing a new family of rockets to meet the unmanned launch needs of the next century. As currently conceived, the National Launch System would include three new vehicles designed to lift cargoes ranging from 20,000 to 130,000 pounds into low Earth orbit. The new rockets were expected to become operational in 2002 and would carry supplies to Space Station Freedom at less cost than present U. S. delivery systems. (W Times, Aug 18/92; Birmingham News, Aug 19/92)
NASA announced that a Space Shuttle flight link up with the Russian Mir Space Station, tentatively planned for September 1994, would be retargeted for launch in April 1995. A flight by a Russian cosmonaut aboard the Shuttle Discovery remained on track for launch on November 16, 1993. The first flight to begin building the planned Space Station Freedom was rescheduled for July 1996. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA reported that a survey of the heavens with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was uncovering remote and unusual galaxies never before resolved by optical telescopes on Earth. HST revealed an unusual variety of shapes and structures in these distant galaxies, which previously had appeared as fuzzy blobs in ground-based sky surveys. The results might lead to much clearer understanding of the formation and evolution of galaxies. The results were presented by Dr. Richard Griffiths of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. (NASA Release 92-98)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
NASA announced that the Space Station Freedom program had initiated a new effort to reduce dramatically the time it would take to integrate small experiments on the Space Station. Called EXPRESS for Expedited Processing of Experiments to Space Station, NASA engineers hoped to reduce the time it takes to get a small payload flown aboard Freedom from up to five years to less than one. (NASA Release 92-191)
NASA's inspector general, Bill Colvin, said that an investigation had been going on for nearly two years as to whether the Perkin-Elmer Corporation of Danbury, Connecticut, maker of the flawed mirrors of the Hubble Space Telescope, withheld data that would have revealed focusing problems before Hubble was sent aloft. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; WSJ, Oct 20/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
NASA scientists using the Hubble Space Telescope said they had discovered extended disks of dust around 15 newly-formed stars in the Orion Nebula starbirth region 1,500 light-years away. Such disks are a prerequisite for the formation of solar systems like the sun's. Hubble's detailed images confirm more than a century of speculation, conjecture, and theory about the genesis of solar systems. Astronomers said the Hubble data was the strongest evidence yet that planets could exist beyond the solar system and may even be a common occurrence. "We have found a place where it is very possible that there will be planets within the next few million years," said Edward Weiler, program scientist for the space telescope, at a NASA briefing. (NASA Release 92-226; W Times, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec. 17/92; NY Times, Dec 17/92; LA Times, Dec 17/92; CSM Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 17/92; UPI, Dec 17/92; APn, Dec 17/92; Newsweek, Dec 28/92)
Michael Griffin, NASA associate administrator for exploration, said that a new heavy-lift vehicle built from components of the Space Shuttle transportation system should be able to launch elements of Space Station Freedom at a cost comparable to that of the space shuttle. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
NASA chose Rockwell International's Palmdale plant in California to refit the seven-year-old Space Shuttle Atlantis, allowing the spacecraft to stay aloft longer and possibly enabling it to rendezvous with the Russian Space Station Mir.  (LA Times, Jul 2/92)
Solar scientists were puzzled by an unexpected "gamma ray afterglow" discovered on the sun by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The glow, a strong emanation of high-energy gamma rays, persisted for more than five hours after a solar flare explosion on June 11, 1991. A similar phenomenon occurred four days later. The scientists also announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had taken the first image of the sun in neutrons, the first picture of any celestial object ever made with neutrons, that is, matter, rather than light. Another scientist reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had found evidence of powerful beams of downward-streaming protons at the onset of a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more than 30 light-years away. Solar flares can produce magnetic storms on Earth that interfere with electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA Releases 92-112 and 92-113; NY Times, Jul 16/92; USA Today, Jul 16/92; The Sun, Jul 16/92; P Inq, Jul 16/92; UPI, Jul 15/92, Jul 17/92; W Post, Jul 20/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
It was reported that the Kennedy Space Center was about to break gground on a second Space Station project, a new building to service the outpost's propulsion modules. The 3,000 square foot building, to be located behind and south of the operations and checkout buildings in Kennedy Space Center's industrial area, would be the space center's third hazardous processing plant. This one was to be dedicated to servicing a single type of payload: 800-gallon modulles filled with propellant, which would be used to keep the space station positioned properly in orbit. The new buildingg wouldbe able to accomodate testing, cleaning, and servicing of two to four modules simultaneously. The Kennedy Space Center was soliciting bids for construction of the plant, which was to be 70 feet high, 135 feet longg and 65 feet wide. A contract, worth about $11 million, was expected to be awarded in June 1992, with construction beginning in July, said payload projects manager JoAnn Morgan. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
NASA announced that it would kick-off a nationwide tour of its full-scale traveling Space Station Freedom model in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. The model, which is housed in two connected tractor trailers, features the U.S. living quarters and the U.S. laboratory module of the international space-based research facility. (NASA Note N92-47)
Dr. Carl Fichtel, Principal Investigator for the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), announced that NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory found three new gamma-ray quasars, detected more than 200 cosmic gamma ray bursts, and captured the best ever observation of the glow of gamma radiation from the disk of the Milky Way galaxy. The Compton Observatory, built by TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, California, is the second of NASA's "Great Observatories." The first was the Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April 1990. The Compton Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, from the Space Shuttle Atlantis, orbits Earth at an altitude of 268 by 262 miles. (NASA Release 92-6)
Newly-released photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope showed that the "Whirpool Galaxy" may have a black hole at its core and that the core of a powerful infrared radiating galaxy called Arp 220 supports vigorous star birth and supernova star explosions. Astronomers suspect that Arp 220 is the product of an earlier collision of two "parent" galaxies. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
At the American Astronomical Society's semiannual meeting in Atlanta, a team of scientists announced that, using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had made the most precise measurement to date of the percent of heavy hydrogen in space, which better determines the physical conditions present in the theorized Big Bang at the origin of the universe. Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, differs from ordinary hydrogen by having one neutron in addition to one proton in its nucleus. A measurement of the ratio of deuterium to ordinary hydrogen provides a critical test of conditions in the universe at the time of the Big Bang because it is believed that essentially all of the deuterium now present was created at that time. If further research finds no evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," then the new deuterium measurements strengthen the idea that the universe will expand forever. If true, the universe had a brilliant beginning but will have no end. (NASA Release 92-2)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin agreed to seek increased funding for NASA's life sciences program destined for the Space Station Freedom, calling current funding levels "disgraceful" and clearly in need of increased funding. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
NASA announced plans to consolidate some management functions for the Space Station Freedom program and to create a contractor-led integration team to ensure the successful building and deployment of the international Space Station. The consolidations affected operations in Reston, Virginia, and at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The consolidation came amid charges of cost growth and delays at Johnson Space Center and among the center's team of contractors led by McDonnell Douglas. The problems associated with the $5 billion contract had prompted two audits and one investigation by NASA's inspector general. (NASA Release 92-214; W Post, Dec 2/92; Space News, Dec 7-13/92; AvWk, Dec 7/92)
Some leading American astronomers complained about the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support for astronomical research in the United States. The absence of dependable funding put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan, the astronomers charged. Federal financing had flagged, they said, just as a steam of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices were ready to be exploited. There were also management problems. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that poor management of America's space and astronomy programs had hobbled efforts to compete with European science. (NY Times, Aug 18/92)
House-Senate negotiators agreed yesterday to provide $2.1 billion next fiscal year for Space Station Freedom. The agreement spelled the end of another year of efforts by opponents to kill a program they consider too expensive and of little scientific value. The Space Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its planned 30-year lifetime. (W Post, Sept 23/92; USA Today, Sept 23/92; LA Times, Sept 23/92; The Sun, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23/92)
A bipartisan group of prominent Americans proposed a plan to reduce government spending, invest in growth, and reshape the income tax system in the hope of balancing the federal budget in a decade. Decisions on which programs would be cut were left to Congress and the president, but the group suggested that NASA's planned Space Station, mass transit operating aid to cities, and other programs would be prime candidates for funding reductions. (AP, Sept 30/92)
A spokesman announced that NASA had failed in its latest attempt to fix the jammed main antenna on the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft, but the agency said it would try different repair methods next year. Engineers turned Galileo's main antenna toward the sun to warm it, then cooled it in shade, but the antenna remained stuck. The latest warming and cooling of the antenna was the seventh and final effort to open the antenna by thermally expanding or shrinking what NASA engineers think are stuck pins on three of the antenna's ribs. Despite the loss of the main antenna, NASA scientists expected to complete 70 percent of Galileo's mission by using a small antenna. The small antenna, however, is capable of transmitting only 1 percent as many computer "bits" as the main antenna would have sent. (AP, Jul 8/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts made a spacewalk to position a cable that will power an exterior engine on their Mir Space Station. (AP Sept 9/92)
With just over three years left before construction of Space Station Freedom begins in Earth orbit, NASA announced that it would add spacewalks to upcoming Shuttle flights when possible, beginning with one during STS-54 in January 1993. (NASA Release 92-210)
NASA acknowledged that it could not keep the Space Station project on schedule even with the most optimistic current funding projections. The projected level of Congressional appropriations for the next few years meant certain delays in development and launch schedules of anything up to 12 or 18 months. Such delays would mean that the station would miss the official December 1999 target for being able to support a crew on a permanent basis. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
NASA's Cassini mission to Saturn passed a major milestone with the completion of a project-wide critical design review. The review included a comprehensive examination of the mission and spacecraft. (NASA Release 92-222)
Russian space authorities reported that they had developed a new design for their Mir 2 Space Station and that initial production of the primary module had already started. The new Mir 2 design envisioned a core with five modules that were to be attached to the middle of a long beam. The officials said they expected Mir 2 to be launched in the mid-1990s and that it represented Russia's determination to continue its long-term plan of manned flight activities despite the difficult financial and political situation in Russia. (AvWk, Aug 10/92)
The Space Station Freedom was saved, as the House of Representatives voted down an amendment aimed at killing the $40 billion project. The House voted 237-181 against an appropriations bill amendment that would have cut $1.2 billion from the 1993 budget for NASA, effectively eliminating the Space Station. The Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its lifetime. It was the fourth time in the last two years that the House had affirmed its commitment to build the Space Station. Supporters said the vote could well represent the program's last serious Congressional challenge. (P Inq, Jul 30/92; LA Times, Jul 30/92; NY Times, Jul 30/92; WSJ, Jul 30/92; W Times, Jul 30/92; W Post, Jul 30/92; The Sun, Jul 30/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92; AP, Jul 30/92; UPI, Jul 30/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92; AvWk, Aug 3/92)
A NASA airplane, equipped with delicate instruments, carried three astronomers to 41,000 feet above Hawaii last month to examine indications of a "black hole" at the heart of the Milky Way galaxy. The launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and improvements in ground-based instruments led to several announcements this year of tangible evidence for the existence of "black holes." (LA Times, Sept 21/92)
The planned U.S. Space Station Freedom survived an attempt to kill it when the House of Representatives defeated a move to cut the $2.25 billion needed to keep the program on track. The 254-159 vote to continue funding marked the fourth time the House had voted on the costly and ambitious program in recent years. (UPI, Apr 30/92; AP, Apr 30/92; W Post, Apr 30/92; USA Today, Apr 30/92)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
The U.S. Senate rejected by a wide margin a move to cancel NASA's international Space Station but forbade NASA from significantly changing the laboratory's design and schedule. If approved by the House of Representative, the restriction would severely limit NASA's ability to overhaul key aspects of the program. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA continued to prepare for what it called "the most aggressive" space-shuttle mission yet--its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set for December 7, 1993. As conceived, it would require four astronauts working in two-person shifts several days to make the repairs. They would need three or possibly four space walks to complete the work. The main task was to install a new camera and a set of corrective mirrors to compensate for spherical aberration in the main 2.4-meter mirror. These and other repairs would, NASA hoped, restore 90 to 95 percent of Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM, Dec 16/92)
After triumphing in a bruising congressional battle in 1991 and securing a $2.25 billion berth in the Administration's 1993 budget, NASA officials and Space Station Freedom contractors said they were on target toward a scheduled launch of the first Space Station components in November 1995. The station, to be lofted piece by piece aboard the Space Shuttle, was to be partially operational by 1997, and permanently manned by a four-astronaut crew by 2000. (LA Times, Feb 24/92)
Opponents of Space Station Freedom, led by Representative Tim Roemer of Indiana, said they would try to strip from the 1993 federal budget virtually all of the $2.25 billion requested for the project by NASA. The attack would come as an amendment to legislation that would set maximum spending levels for the agency over the next three years. (LA Times, Apr 29/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
Based upon images taken by NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers reported that they had found intriguing evidence that a black hole, weighing over 2.6 billion times the mass of the sun, exists at the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. Galaxy M87 is at the center of a nearby cluster of galaxies in the constellation of Virgo, 52 million light-years distant, and contains more than 100 billion stars. (NASA Release 92-10)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
Hubble Space Telescope scientists announced that Hubble has used a natural "zoom lens" it discovered in space to photograph an otherwise invisible distant galaxy and to chart concentrations of the mysterious dark matter that controls the fate of the universe. The astronomers said that the telescope was actually seeing a phenomenon known as a gravitational lens, which occurs when the gravitational field of a massive object bends light rays from a more distant source. They regarded the ability to discern in detail the structure of the distant magnified object as a major breakthrough in observing techniques. (W Post, Oct 9/92; UPI, Oct 8/92; NY Times, Oct 9/92; NASA Release 92-87 and 92-168)
Astronomers reported interesting initial results from a survey of several hundred quasars being studied with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Using Hubble's high resolution images, the "Snapshot Survey" program detected evidence on gravitational lensing at a level of detail not usually found with ground-based telescopes. The findings set new limits on the nature and distribution of material in the universe. The results provided information on objects such as stars and galaxies that can be detected with telescopes as well as non-luminous material or "dark matter." In the past decade, about a dozen examples of probable gravitational lenses had been discovered by ground-based telescopes. According to conventional theoretical models, approximately half of all multiple-image gravitational lenses cannot be identified from ground-based telescopes because the separation between the images would be less than one arc second, which is below the nominal resolution limit for ground-based telescopes. The Hubble Space Telescope routinely provides 0.1 arc second resolution of moderately bright point sources, making it a unique and powerful tool for searching for multiple-image lenses. The HST data may ultimately provide new and unexpected insights into the early universe. While the Snapshot Survey will not offer insights into the competing Big Bang models, results will provide scientists with the denizens of the universe but not how they got there. (NASA Release 92-3)
