Two Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth on Monday after 189 days in space. The two cosmonauts made four space walks during their stay on the orbiting Space Station Mir and carried out a variety of experiments. (AP, Feb 1/93)
NASA announced that it planned to launch Shuttle Endeavour and seven astronauts on December 1 on a  mission to repair the troubled Hubble Space Telescope. (UPI, Oct 21/93)
NASA said that it planned to launch a repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope as planned next month despite a troublesome sensor on one of Shuttle Endeavour's wing flaps. The faulty sensor poses no safety problems, a Nasa spokesman said. (APn, Nov 19/93; RTw, Nov 19/93)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin's shuffling of top Space Station officials had led to internal friction between NASA and officials at the Reston, Virginia, program office for the Space Station. NASA's international partners in the Space Station were also reportedly concerned that they were not fully involved in key decisions involving the Station. (AvWk, Aug 2/93)
NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom Utilization Conference, planned for June 21-24 in San Francisco, California. NASA managers decided to postpone the conference because of recent instructions to redesign the Space Station. (NASA Media Advisory)
The magazine Science reviewed the three main redesigns of the Space Station, noting that the White House's mandate that NASA produce a less costly station design had upset the U.S.'s international partners. (Science, May 28/93)
John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93)
President Clinton declared his support for building a Space Station in partnership with the Russians and received support for the project from key figures in Congress during a White House meeting on November 29.  (W Post, Dec 1/93; RTw, Dec 1/97; AP, Dec 1/97; APn, Dec 1/93; NY Times, Dec 1/93; USA Today, Dec 1/93)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-61 to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was scheduled for December 1, 1993. The flight was the first in a series of planned visits to the orbiting telescope. The 11-day mission was designed to accommodate a record five spacewalks with the capability for an additional two if needed.
Three cosmonauts, including one Frenchman, landed in the Central Asian republic of Kazakhstan after a successful mission aboard the Russian Space Station Mir.  The 22-day Russian-French mission was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan July  1 on board a Soyuz TM-17 craft and two days later docked with Mir. (UPI, Jul 22/93; AP, Jul 22/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that a dispute was brewing within NASA regarding who was to be assigned to the management team overseeing work on the redesigned Space Station.  NASA
Yuri Koptev, head of the Russian Space Agency, said that Russia would definitely take part in the creation of a proposed Space Station with the United States. Work on the Station should start in 1997 and be finished by 2001. (Reuters, Nov 16/93; P Inq, Nov 26/93)
An article in the Christian Science Monitor reported that scarce NASA funding jeopardized the Space Station and manned flights. NASA had asked for a $1 billion increase over fiscal year 1993; however, Representative Ralph Hall, D of Texas, the chairman of the House space subcommittee, told Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, that a billion-dollar increase was not very likely. (CSM, Apr 28/93)
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved $1.9 billion for continued work on Space Station Freedom, but the project faced a fight in the full Senate, where opponents wanted to cut funding. (USA Today, Sep 10/93)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have been able to see a double star whose existence they had known only by the intermittent bursts of x-rays recorded over the last 20 years. The binary star, made up of a neutron star and a white dwarf, is 30.000 light-years away from Earth. The report of the discovery was recently published in Astrophysical Journal Letters. (NY Times, Sep 7/93; W Times, Sep 5/93; W Post, Sep 13/93).
After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93)
NASA announced that the December flight of the Endeavor Space Shuttle mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope was scheduled to last ll days and to involve a record five spacewalks, with the possibility of two additional walks, if needed. (NASA Release 93-76; W Times, Apr 25/93)
According to reports, the Clinton Administration's new budget would cut funding for NASA's planned Space Station by 40 percent; the cuts were predicted to trigger another major restructuring of the project and more delays. Key Capitol aids said the House had approved $1.35 billion for the program in the next fiscal year, instead of the $2.25 billion NASA had requested, Clinton was reported to be troubled by the massive cost-overruns associated with the project. (W Post, Feb 12/97; AP, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93; UPI, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, praised President Bill Clinton as generally being "on track" with  his space and aeronautics program. However, the author suggested that President Clinton needed to clarify his vision for the Space Station; decisive action was needed in a project that already had consumed $8 billion over nearly a decade. An editorial in the Orlando Sentinel urged President Clinton to keep his commitment to the Space Station but to do so with an "eye toward greater efficiency."  (AvWk, Feb 22, 1993; O Sen Star, Feb 22/93)
Russian officials announced that two Russian cosmonauts had taken a space walk to rearrange solar panels on the outside of the Mir Space Station in order to increase the panels' efficiency. The rearrangement also would prepare the Mir for an eventual docking by the U.S. Space Shuttle. The cosmonauts encountered several problems during the walk and had to stay outside their capsule longer than planned. (AP, Apr 4/19, Apr 4/20; RTw, Apr 20/93; USA Today, Apr 20/93)
NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the agency's new office of Space Science, effective immediately. During his career at NASA, Diaz served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, managed the Galileo and Ulysses programs in the Solar System Exploration Division, and developed space science programs for Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 93-53)
NASA announced that it had banned news organizations from covering meetings about the redesign of Space Station Freedom. NASA said the meetings would be closed because they involved mainly NASA employees, not outside advisers. NASA has formal advisory committees, which meet openly in compliance with a 1972 law governing such meetings. (Space News, March 22-28/93)
NASA announced that the Galileo spacecraft had successfully explored the asteroid Ida located between Mars and Jupiter. Although hampered by a jammed main antenna, Galileo zoomed around 1,491 miles from Ida and took all but three of 21 planned photographs.  The three missing photos were the longest-distance photos and unimportant compared with the close-ups. The first photos were not scheduled to arrive at Earth for another two months; the others were to be transmitted in the spring of 1994.  (AP, Aug 28/93; RTw, Aug 28/93; USA Today, Aug 30/93; NY Times, Aug 29/93
The Washington Post reported that the Space Station Freedom redesign team was struggling over a key issue: how to cut the facility's costs while retaining enough power to make the facility worth building. In 1985, NASA engineers envisioned a power system that supplied 135,000 kilowatts (kWs), far more than any other spacecraft. The basic outline of the original plan remained, but the planned capacity had dropped to about 57kW. President Clinton could select a new space design by mid-June. (W Post, May 31/93; USA Today, June 2/93)
NASA's $30 billion Space Station survived its third, and presumably final, vote in the House of Representatives, when members voted 248-184 to keep it from being grounded by budget-cutters (H Post, Nov 23/93; H Chron, Nov 22/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
The Senate endorsed the Clinton Administration's plan to build the Space Station by refusing to cut funding for the 1994 program from $1,94 billion to $500 million.  The latter amount would have been used to shut down the program. (RTw, Sep 21/93; UPI, Sep 21/93; AP, June 22/93; LA Times, Sep 22/93; P Inq, Sep 22/93; NY Times, Sep 23/93)
Late this month, the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft was scheduled to visit a big chunk of rock named Ida, only the second asteroid to be explored up close.  Galileo, launched from a Space Shuttle in 1989, was scheduled to be within 1,500 miles of Ida in late August, on its way to its 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. Galileo made the world's first asteroid encounter--with Gaspra--in October 1991.
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
NASA announced that astronomers working with the Hubble Space Telescope had some success in their attempts to measure the Hubble Constant and the age of the universe. The Hubble Constant (HO) is the ratio of the recession velocities of galaxies to their distances in the expanding universe. The age of the universe can be estimated from the Hubble Constant and currently is thought to lie between 10 and 20 billion years. A more precise measurement of the Hubble Constant is required to narrow this range. (NASA Release 93-108; P Inq, June 10/93; RTw, June 9/93)
NASA officials announced that further testing on the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II (WF/PCII), an instrument scheduled to fly on the Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission in December, might be necessary. Tests had cleared the camera of suspicion that it was flawed, but NASA asked for one last independent review of the data just to make completely sure.  (NASA Release  93-169; W Post, Sep 28/93)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
The Clinton Administration considered cancelling NASA's $30 billion Space Station and the $8.2 billion Super Collider but decided to keep the programs after encountering intense opposition to their cancellation. Cost overruns on the two programs, however, have damaged their political prospects in the administration and Congress. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93; AP, Feb 6/93, 8/93; UPI, Feb 5/93, Feb 8/93; W Post, Feb 6/93; W Times, Feb 6/93; P Inq, Feb 6/93;B Sun, Feb 6/93; NY Times, Feb 6/93)
Writing in the Washington Times, Representative George E. Brown, California Democrat and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, argued that critics of the Space Station were themselves partially responsible for the delay, confusion, and high costs of the Station because of the annual sniping, redrafting and retrenchment to which they have subjected the  Space Station. Brown maintained that the United States needs the jobs provided by the Space Station, needs the scientific challenges of space-based design and engineering, and needs the emotional satisfaction of exploration and discovery.
An editorial in the Baltimore Sun urged President Clinton to give a "strong go-ahead" to the building of Space Station Freedom. (B Sun, June 17/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that, according to congressional aids, President Clinton had decided to push for construction of a sophisticated, orbiting space laboratory that would make use of much of the technology already developed for Space Station Freedom. The President appeared to hint at this decision in a June 15 press conference. (LA Times, June 16/93)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered a group of stars that apparently had been cannibalized of their cooler outer gas layers by other passing stars, resulting in stellar "naked cores" with surface temperatures five times hotter than Earth's sun. (NASA Release 93-109; NY Times, June 10/93; P Inq, June 10/93; B Sun, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93; Science, June 14/93)
Congress held an oversight hearing March 2, in which members of Congress attempted to determine what had led to a potential $1 billion overrun in the Space Station program. Space Station managers testified on how the overruns had developed and how they planned to fix them. At the hearing, NASA officials said they had offset all but about $500 million of the potential cost overruns for the next three year; they had done so largely by cutting management jobs and replacing consultants with government employees. (W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93; Space News, Mar 8-14/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93; H Post, Mar 3/93)
NASA settled a union grievance with Reston, Virginia Space Station employees and cleared the way toward opening a new office in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Sep 9/93)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Allan H. Meltzer, professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that if the Clinton Administration were serious about reducing spending it would eliminate the $30 billion Space Station, reduce entitlements, and cut wasteful projects. (WSJ, Feb 22/93)
The media announced that NASA had unveiled four designs for a scaled-down Space Station. None of the designs, however, could be built as cheaply as the White House had requested and still meet the orbital laboratory's main goals. The team presented cost figures ranging from a low of $11.9 billion to $13.3 billion to build the design that more completely resembled the Space Station Freedom. Three of thee options were similar to the original design of the Space Station but achieved savings through reduction in hardware, management, and capability.
The Washington Post reported that Maxime Faget, chairman and founder of Space International Inc., had resigned from his position as consultant to the Space Shuttle redesign team. Some NASA employees questioned Faget's objectivity because his company had earlier proposed its own alternative Space Station and design and because the company would likely bid on any new design proposal. Faget's resignation "was determined by both NASA and Space Industries as necessary." (W Post, Mar 24/93)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that a NASA advisory panel had found that the Hubble Space Telescope would have had even more component failure in orbit if the launch had not slipped from 1986 to 1990 as a result of the Challenger accident. The delay enabled technicians to do additional testing that revealed suspect parts. (AvWk, May 24/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation reported that its Martin Marietta Astronautics Group had received a $35 million contract from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build the propulsion module subsystem for NASA's Cassini spacecraft mission that was to study Saturn, its moon Titan, and the rest of the Saturnian system. The Cassini was scheduled for launch in October 1997. (W Times, Apr 13/93)
NASA announced that it had notified all its contractors to discontinue all overtime on Space Station work and said that it would "restrict new spending." (W Times, Feb 27/93)
NASA named representatives from government and industry and academic experts from across the country to take part in an independent review of NASA's Space shuttle redesign options. A total of 16 individuals were invited to serve on the committee. Charles M. Vest had previously been named by Vice President Albert Gore to head the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station. The Advisory Committee was to submit its recommendations in June. (NASA Release 93-59)
Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)
Writing in the journal Nature, U.S. scientist Walter Jaffe said that his team had taken pictures of a so-called nuclear accretion disk, which scientists have long theorized surrounds a black hole.  The idea is that matter swirls around the black hole as it is being pulled in, forming an accretion disk, a flat ellipse resembling a round Danish pastry.  The disk was discovered through use of the planetary camera on the Hubble Space Telescope. (RTw, Jul 14/93)
A November Discovery flight, the second Spacehab flight of the year, was scheduled to carry the Wake Shield Facility (WSF), designed to be released from the payload bay to create an atomic oxygen wake as it circled the Earth. Discovery astronauts would conduct experiments to determine the effect the "space wake" had on them. The December flight of Endeavour was scheduled to be the first servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release 93-10)
In an article in the Washington Post Magazine, entitled "Has NASA Lost Its Way?," author Peter Carlson described his viewing of a Shuttle launch, which he called inspiring," and reviewed the history of Space Station Freedom. About the Space Station, he concluded, "So if they can cut the waste and trim the fat, if they can really do it cheaper, faster, better, then let them do it." (W Post, May 30/93)
NASA added a spacewalk to a U.S. Shuttle mission scheduled for July as part of a continuing program to give astronauts experience before start of Space Station construction in 1996. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
Daniel S. Golden, NASA administrator, named Dr. Joseph F. Shea, adjunct professor of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and former NASA employee, to be in charge of the redesign of the Space Station. Golden also announced measures to conserve resources and restrict new spending during the redesign transition. (NASA Release 93-038; Space News, Mar 1-7; UPI, Feb 27/93; W Post, Feb 27/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had provided the most detailed look yet at comet Shoemaker-Levy 5, which was hurtling toward a July  1994 collision with the planet Jupiter.  Hubble's high resolution images showed that the approximately 20 objects that make up the comet are much smaller than originally estimated from observations with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 93-188; USA Today, Oct 15/93; S F Chron, Oct 15/93; RTw, Oct 14/93; W Post, Oct 25/93)
Senator John Warner, R. Virginia, introduced legislation to kill NASA's manned Space Station project. Calling the Space Station "wasteful and unnecessary," the senator urged President Clinton to kill the project. (W Post, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93)
Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported that the White House had begun to review the various options for redesign of the Space Station. There were reports that the President might be wavering in his support for the Station and perhaps would be willing to sacrifice it for his broader economic goals. (AvWk, June 14/93)
President Bill Clinton announced that he would ask Congress to support a scaled-down version of Space Station Freedom and would attempt to broaden international participation in the program. Clinton said that he would also support the Superconducting Super Collider project. (RTw, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; W Post, June 18/93; LA Times, June 18/93; USA Today, June 18/93; NY Times, June 18/93; W Times, June 18/93; B Sun, June 18/93; WSJ, June 13/93; AP, June 18/93)
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
An article in New Scientist suggested that many failures in space are not the fault of electronics or software, but something more fundamental--the mechanics.  The article identified a number of space missions that had problems caused by mechanical failures. Examples include the mission involving the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca); Germany's TVSAT1, a direct broadcast satellite launched in November 1987; and the Hubble Telescope. (New Scientist, Oct 30/93)
Writing in the New York Times, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, suggested that now that the Cold War was over and there was no longer any need to demonstrate U.S. space superiority over the Soviet Union, the time had come to "put Space Station Freedom out of its misery." Parks noted that there was very little one could do in a Space Station; he added that the scientific accomplishments of the Russian cosmonauts in Russian Space Station Mir had been meager and that there was little expectation that U.S. astronauts would do any better. He noted, further, that the costs connected with the station were enormous. (NY Times, Apr 18/93)
NASA managers and industry contractors blamed Space Station cost overruns on the rush to redesign the effort in 1990 and 1991. Congress directed NASA in October 1990 to shave $6 billion from the Space Station over five years. NASA settled on a plan in early 1991 to shorten the pressurized modules and reduce the number of solar arrays. The agency also pushed back the date when the crew could occupy the Space Station by two years--to 1999--and reduced the crew size by half. In addition, NASA redid plans for the latticework structure that forms the Space Station's backbone and the Johnson Space Center's major responsibility in the program. According to Jack Boykin, Johnson's acting project director, the plan was too optimistic in its estimates of cost and technical complexity.
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, attempted to smooth over "strained" relations with top NASA management, upset over a letter that he had written to a House subcommittee investigating space station funding. In part the letter read,"I have been concerned with regard to the validity of the present cost and schedule estimates." NASA officials scheduled to testify before the subcommittee said that Goldin's comments seemed to discredit what they had to say even before they said it. Yesterday, Goldin denied that he distrusted his top managers. (W Post, Mar 5/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, aerospace engineer James F. Glass advocated funding the Space Station, arguing that not only does NASA provide jobs and dreams, but it also keeps the country pulling together for America's future. He noted that when NASA, with all its faults, spends a dollar, the taxpayer usually receives a dollar's value.  Ultimately, in Glass's view, the country needs to focus on more than survival; it must reach for the stars. (LA Times, Jul 20/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that Space Station Freedom needed to be everything from a scientific laboratory to "an inspiration to children."  Disagreeing with Goldin, Robert L. Park, representing the American Physical Society, argued that the "Space Station is unlikely to make any significant scientific contribution." (AP, Jul 1/93, Jul 2/93)
In its annual report, NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel said that the Space Station had "progressed considerably in the past year." The report went on to say that the effort "exhibits a degree of stability and continuity that has previously been absent." (APn, Mar 18/93)
The Washington Post reported that NASA's dream of building a permanent human outpost in space was generating much controversy. President Clinton's decision to shrink Space Station funding and his mandate that the station be redesigned added to the controversy. (W Post, May 17/93)
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
Speaking on CNN's morning news show, Senator Jim Sasser, D-Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, called the Superconducing Super Collider a $7 billion scientific pork barrel. He said he would propose cutting it out of the budget along with the Space Station. (AP, Feb 7/93)
The media reported that NASA administrators were seeking to quell the concerns of European space officials over the redesign of the planned U.S. Space Station. Clinton's decision to redesign the project could have "disastrous effects' if it results in an orbiting lab unsuitable to foreign partners, a German executive said. (WSJ, May 14/93; AP, May 13/93)
The House of Representatives voted to maintain $2.1 billion in funding for the scaled-down Space Station Freedom by a 220 to 196 vote. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin attributed the growing support to an intense lobbying effort by the White House and congressional supporters. The project's chance of surviving the Senate vote were seen as good. (RTw, June 28/93; UPI, June 28/93; APn, June 29/93; AP, June 29/93; W Post, June 29/93; LA Times, June 29/93; H Post, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93; W Times, June 29/93; NY Times, June 30/93)
NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)
After conferring with Space Station contractor McDonnell Douglas, space officials confirmed that a cost overrun of at least $500 million was expected if costs were not brought under control. They told a congressional panel that the Station was now a $31.3 billion project. The increases appeared to be mainly in the Johnson Space Center portion of the program. NASA's Marty Kress, the Space Station project's new deputy director, said managers were determined to lower costs and were considering various means for doing so. Key congressional aides expressed anger at the news of the overrun, noting that for years NASA had ignored their advice on a design strategy to lower costs. (W Post, Jan 31/93; Space News, Feb 1-7/93; O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number  of organizational changes in the agency. He named John R. Dailey to be Acting Deputy Administrator and said that Dr. Joseph Shea, recently named as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis, would have oversight over all Space Station related development activities.
The ITAR-Tass news agency announced that a cargo ship loaded with food, water, fuel and equipment had docked with the orbiting Space Station Mir. The cargo ship also delivered a landing capsule to the two Mir astronauts, who had been aboard the Mir for four months. (AP, May 24/93)
Science reported that NASA had agreed that NASA and Russian scientists would cooperate in several research projects aboard the Russian Space Station Mir in 1994. The joint effort would be part of a scientific exchange signed by the United States and Russia last July. (Science, May 28/93)
The Washington Post reported that NASA, under White House instructions to cut the budget of Space Station Freedom, was attempting to push the McDonald Douglas Corporation out of the $30 billion Space Station contract. McDonald Douglas was the prime contractor in the project, which had cost overruns of between $300 million and $1 billion. (W Post, Apr 25/93)
A senior NASA official who asked not to be named said that the agency was seriously considering attaching Space Station Freedom modules to Russia's Mir Space Station and helping refurbish the seven-year-old facility. NASA was also actively looking at combining Freedom with the next-generation Mir Station, which Moscow said it planned to launch around 1996. (Defense Daily, Aug 26/93)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle criticized political opponents of a permanent U.S. Space Station, arguing that the Space Station's detractors risk costing this nation its scientific and technological preeminence for decades to come. (H Chron, June 2/93)
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency (ESA) have invited Russia to help them build a new Space Station, according to an announcement by the ESA. (RTW, Oct 18/93; NASA Release N93-650)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin notified employees in a memo distributed the previous week that the scaled-back Space Station would mean the loss of about 1,300 jobs among federal workers alone.  Space Station work involved 2,300 of NASA's 24,000 employees. (AP, Jul 26/93; Sp News, Jul 26-Aug 1/93; B Sun, Jul 27/93)
A Washington Post editorial had generally favorable comments regarding President Clinton's economic stimulus-deficit plan, noting that he had taken on some formidable interest groups. It suggested, however, that he  could have killed the Space Station as "unaffordable in present circumstances." A Washington Times editorial argued that both the Space Station and the Superconducing Super Collider should be cut. A Philadelphia Inquirer editorial called for a delay in building the Space Station because of funding issues. (W Post, Feb 24/93; W Times, Feb 26/93; P Inq, Mar 7/93)
Included in the promises Bill Clinton made during his presidential campaign were two relating to NASA. Clinton promised to create a civilian research agency to serve as a means of transferring new technologies into new products. He also promised to support construction of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Jan 15/93)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Bryan O'Connor, Deputy Director of the Space Station Redesign Team, would take over management of the Space Station effort in order to accommodate a request by the team's leader, Joseph F. Shea, that his workload be reduced. Shea submitted his resignation as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis; he was to serve as Special Advisor to the Administrator and advisor to O'Connor. (NASA Statement on Advisory Committee Meeting)
NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)
According to NASA, President Clinton's plans for the Space Station could threaten some of the 125 Maryland jobs connected with the project. About $14 million was being spent in Maryland on station-related work. (B Sun, Feb 18/93)
The Houston Post reported that the two committees charged with redesigning Space Station Freedom were behind schedule. The two groups, a technical resign team mainly made up of NASA employees and a team of outside experts, had been faced with much infighting at NASA and a barrage of criticism from Congress and the foreign countries participating in the Space Station project. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin asserted that the work would be finished on time. (H Post, May 4/93; AvWk, May 3/93; H Chronicle, May 6/93)
In letters to the editor of the Baltimore Sun, two Johns Hopkins University physics professors defended the importance of the Super Collider. Both writers said that the project represented basic research of the highest caliber and noted that its fate should not be tied to that of the Space Station. (B Sun, Jul 1/93)
NASA described Space Station Freedom as a laboratory for industry as well as government and set aside a third of the Station's experiment space for commercial research. NASA planned to begin launching pieces of Space Station Freedom into orbit in 1996. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
The Christian Science Monitor reported that astronomers who study the evolution of the cosmos hoped that the Hubble space telescope, if it could be repaired as planned this December, would help them resolve a paradox relating to the universe's age. Current research implies that the universe is younger than the oldest stars. One of the Hubble's key missions was to refine what had become the foundation for many cosmic distance scales. (CSM, May 12/93)
Writing in the Christian Science Monitor, James Oberg, a professional space engineer and a specialist on Russian aerospace, hailed the success of Russia's manned Space Station, Mir. He noted that the Mir, launched in 1986, had been continuously occupied since mid-1989 by successive teams of cosmonauts.
Europe, Japan, and Canada--the United States's partners in the Space Station project--rejected NASA's move to redesign the project. They instead demanded that the team begin by considering revisions to the current plan. They warned that they might be forced to pull out of the program if the United States changed the plan significantly. (Space News, March 15-21/93)
NASA announced that in one of the deepest celestial surveys yet made by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers had discovered a small group of previously unknown interacting galaxies estimated to be three billion light-years away. Because Hubble caught the galaxies in an early stage of evolution, they offer new clues as to how galaxies have changed over time. (NASA Release 93-203)
NASA announced that the Space Station redesign team would submit its final report on three design options to the White House Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station on Monday, June 7. The three options included a modular concept that would use existing flight-proven hardware, a derivative of the current Space Station Freedom design, and a Space Station that could be placed into orbit with a single launch of a Shuttle-driven vehicle. (NASA Release 93-104; UPI, June 6/1993; AP, June 7/93; NY Times, June 6/93; W Post, June 6/93; B Sun, June 6/93)
Writing in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Daniel S. Greenberg noted that "times are bad" for the so-called mega projects of our era: Star Wars, the Space Station, and the super atom smasher in Texas. He, warned, however that big-science mobilization should not automatically be suspect, suggesting, for example, that the country would benefit from an all-out effort on a project such as the electric car. (P Inq, May 21/93)
Static firing tests of a propulsion development test article for Space Station Freedom began at NASA's White Sand's Test Facility (WSTF) in New Mexico in late December. The tests checked the preliminary design for the propulsion module that was to be used for Space Station attitude control, orientation, speed and altitude control, and avoidance of space debris. (NASA Release 93-7)
Writing in USA Today, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson, R-Texas, noted that research planned for the Space Station program would help women. Research already scheduled for the newly redesigned Space Station would address several women's diseases, from osteoporosis to ovarian and breast cancer to immune-system disorders.  (USA Today, Aug 12/93)
The media reported that Representative George E. Brown, chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, told a news conference that NASA's effort to save Space Station Freedom was doomed unless the project continued with a scaled-down version of the current design. Although the streamlined model of Freedom was the most expensive of the three options being analyzed, Brown noted that it was also the one with years of experience and $8 billion in development costs behind it. (WP, May 21/93; H Chron, May 21/93; LA Times, May 21/93; W Times, May 21/93; NY Times, May 21/93; W Post, May 21/93; AvWk, May 24/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
The countdown began for the Hubble Telescope repair mission, considered by many to be NASA's biggest challenge in space since the Apollo moon landings. The Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to lift off on the 11-day flight on December 1. (B Sun, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; USA Today, Nov 29/93; P Inq, Nov 29/93; NY Times Magazine, Nov 28/93; USA Weekend, Nov 26-28; W Post, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; RTw, Nov 27/93, 28/93; APn, Nov 27/93, Nov 28/93; UPn, Nov 26/93, Nov 28/93; W Times, Dec 1/93)
Richard H. Kohrs, Director, Space Station Freedom, retired from NASA after 30 years of service. Kohrs was appointed Space Station Freedom Director on June 1, 1989. (NASA Release  93-160)
The Washington Post reported that U.S. and Russian scientists would meet in Washington during the week to discuss ways to cooperate on U.S. and Russian Space Stations and possibly merge the two stations in the late 1990s. The Post said that Vice President Al Gore was leading the White House initiative on this subject. (Rtw, Jul 26/93; W Post, Jul 26/93)
NASA held a marathon, 59-hour dress rehearsal of the agency's $251 million mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope and repair its flawed vision. The 11-day mission aboard the Shuttle Endeavour was planned for December 1.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
Marshall Engineers and Scientists Association President Wesley Darbro said that it appeared that the Marshall Space Flight Center would lay off about 478 workers, all associated with the Space Station program. (Huntsville Times, Sep 20/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Office of Space Flight would assume responsibility for management of the Space Station Program.  Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Associate Administrator of Space Flight, was scheduled to lead the integration of these major programs.  (NASA Release  93-1291; AP, Oct 20/93)
NASA managers and engineers warned that infighting and confusion jeopardized the Space Station effort. Critics said that NASA must strengthen accountability, do away with bureaucratic constraints, and forge a more cohesive team. There was widespread disagreement among Space Station players over whether NASA should make some personnel changes or take a more radical path, for example, invest more authority in the program office in Reston, Virginia, or concentrate effort at a single NASA center. (Space News, Feb 15-21/93)
Space-agency officials from the United States, Europe, Canada, and Japan agreed to invite Russia to join them in building an international Space Station that would be the world's largest collaborative science project. (WSJ, Dec 7/93; B Sun, Dec 7/93; TTw, Dec 6/93)
White House officials said that President Clinton had decided to proceed with a slightly slimmed down version of the original Space Station Freedom design. The Space Station was expected to cost about $10.5 billion over five years. (RTw, June 16/93; NY Times, June 17/93; USA Today, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
Studies on the feasibility of using Soyuz TM spacecraft as crew return vehicles for the U.S./international Space Station were scheduled to enter a more detailed phase according to NASA Associate Administrator Arnold D. Aldrich. NPO ENERGIA was to study modifications, launch options, and costs for one year. The Soviet hardware could allow NASA to permanently staff the station by 1998 or 1998. (AvWk, Jan 4/1993)
In a Time magazine essay, Dennis Overbye advocated cooperating with the Russians in building the new Space Station. He suggested  that the inclusion of Russia would breathe new life into the tired Space-Station project.  At the very least, he advocated that the Space Station go into a high-inclination orbit so that Russian spacecraft could visit from the Baikonur spaceport and perhaps perform rescue operations. (Time, Jul 19/93)
NASA officials said that the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to be functioning well, but that they would not know until February whether or not the Hubble's vision problems had been corrected. (W Times, Dec 16/93; Fla Today, Dec 14/93, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; UPn, Dec 15/93)
In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
A spacewalk was added to Space Shuttle mission STS-57 aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour as part of a series of spacewalk tests NASA planned to conduct during the next three years to prepare for the construction and maintenance of Space Station Freedom. Endeavour was scheduled for an April launch. The main objectives of the STS-57 mission were retrieval of the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) deployed during a Shuttle flight in August 1992 and the conducting of research in the Spacehab module. (NASA Release 93-31)
John H. Gibbons, Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy, outlined to the members-designate of the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station, three budget options. The three options are a low option of $5 billion, a mid-range option of $7 billion, and a high option of $9 billion. Each option would cover the total expenditures for the Space Station from fiscal year 1994 through 1988. (NASA Release 93-64)
A team of astronomers using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope discovered a "double nucleus" in the center of the neighboring spiral galaxy M31, located in the constellation Andromeda.  Hubble shows that the M31 nucleus is much more complex than previously though, according to Dr. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, Tucson, Arizona.
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
NASA announced that the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had been selected to design and build, in-house, the Space Station Furnace Facility, the first major element of Space Station scientific instrumentation and the focus of microgravity materials science research on the Space Station. (NASA Release 93-211)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
A Soyuz spacecraft with a Russian-French crew docked successfully with the Mir-1 orbiting Space Station on July 3. (RTw, July  3/93)
NASA announced that it planned to launch a $550 million-plus mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. Observers viewed the mission as very important for NASA's future; failure to repair the telescope would not only be a blow to astronomy but also would fuel the debate in Congress about NASA's ability to build Space Station Freedom later in the decade. The concern over the repair mission led to extensive oversight, numerous internal debates about the mission, and talk of a possible lengthening of the duration of the mission in order to allow for as many as six spacewalks. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93; Science, Feb 12/93; RTw, Mar 11; B Sun Magazine, Mar 14/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
The head of the Japanese space agency's office of space utilization said that Japan was unhappy with cutbacks to the Space Station Freedom project. Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa may bring up the issue at a meeting with President Clinton, scheduled to be held in Washington this week. (LA Times, Apr 14/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
A New York Times editorial suggested that if pain was to be spread fairly, the country's two biggest science projects, the $8.3 billion Superconducting Super Collider now being built in Texas and the $30 billion Space Station, had to be cut along with other vital programs.
Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)
The President's 1994 budget request for NASA called for an increase over last year's budget and contained key provisions for the Space Station program and the development of important new technologies. The President was to propose a $14.7 billion budget for NASA for fiscal year 1994, up from $14.1 billion during the current year.
The Los Angeles Times reported that congressional supporters of the proposed Space Station were warning that the project would face serious trouble if President Clinton supported a radical, low-cost design. Supporters of the Station made it clear that they supported the most elaborate and expensive of the three redesigns developed by NASA. This design, which would cost $13.3 billion over the next five years, would cut more than $4 billion from the cost of the Station, yet it would keep most of the Station's capabilities and make use of much of the work that NASA had done on the project over the last nine years. (LA Times, June 11/93)
NASA announced that it had cleared the instruments scheduled to be used for the Hubble Telescope repair mission.  It was feared that the instruments had been contaminated by sandy  grit that had seeped into the cargo room where the equipment was being stored. The grit problem forced NASA to move the Endeavour to a different launch pad. (B Sun, Nov 16/93; W Times, Nov 16/93; USA Today, Nov 16/93; RTw, Nov 15/93)
By a one-vote margin, the House of Representatives voted to fund Space Station Freedom. As a result of a 216-215 vote, the program escaped an attempt by budget-cutting lawmakers to scrap the multibillion-dollar project. (WSJ, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93; LA Times, June 24/93; W Times, June 24/93; USA Today, June 24/93; AP, June 24/93; UPI, June 23/94; RTw, June 23/93; W Post, June 24/93)
The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
The House Space, Science, and Technology Committee passed a $15.16 billion authorization for NASA, in effect rejecting the attempt to kill the Space Station. The authorization would give the Space Station $1.9 billion a year for the next six fiscal years and $1.3 billion in the fiscal year 2000. Congressional opponents of the station, however, vowed to take the fight to the House floor. (NY Times, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; USA Today, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93)
In an address to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, said that the redesign effort for Space Station Freedom was making "great progress." (AvWk, May 10/93)
A New York Times editorial recommended that Congress eliminate the Space Station program because of the need to find deeper budget cuts and the fact that the program looked "more like pork-barrel spending for the aerospace industry than an exciting technological venture." The editorial noted that cutting the program would force the nation to reassess just what role humans should play in space. (NY Times, June 23/93)
A spaceship, with two cosmonauts on board, was launched from Kazakhstan to test a new docking procedure for a possible linkup with a U.S. Space Shuttle. The spaceship was scheduled to dock with the orbiting Space Station Mir and deliver the two cosmonauts, who would replace the two currently on board the Mir.  (W Times, Jan 23/93; AP, Jan 24/93; UPI, Jan 24/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced that following a White House directive, NASA had begun a redesign of the proposed Space Station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build, and cheaper to operate. The redesign team planned to present three proposed models to the Clinton Administration by June 1. Goldin said that the agency would make maximum use of the $8.5-billion worth of work that had gone into designing and planning the Space Station since the mid-198s. (NY Times, Mar 12/93; W Times, Mar 12/93; LA Times, Mar 12/93; B Sun, Mar 12/93; AP, Mar 11/93, Mar 12/93; WSJ, Mar 12/93; Space News, Mar 15-21; AvWk, Mar 15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93, Mar 12/93)
Hughes Aircraft and Perkin-Elmer Corporation agreed to pay $25 million to head off a threatened government lawsuit, charging them with liability for the defect that crippled the $2-billion Hubble Space Telescope, the Justice Department announced. (UPI, Oct 4/93; AP, Oct 5/93; NY Times, Oct 5/93; B Sun, Oct 5/93, Oct 8/93; W Post, Oct 5/93; WSJ, Oct 5/93; LA Times, Oct 5/93)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had reported that recent NASA Hubble Space Telescope observations of a class of active galaxies further supported the theory that they are fueled by a massive black hole at the center. (NASA Release 93-130; RTw, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
By using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have concluded that the Markarian 315 galaxy, a galaxy that has been observed for ten years, is in reality composed of two merged galaxies; the collision of the two galaxies is thought to have provided new fuel for a massive black hole, which has a "tail" of gas 240,000 light-years long. (NASA Release 93-006; W Times, Jan 8, 1993)
In a report delivered to the White House, a panel appointed by the President said it found the two cheaper options for a Space Station to be the "most deserving of further
Writing in the Chicago Tribune, commentator Joan Beck called on Congress to kill the Space Station. She admitted that killing the project would cost jobs, but argued that doing so was necessary if progress were to be made in cutting back the deficit. (C Trib, June 24/93)
Scientists reported that NASA's Galileo spacecraft had detected changes in the interplanetary magnetic field as it passed the asteroid Ida on August 28. (NASA Release 93-193)
NASA announced that a task force established by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to review plans for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission had concluded that "the mission is achievable." The servicing mission was currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA Release 93-96)
Russia's Mir Space Station celebrated its seventh anniversary in orbit on February 20. The Mir has given Russian cosmonauts much experience with extended periods in space. About half-dozen cosmonauts have made multiple flights and spent a total of more than a year in orbit. (AP, Feb 19/93)
Two Russian cosmonauts orbiting the earth since July  have been forced to extend their stay on the Mir Space Station by 49 days because of a delay in sending a relief craft, a space agency officials announced. (RTW, Oct 16/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had looked into the nucleus of a galaxy created by the collision of two galaxies and had discovered a pinwheel-shaped disk of gas surrounded by clusters of young stars born as result of the collision. "This may unlock the key for understanding how all globular clusters formed in ellipticals," said Dr. Brad Whitmore of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.
An editorial in the Washington Post noted that in light of the budget deficit it was difficult to quarrel with Congress's decision to kill funding for the Superconducting Super Collider. By that same token, however, the Space Station deserved to be killed, especially because the Super Collider had the potential to contribute to human knowledge while the Space Station did not. (W Post, June 30/93)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it had picked two Germans, a Spaniard, and a Swede for its first joint missions with Russian astronauts to the Mir-1 Space Station in 1994 and 1995. The ESA had reserved one slot each for the two flights. A decision on which two men would participate would be made in the weeks before the flight. (RTw, May 7/93)
NASA announced that it planned to use the eight Space Shuttle flights scheduled for 1993 for research relating to the building and operation of Space Station Freedom, scheduled to be launched in three years.
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts was scheduled to blast off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission during which the team would carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments. This was the fourth joint Russian-French space mission since 1982. The mission had been largely overshadowed by the space program's serious financial problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union. (RTw, June 6/30)
After a one-day weather delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour lifted off before dawn on a mission to repair the out-of-focus $3 billion Hubble Space Telescope. Four members of the Shuttle crew, made up of six men and one woman, were to take five planned day-long spacewalks in an attempt to restore the full capability of the Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; TRw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; NY Times, Dec 3/93; APn, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93)
NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
A spokesman said that NASA had delayed loading the Hubble Space Telescope's replacement parts into Space Shuttle Endeavour because a fine, sandy substance had been found on two sealed plastic bags containing instruments needed to repair the telescope. A wind storm was thought responsible.  Officials were to inspect the instruments to make sure they had not been damaged. NASA did not believe the inspection would delay the mission's target liftoff of Dec. 1. (AP, Nov 2/93; RTw, Nov 2/93, Nov 4/98; B Sun, Nov 4/93)
Writing in Business Week, science writer John Carey predicted that Congress would ultimately keep alive the Space Station, which he labelled a boondoggle, and very likely kill the scientifically worthy Super Collider. Carney charged that the  Space Station was mainly being kept alive to preserve 15,000 mostly high-paying jobs in areas hard hit by defense cutbacks.  He viewed the cries of those who charged that the country couldn't afford the Super Collider as hypocrisy, noting that Congress funds much less worthy projects. (Business Week, Sept. 13/93)
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
NASA scientists said they were "ecstatic" over their progress in bringing the Hubble Space Telescope back to life after this month's repair mission. Hubble's ground handlers at NASA predicted that they would focus the observatory completely by the end of January, about two weeks quicker than expected. (H Post, Dec 23/93; APn, Dec 29/93; B Sun, Dec 25/93)
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
The Houston Chronicle reported on a new nationwide poll of registered voters conducted by Yankelovitch Partners and sponsored by NASA contractor Rockwell International Corporation. The poll revealed that 70 percent of American voters supported the construction of a permanently staffed Space Station and 63 percent believed that the United States should spend "whatever is necessary" to preserve its lead in space activities. Some of the poll results, however, reflected wide swings of support for the space program. (H Chron, May 25/93)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts blasted off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission. The team was scheduled to carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments and undertake three space walks.  This was the fourth joint Russian-French space flight since 1982. (RTw, Jul 1/93; RT, Jul 1/93)
The newly released proposals to redesign Space Station Freedom drew mixed reviews on Capitol Hill, with supporters praising the effort and detractors citing the cost of the project as further evidence that it should be abandoned. (W Post, June 9/93; LA Times, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; P Inq, June 9/93; AP, June 9/93; APn, June 8/93; RTw, June 8/93; H Chron, June 9/93; H Post, June 10/93)
NASA released two new Hubble space telescope photographs that show a bullet of gas streaking across the sky. According to J. Jeff Hester, an Arizona State University astronomer, the new pictures show a "shock wave from a colossal explosion of a star 15,000 years ago smashing into a pocket of interstellar gas, heating the gas and causing it to glow." Following the blast wave is a shaft of gas traveling at more than 3 million miles an hour. The images show the structure behind the shock waves in the Cygnus Loop supernova remnant. The Hubble photos are giving astronomers their first detailed look at the anatomy of the powerful astrophysical shock wave generated by a supernova. (NASA Release N93-002; B Sun, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 18/93)
House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)
Bryan O'Connor, a former astronaut and deputy director of the redesign team and deputy associate administrator of the office of space flight at NASA, said that NASA engineers planned to have three new design options ready by June. O'Connor said that two plans could cut the cost of the project by 50 percent or more. The third plan, which would be based on the current Space Station Freedom concept, would cost more. Whether the redesign effort could be done quickly and cheaply was still in doubt, O'Connor said. (AP, Apr 6/93; W Post, Apr 6/93)
NASA announced that April marked the 10th anniversary of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a space-based network developed to meet telecommunications needs of Space Shuttle, Space Station, and other low Earth-orbiting spacecraft missions. The TDRSS is equipped to support up to 24 user spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle, simultaneously. (NASA Release 93-60)
In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)
According to a report in Space News, NASA and White House officials agreed last week to consider partner concerns about the Space Station design effort. The U.S. Government would give their European, Japanese, and Canadian partners greater representation in the project and ensure that any alternative design did not exclude their hardware. The agreement was laid out in a March 19 document. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
Onboard computers aborted the launch of Space Station Discovery just three seconds before liftoff. This was the fourth delay for Discovery, which was halted twice for technical problems in July  and rescheduled because of a meteor shower on August 11. NASA said the next try could come in three to six weeks.
The Russians, eager to hawk their space wares to the West, were scheduled to hold a conference on the Mir Space Station July  27 to July  28 at the Dulles Hyatt in Herndon, Virginia.  Hosted by NPO Engergia, manufacturer of the Mir, the conference is scheduled to cover all aspects of the platform.  A large delegation was expected from the NASA Space Station redesign team. (Washington Technology, Jul 15/93)
A NASA panel recommended that the space agency plan two Space Shuttle missions rather than the scheduled one to repair the Hubble telescope. The panel agreed that the repairs could be done, but suggested that because of the complexity of the task, a back-up mission should be planned. (UPI, May 25/93; AP, May 25/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
U.S. Senate candidate Richard Fisher called Space Station Freedom a "pork barrel" project in a speech on Friday. Fisher, a Texas investor, was running as a Democrat in a special May 1 election. Fisher had advised the independent presidential campaign of Ross Perot, who had criticized the lack of spending controls on the Space Station project. Fisher, who in the past had voiced support for the Superconducting Super Collider, said that he was still studying the project's worth. (H Chron, Apr 24/93)
President Clinton thanked the crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour for giving "a great deal of credibility" to his attempt to save the Space Station. The President called the crew on Tuesday, June 22. (USA Today, June 23/93; NY Times, June 23/93; W Times, June 23/93)
The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)
NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
Several life science researchers questioned whether a redesigned Space Station would accomplish enough life science objectives to be worth the investment. Researchers at a meeting of the NationaL Research Council's Space Studies Board said that they expected a redesign to either shrink or reduce the centrifuge, a set of spinning modules designed for precise gravity experiments on animals aboard the station. Harold Guy, a professor at the University of California's School of Medicine in LaJolla, California, said that without a large centrifuge, much of the station's experimental value for life scientists would be lost. "The life science community may bail out," said Fred Turek, a neurobiologist and chairman of the space biology and medicine committee on the National Research Council's Space Studies Board. (Space News, Mar 1/93)
Representative George E. Brown Jr, chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, warned the Clinton Administration that ordering a redesign of the Space Station might doom not only the space station but also other international "big science" projects. He also sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin cautioning him against abandoning the current design, which had cost $8 billion so far. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
Space News reported that European space officials were monitoring news about the fate of the United States Space Station under the Clinton Administration. The 13-nation European Space Agency (ESA) had agreed to spend about $2.8 billion on its Columbus Space Station program. The European program included a habitable laboratory that was to be attached to the Station and related ground equipment. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
NASA officials announced that they planned to eliminate a number of expensive facilities and delay several Space Station assembly missions in their attempt to cut growing cost projections for the program. Senior program officials said that they had reduced $l.08 billion in anticipated cost increases for the Space Station to $678 million. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, commentator James Flanigan made the case for funding the Space Station, reminding readers of the Vest Commission report, ordered last March by the White House. The report listed three main goals of the Space Station program: to learn about space travel, specifically how human beings and materials react to prolonged weightless exposure; to gather technological and engineering knowledge; and to further international cooperation. (LA Times, June 28/93)
Technical breakthroughs in space have helped launch clinical advances on earth. Space Shuttle experiments, which focus on determining how best to maintain the health of astronauts aboard a future Space Station, continue to provide spin-offs for clinical medicine on earth, from programmable pacemakers to a better understanding of vestibular disorders. The cost, however, is very high, and the question remains whether the Space Station project represents a potentially giant leap for medicine or a small step for a select few. (Medical World News, Aug 15/93)
