George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)
A Japanese cabinet advisory commission report stated that Japan needed to double its space budget over the next 15 years to initiate planetary expeditions, become a leader in Earth observation, and develop advanced robotics. The new space plan confirmed Japan's existing commitment to international space programs, inclduing the Japanese Experiment Module for NASA's International Space Station. The recommendations came from a long-term planning group within the Space Activities Commission and were to be forwarded to Japan's Finance Ministry at the end of August when the fiscal 1995 budget would be prepared. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
The anticipated fight over the budget and, specifically, the likelihood that NASA's appropriation would be cut and that further efforts would be made to eliminate funding for the International Space Station was featured prominently in the media. (SP News, May 16-22/94; Fla Today, May 16/94; Defense Daily, May 16/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
The Book Review section carried an extensive review of Eric J. Chaisson's The Hubble Wars: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope. Chaisson served as spokesman and director of educational programs for the Space Telescope Science Institute, a NASA-supported group of astronomers responsible for planning and directing the telescope's observational program. According to the author, the space telescope's progress toward scientific discovery was hampered by squabbling among NASA, the military intelligence community, industry, the press, and scientists. Some of the problems might have been avoided if the Hubble scientists had had access to the technical experience of the military intelligence community. (NY Times Book Review, May 29/94)
The Boeing Company denied any intentional wrongdoing but paid the U.S. Government $75 million to settle accusations that it systematically overcharged and mischarged the Government on military contracts. U.S. Attorney Kate Pflaumer said the most egregious mischarging was in Boeing's divisions that explored artificial intelligence applications to robotics, military command and control, high-speed jets, and Space Stations. Boeing admitted having improperly charged the Government several million dollars in costs incurred in selling aircraft overseas and having charged the Government millions of dollars for hazardous-waste disposal. (NY Times, Apr 30/94; WSJ, Apr 30/94)
NASA announced that its Galileo Spacecraft had begun a six-month process of radioing to Earth data taken during the collisions of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at Jupiter in July. (NASA Release 94-133)
Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania, who was scheduled to chair the House Science Committee in the new Congress, said he felt that Space Station appropriatations by Congress were safe. He indicated he wanted to explore ways of linking NASA facilities with universities and international partnerships as well as tax incentives for space business development, all of which he saw as ways of saving space funds. (AP, Dec 14/94; Gannett News Service, Dec 14/94; H Chron, Dec 15/94; Congressional Quarterly's Congressional Monitor, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 15/94)
The National Research Council reported that NASA officials had not yet established a solid working relationship with the Russian Space Agency. The Council found tremendous improvement in NASA management but considered that NASA thus far lacked a strong grip on Russian involvement. Since 1985 the Council, the operating arm of the National Academies of Science and Engineering, had reviewed the Space Station regularly under federal funding. The Space Station Committee, headed by Jack Kerrebrock, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor, also expressed concern that NASA needed to invest more in experiment development and preparatory work on Spacelab, the Shuttle's science laboratory. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; NY Times, Jul 29/94; Phillips Business Information, Jul 29/94)
NASA faced tough opposition over Russian participation in the International Space Station during hearings of the House Subcommittee on Space. Both committee chairman Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas, and James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican member, believed strongly that it should be an American Station. (O Sen Star, Apr 21/94)
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Partner met in Paris with officials of the Russian Federation for the first time to discuss steps to implement the decision to bring Russia into the Space Station partnership. The resulting joint statement referred to Russia's planned contribution, enhancing Station capabilities, needed changes to the legal framework of the 1988 agreements to include Russia, and a schedule to complete negotiations, beginning with an April meeting. (NASA Editor's Note N94-23)
A photograph was featured of the first node of NASA's international laboratory designed as part of the International Space Station. It was being manufactured by Boeing at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. (Fla Today, Oct 2/94)
A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)
NASA announced the dedication of the Independent Verification and Validation facility, a new research facility in Fairmont, West Virginia, that was to support NASA's work in advanced research, stimulate commercialization efforts, and provide training in a variety of engineering and technology areas. In addition to housing staff working on software for the International Space Station, it was to house parts of the Earth Observing System Data and Operations System. Senator Robert C. Byrd attended the opening. (NASA Release 94-88; Times-West Virginian, Jun 2/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)
Russia again postponed the launch of the Spektr research module, scheduled to rendezvous with Space Station Mir in December. Itar-Tass news agency reported that the launch had been postponed until May 1995. (Itar-Tass, Nov 17/94)
France planned on its next manned mission to Russian Space Station Mir in January 1996 to use an advanced Aerospatiale system called Alice 2 to improve knowledge of fluid behavior in microgravity conditions for use in materials processing. (AvWk, Dec 12/94)
NASA announced that the Space Station Control Board had approved a revised assembly sequence that provided significantly more power for the U.S. laboratory, provided an earlier U.S. capability for essential Space Station systems, and produced hardware in an efficient and cost effective manner while still meeting the $2.1 billion annual spending cap. (NASA Release 94-117)
NASA announced that based on technology developed for its Hubble Space Telescope, a new, non-surgical breast biopsy technique had been developed. The new technique, known as stereotactic large-core needle biopsy, was predicted to reduce national health care costs by about $1 billion annually. The technique involved an improvement to digital imaging technology called a Charge Coupled Device, a high tech silicon chip that converted light directly into an electronic image. (NASA Release 94-107)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said he would personally discuss the Space Station program with 220 members of Congress before the House of Representatives votes on the Station in the summer. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94; AvWk, Apr 11/94)
A feature article described the work of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. The astronomers devised plans for a Polar Stratospheric Telescope (POST) intended to reveal stars and galaxies in twice the detail possible with the Hubble Telescope and do so more cheaply. The telescope, which was to hang from a blimp tethered over the South Pole, was to be the prototype for a new generation of observatories that could follow Hubble into space. The Institute, together with Johns Hopkins University, a consortium of other universities, and two private manufacturers, planned to ask NASA for $500,000 to $1,000,000 for a six-month design and cost study. (B Sun, Feb 22/94)
The General Accounting Office issued a report to the Congress stating that Russian participation in the U.S. Space Station project would add nearly $400 million to the Station's cost as well as $1.4 billion for other NASA programs that supported the Station, instead of saving that amount, as had been predicted. (Reuters, Aug 2/94; P Inq, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 3/94)
Former NASA Space Station Director Richard Kohrs was a member of a team to revamp the Cassini mission for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also contacted him, reportedly asking that he look at the troubled Space Station program. (SP News, Mar 28-Apr 3/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronauts Norman E. Thagard and Bonnie J. Dunbar as prime and backup crew members for a three-month flight on Russian Space Station Mir in March 1995. Both astronauts flew on previous U.S. Shuttle flights and conducted various scientific experiments. (NASA Release 94-16)
In a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, chairman John Dingell, Democrat from Michigan, pressed NASA officials to explain why they had selected Boeing as prime contractor for the Space Station in late 1993 in spite of the firm's having failed NASA's own cost-control reviews. NASA officials admitted they did not know that Boeing was under 21 federal criminal investigations and was forced to pay the government $161 million in settlements. Testifying for NASA were Deirdre A. Lee, Associate Administrator for Procurements, and Deputy Administrator John R. Daily. In addition to the problems with Boeing, Michael Thibault, Assistant Director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency, said that an audit of charges by IBM, a subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas, one of the earlier Space Station contractors, found that about 20 percent of IBM's $490 million charges were not allowable under its contract. (LA Times, Jul 28/94; SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)
NASA announced that two teams of astronomers, working independently with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, had ruled out the possibility that red dwarf stars consituted the invisible matter, called dark matter, believed to account for more than 90 percent of the mass of the universe. The results increased the mystery of the missing mass because whatever dark matter was, its gravitational pull ultimately would determine whether the universe would expand forever or would someday collapse. Bruce H. Margon, an astrophysicist at the University of Washington at Seattle, in discussing the mystery of the missing matter, said "It's a fairly embarrassing situation to admit that we can't find 90 percent of the universe." Various theories had been proposed by physicists, such as that neutrinos, electrically neutral subatomic particles produced prolifically in the Big Bang, had mass, or that the value of the cosmological constant, a concept invented by Albert Einstein, was low, helping to account for the difference between the observed density of matter and the critical density. (NASA Release 94-188; Reuters, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 16/94; H Chron, Nov 16/94; C Trib, Nov 16/94; CSM, Nov 17/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94)
The Senate voted 64 to 36 to defeat the amendment offered by Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat from Arkansas, to end funding for the International Space Station. (W Post, Aug 4/94; W Times, Aug 4/94; Huntsville News, Aug 4/94)
A biography of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin based on an interview with him, said that Goldin put in 15-hour days; originally, he did this seven days a week but now he did it five and a half days a week. In returning to NASA from TRW, he determined to battle the bureaucracy and did so. He expressed concern about America having become a nation of consumption, interested mainly in entertainment and recreation. His major present concern was keeping the Space Station on track. (News Register, Jul 17/94)
The Space Telescope Institute released photographs made by the repaired Hubble Space Telescope of comet fragments that were to smash into the planet Jupiter in July. The fragments were projected to strike with the force of 100 million hydrogen bombs, with the explosions so bright that the light would be reflected off Jupiter's moons. (Reuters, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94; AP, Feb 9/94)
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
NASA's Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station, Wilbur C. Trafton, said he expected Russia to participate in the Space Station partnership in accordance with the agreement reached in 1993. Such participation was scheduled to allow the project to be completed in June 2002 instead of 2003 and save $2 billion. If Russia should withdraw from participation, backup plans existed. (AP, Feb 18/94; Reuters, Feb 18/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
In a telephone interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, who was formerly general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group in Redondo Beach, California, answered questions about NASA and his efforts to revive the agency. Among other topics, he discussed the International Space Station, the difficulties of working in space, and the problems of budget cuts that NASA faced. (Orange County Register, Apr 8/94)
NASA announced the completion of the International Space Station System Design Review. Using approximately 75 percent of Space Station Freedom hardware, the completed Station was to consist of U.S. elements, including the integrated truss, habitation module, and laboratory module; the Russian science power platform, service module, and functional cargo block vehicle (FGB); the European laboratory module; the Japanese experiment module and exposed facility; and the Canadian remote manipulator system. The assembly was to begin with launch of the FGB vehicle in November 1997. The U.S. contribution to the Station was estimated to cost $17.4 billion from Fiscal Year 1994 until assembly was complete in 2002. The ground system for the Station was to build on the Shuttle and Freedom programs. (NASA Release 94-53; USA Today, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 26/94)
Two Russian cosmonauts stepped outside Space Station Mir in order to reposition solar panels outside the Station. They were expected to spend five hours outside, and the repositioning of the panels should facilitate the visit of U.S. Shuttle Atlantis in 1995. (AP, Sep 13/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and ranking member of the House Space Subcommittee, wrote NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin requesting information about U.S. dependence on Russia, payments to the Russian government, cost constraints on the Space Station in view of NASA's tight budget, and financial agreements with Station international partners. He expressed reservations over the decision to move the Station to a higher orbital inclination at the Russian request and expressed the fear that the agreement with Russia was negotiated from a position of U.S. vulnerability because of budgetary limits. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
Wilbur Trafton, NASA's Space Station program director, who was in Houston to attend the Space Exploration 94 conference sponsored by the NASA Alumni League, said several Chinese officials attending a gathering of aerospace professionals in Huntsville, Alabama, asked informally about joining the U.S.-led International Space Station program. They were urged to pursue their goal through diplomatic channels. (H Chron, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope took new images of the planet Uranus that revealed the planet's rings, at least five of the inner moons, and bright clouds and a high altitude haze above the planet's south pole. (NASA Release N94-78)
NASA announced the names of the crew for the Space Shuttle mission to rendezvous and dock with the Russian Space Station Mir in October 1995. The mission commander was designated as Kenneth D. Cameron. (NASA Release 94-145)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had obtained the clearest views yet of distant galaxies that existed when the universe was a fraction of its current age. Hubble findings suggested that elliptical galaxies developed quickly into their present shapes. However, spiral galaxies in large clusters evolved over a much longer period. (NASA Release 94-201; Reuters, Dec 6/94; NY Times, Dec 7/94; W Post, Dec 7/94; W Times, Dec 7/94; H Chron, Dec 7/94; USA Today, Dec 7/94; CSM, Dec 7/94; H Post, Dec 7/94; Newsweek, Dec 19/94)
A congressional report, based on a House Subcommittee on Space tour of the European and Russian space communities, said Europeans were tired of U.S. changes in the International Space Station project and uncertain about U.S. plans to take Russia in as a full partner. The report also expressed concern about how well Russia could support its part of the Space Station agreement. (AP, Mar 23/94)
NASA was experiencing difficulties finding sufficient amounts of materials to fill the Shuttle's cargo bay in order to justify a planned ten Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir. It might develop that only six or seven flights would be needed according to NASA Shuttle chief Bryan O'Connor. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 1/94)
An article criticized of the ways in which NASA spent more than half the funds allocated to it on unproductive matters that had not advanced the design of the Space Station. The article alleged that at least 24 months of delays resulting from congressional budget-trimming and frequent redesigns cost $1.6 billion, a "hefty extra layer of management" cost $1.1 billion; a discarded propulsion and guidance unit cost $900 million, a failed data management system cost $500 million, and other redesigns and deletions cost $600 million. Since the appointment of Daniel Goldin as Administrator, many of the problems had been fixed, but if technical glitches and congressional meddling recurred, the program could again be in trouble. (Bus Wk, Aug 15/94)
After an unsuccessful attempt to link with the Mir Space Station, an unmanned Progress M-24 Russian cargo craft was scheduled to try again on August 30. A Russian spokesman said the docking mechanism of the Progress appeared too sensitive for the Mir's vibrations. The attempt of Progress to dock August 30 again was unsuccessful. However, on September 1 a Russian cosmonaut successfully docked the unmanned supply ship. (AP, Aug 29/94; Reuters, Aug 29/94; C Trib, Aug 31/94; UP, Sep 2/94; NY Times, Sep 3/94; W Post, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 3/94; P Inq, Sep 4/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
NASA Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn L. Huntoon announced a number of changes designed to assure the success of the Shuttle and International Space Station programs. Changes included the establishment of a new Projects Office, a new Business Management Directorate, and a new Information Systems Directorate; encouragement of rotational assignments and "teaming"; and new leadership appointments. Larry Bourgeois became head of the Projects Office, Terrence Hesse became director of the Business Management Directorate, and Jane Stearns became director of the Information Systems Directorate. A number of other appointments also were announced. (NASA Release 94-036; H Chron, Jun 17/94; H Post, Jun 17/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)
Groups of citizen lobbyists, particularly from Florida, Texas, and Ohio, came to Washington to lobby Congress on the importance of the Space Station to the continuation of a manned space program. (Fla Today, Jun 15/94; O Sen Star, Jun 15/94)
NASA announced that transmission of data from Galileo spacecraft indicated its observation of what was probably a satellite of the asteroid Ida, which would be the first moon of an asteroid ever sighted. The flyby of Ida occurred August 28, 1993. (NASA Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)
NASA announced the updated schedule of Space Shuttle/Space Station missions through calendar year 1997 and expendable launch vehicle missions through calendar year 2001. Included were 10 Space Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir between 1995 and 1997. (NASA Release 94-61)
Bowman Cutter, deputy assistant to the President for economic policy, took a lead in developing a space policy for the administration, according to a statement he made on May 26. As a first step, he convened a meeting May 13 at the White House with a diverse and bipartisan group of industry representatives, NASA managers, military officers, and academicians to discuss the space program's future. Although there was some talk about the Space Station, the major emphasis was on longer-term policy. Rather than new programs, White House officials said the focus was to be on streamlining NASA's bureaucracy, focusing research and development to help private industry, and pushing small missions to demonstrate advanced technologies. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
Possible evidence of a new planetary system only 52 light-years away arising from observation of a star named Beta Pictoris was published in Nature. Harold F. Levinson and colleagues at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio showed how a system of planets and comets could account for the phenomena seen near the star. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled some of these new discoveries. Planet hunter Charles M. Telesco at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama said of Levinson's work, "Whenever you can put a body of evidence into a coherent picture like that, everybody feels much better." (CSM, Dec 1/94; H Post, Dec 1/94)
Roger Bonnet, science director of the European Space Agency (ESA), stated in an interview that the ESA, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, sought some $350 million from member states to fund the first in a series of lunar programs that could end in a manned moon station within 25 years. The first European emissary to the moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (Lunar European Demonstration Approach), could land on the moon by 2001. LEDA would carry instruments to measure the darkness of the lunar sky, the frequency of meteorite impacts, and the stability of the ground, factors that would affect the functioning of a future astronomical observatory. LEDA would also need to analyze lunar soil for components to be used in the construction and operation of a permanent station. Such a European approach would bypass NASA's plans for an orbiting Space Station, a plan with which many European countries had become disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
The new chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, David Obey, Democrat from Wisconsin, divided a $540 billion federal spending budget in such a way that NASA had a good chance of getting 98 percent of the funds it requested for fiscal 1995. Efforts to kill the International Space Station project on the House floor remained likely. (O Sen Star, May 12/94; Fla Today, May 12/94; H Chron, May 13/94; H Post, May 13/94; W Post, May 13/94; SP News, May 16/94)
NASA announced a major milestone in the Space Station Program as of February 1, with the signing by NASA and contractor officials of documents ending the Freedom Work Package contracts. NASA had signed these agreements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. Instead, responsibility for design, development, and integration of work on the International Space Station program was being concentrated in a single contract with Boeing Defense and Space Systems Group, Seattle. (NASA Release 94-15)
NASA announced assembly sequence refinements that incorporated the latest updates to plans for the International Space Station. The sequence incorporated early provisions for a centrifuge and allowed for the earlier construction of Russia's Solar Power Platform but did not affect existing major milestones. (NASA Release 94-164)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement hailing the vote in the House of Representatives that defeated an amendment to end the Space Station program. In his statement, he expressed appreciation for the leadership of the President, the efforts of the Vice President, and the hard work of Chairman Brown and Representative Walker. He also praised the collaboration of NASA with international partners, which strengthened the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 94-106)
NASA announced that astronauts John E. Blaha and Shannon W. Lucid had been selected to train for the second of at least four scheduled astronaut stays aboard Russian Space Station Mir. The two were to begin training in Star City, Russia, in February 1995. (NASA Release 94-183)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used the European Space Agency's Faint Object Camera on the Hubble Space Telescope to confirm a prediction of the Big Bang theory--that helium should be widespread in the early universe. The July 7 issue of the British science journal Nature reported the way in which the helium was detected. (NASA Release 94-109)
Representative Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas and chairman of the Space Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, said he was not sure the President was doing enough to prevent defections among Space Station supporters. Representative George Brown, Democrat from California and chair of the parent committee, threatened to withdraw his support if the President could not get sufficient funds for other science projects. (H Chron, Apr 15/94; National Journal, Apr 23/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, in addressing a Maryland Space Business Roundtable, warned aerospace contractors that congressional budget cutters were targeting NASA's Space Station; meanwhile other congressional members supported increased funds for human services programs and sought to cut from science and technology projects. Senator Mikulski stressed the importance of investments in science and technology within the framework of a balanced budget. (B Sun, Feb 16/94)
An editorial in a major space journal urged that the European Space Agency (ESA) not abandon its Columbus space station module program, despite a redesign of the Freedom station in favor of a U.S./Russian station core. This threat, due to funding crises in Germany and Italy, would jeopardize one of ESA's own justifications for existence. While ESA's near-term strategy is to maintain Columbus and increase ESA's participation in the station, its long-term strategy is for an advanced crew transfer spacecraft for station operations--a major European technological development. The U.S., Russia, Japan and Europe all need this new vehicle. Launched by Ariane-5, it should be ready around 2005-2007, after Columbus in 2001. Further, European managers rightly stressed that the station program should make better use of Ariane 5 for resupply as well as launches, but costs now 30 percent over budget must be reduced. (AvWk, Jan 3/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, called a closed-door meeting on May 5 to discuss the $30 billion International Space Station. He called the meeting after Administration officials assured him that Space Station costs would not shortchange other NASA programs. Observers said Brown wished to assure that NASA received sufficient funds to conduct its activities. Committee members decided they could take no action until they heard of the decisions of the Appropriations Committee. (Fla Today, May 5/94; AP, May 5/94; O Sen Star, May 6/94; H Chron, May 6/94; H Post, May 6/94; Fla Today, May 6/94; LA Times, May 11/94; Huntsville News, May 11/94)
A Russian Military Space Forces official told Reuters that Russia planned a series of unmanned space launches to its orbiting Space Station Mir in May before a manned launch in June with a cosmonaut from Kazakhstan. The unmanned launches were to consist of a cargo spacecraft, a communications satellite in a joint program with the U.S. company Rimsat, and two military satellites. (Reuters, May 5/94)
Three cosmonauts aboard Russian Space Station Mir celebrated the eighth anniversary of the Soviet Union's launch of Mir in 1986. (AP, Feb 20/94; W Times, Feb 21/94)
A feature article, including photographs, described the problems centering around adequate living room in space for astronauts in relation to the design of the Space Station. The main factor limiting space of the 28-by-14.5 foot habitat was the size of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay in which it would ride into orbit. (NY Times, Sep 8/94)
Russian Space Mission Control spokesman Alexander Volchenkov announced that the Soyuz TU-18 rocket had lifted off Saturday for rendezvous with the orbiting MIR Space Station. Aboard were three cosmonauts, one of whom may attempt a new record for living in space. The craft was scheduled to dock with Mir for a crew change, after 200 days in space for the current crew.
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)
Spence Armstrong, NASA Associate Administrator for Human Resources, stated that in order to cut more than 1,000 jobs as Congress ordered, NASA needed to offer buyouts to staff. To restructure the Space Station Freedom project, NASA had to cut 1,300 positions, but employees were not leaving in normal attrition numbers--an attrition of only 600 to 700 persons was predicted for fiscal 1994, without buyouts. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said further cuts would endanger NASA's entire mission. The vice president's "reinventing government" group said NASA needed to accelerate its job cuts but stick with attrition and buyouts rather than reductions in force. The group offered no specifics as to positions NASA should cut. (Federal Times, Feb 24/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported from Moscow that nine Russian women went into training for long-haul space flights by starting a four-month stint of lying with their heads below their feet. The Institute of Medicobiological Problem was in charge of the experiment, which simulated lengthy space flights aboard the Mir Space Station. One woman was to be selected to fly on Mir in November. (Reuters, Feb 18/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94)
In the absence of a National Space Council chaired by the Vice President, Vice President Al Gore's office became the focal point for space policy. Gore and the White House seemed confident that the administration had sufficient support to pass the Space Station. (SP News, May 16-22/94)
NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)
The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with the Boeing Company on the key elements of the prime contract for the International Space Station. The agreement dealt with the scope of work, program schedule, cost ceiling, and fee arrangements as well as establishing contractual terms for the contract to be signed before year's end. (NASA Release 94-144)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin spoke to workers at Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems in eastern New Orleans, praising the company's new contract with NASA to make lightweight Space Shuttle external fuel tanks, calling the tanks an essential part of the Space Station. (Times-Picayune, Apr 26/94)
Bryan O'Connor, overseer of Shuttle operations at NASA headquarters, said that NASA expected to receive shortly a Russian-built Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly that would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russia's Mir Space Station. A damaged tube delayed delivery of the docking component. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the National Space Society's conference and challenged the space community to define the U.S. role in space. He expressed frustration at repeated congressional efforts to kill the planned International Space Station. (Fla Today, Mar 11/94)
NASA announced that its prime contractor for Space Shuttle orbiters, Rockwell Aerospace, on September 11 received the Russian-built docking mechanism, the Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly (APDA). This mechanism would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to join the orbiting Russian Mir Space Station in June 1995. Work was scheduled to begin immediately at Rockwell's Space Systems Division to assemble the APDA with the Rockwell-built docking system hardware. (NASA Release 94-151)
NASA's budget was scheduled to face possible major cuts according to top congressional sources. The Space Station, Earth Observing System, International Ultraviolet Explorer, Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer, Cosmic Background Explorer, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, Mission Operations and Data Analysis, Cassini, AXAF, and two $1 billion wind tunnels for the High Speed Civil Transport program could be affected.
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement following the defeat of the Senate amendment to end funding for the International Space Station. Goldin praised the Senate's vote of confidence as an indication of a bipartisan coalition of support. He said that the Space Station was a "truly international scientific effort, and a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in the post Cold War world." Subsequent to Goldin's statement, various media comments appeared stressing the commitment of "time and political capital" by the President and the Vice President to supporting the Space Station, in addition to Goldin's tireless efforts. (NASA Release 94-127; SP News, Aug 8-14/94; B Sun, Aug 12/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Larry DeLucas, a former Space Shuttle payload specialist and an expert in protein crystallography, as acting senior scientist for the Space Station. (NASA Release 94-206; Phillips Business Information, Dec 14/94)
Commenting on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's urging of space scientists to search for a habitable planet among the stars, science columnist Robert C. Cowen viewed such a quest as feasible in view of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. He saw the next phase of the search as involving a look for signs of gravitational interaction of a star and planets. (CSM, Jun 22/94)
The House by a 278 to 155 vote rejected the amendment that would have ended the Space Station program the next fiscal year and redirected $2.1 billion in proposed funding to other NASA programs. A key factor in building support was the Station's foreign policy significance as a result of bringing Russia in as a Station partner. Intense lobbying efforts by the Clinton administration also were a factor. (Reuters, Jun 29/94; AP, Jun 29/94; UP, Jun 29/94; WSJ, Jun 30/94; P Inq, Jun 30/94; W Post, Jun 30/94; USA Today, Jun 30/94; W Times, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jul 1/94; C Trib, Jul 5/94)
The International Space Station was entering a decisive six-month period in which governments in the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada were poised to sign the final industrial contracts and intergovernmental accords needed to build the facility. Barring unforeseen developments, the European Space Agency would be unable to commit itself to the Space Station before November 1995, when its member governments' ministers were scheduled to convene. Other remaining hurdles were the signing of the prime contract for Station hardware between NASA and the Boeing Company; the conclusion of a smaller contract between the Canadian Space Agency and Spar Aerospace; a final round of negotiations bringing Russia into full Station partnership; and an agreement among the partners on who would contribute what to the Station's upkeep and the apportioning of access to the Station's limited electricity and other resources. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had discovered the best evidence yet of a black hole in the constellation Virgo. The proof consisted of a whirlpool of hot gas at the core of galaxy M87, which lies more than 52 million light-years from Earth. The stars in the whirlpool appeared to be streaming toward the galaxy's center and then into orbits bound to an apparent black hole hidden at M87's core. Data from the Hubble spectrometer, used to measure the velocity of stars orbiting within the nucleus of the M57 galaxy, also appeared to confirm the black hole. Sally Heap, a NASA astronomer, at a national meeting of the American Astronomical Society, commented on the Hubble findings in terms of her own research. (NASA Release 94-82; Fla Today, May 25/94; B Sun, May 26/94; USA Today, May 26/94; W Post, May 26/94; NY Times, May 26/94; W Times, May 26/94; Fla Today, May 26/94; WSJ, May 26/94; O Sen Star, May 26/94; AP, May 26/94; CSM, May 26/94; Oregonian, May 27/94; Fla Today, May 29/94; AP, May 30/94; H Chron, May 31/94; C Trib, May 31/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 2/94; Newsweek, Jun 6/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Earle K. Huckins III as Cassini Program Director in the Office of Space Science. An international program, Cassini was designed to explore the planet Saturn, its rings and moons, and the surrounding environment. Scheduled for launch on a Titan IV Centaur in October 1997, the Cassini spacecraft was to swing by Venus, the Earth, and Jupiter before being inserted into orbit around Saturn in June 2004. Cassini was projected to orbit Saturn for four years. (NASA Media Advisory Aug 11/94)
Astronaut Jannice Voss Ford, training for a mission aboard Russian Space Station Mir, appeared in a two-hour electronic conference concerning the Mir flight, NASA, the Space Station, and her qualifications for being an astronaut. (Fla Today, Jun 12/94)
NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
In order to carry out a complex docking experiment that involved detaching the Soyuz spacecraft from Mir and then redocking using automatic systems, the three cosmonauts aboard the Russian Space Station would remain in space an additional day. The operation was carried out successfully on November 2. On November 4, the German scientist and two cosmonauts returned to Earth. (Reuters, Nov 2/94; Phoenix Gazette, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; UP, Nov 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave an impassioned defense of NASA to a group of aerospace executives attending an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference in suburban Washington. He described the budget fight as part of Congress's continuing effort to turn the space program into a "debating society" and said it was time for the talk to stop. He deplored the fact that NASA was not given enough money to create a space program that American youth could dream about. Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, who sat next to Goldin, in contrast spoke of "a fatally flawed space station program" on which space dollars should not be risked. (O Sen Star, May 5/94; Space News, May 9/94)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1994 activities and provided a chronology of major space events. Of particular note were the flight of a Russian cosmonaut aboard a U.S. spacecraft for the first time and a spectacular cosmic collision that occurred on Jupiter. However, it was the work of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope that dominated NASA news in 1994. Among Hubble results were the following: evidence of a massive black hole in the center of a galaxy 50 million light-years away, supporting Einstein's theory of relativity; observations of huge pancake-shaped disks of dust, raw material for planet formation, swirling around half the stars in the Orion Nebula; confirmation of a critical prediction of the Big Bang theory that helium should be widespread in the early universe; and significant progress in determining the age of the universe--between 8 and 12 billion years--and its size. (NASA Release 94-216; UPI, Dec 22/94)
Canadian Industry Minister John Manley said that Canada was cutting its contribution to the International Space Station program from $1.2 billion to $500 million. It could not afford the proposed level of funding and instead was focusing its energies on helping Canadian space industries. (H Post, Jun 7/94)
The crew of NASA's November Atlantis Shuttle mission were scheduled to test the feasibility of an unusual rendezvous procedure for the second docking with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. They would fly Atlantis on a "plus R bar" (the radius vector from the target's center of mass to the Earth's center) to rendezvous with and retrieve the Crista-Spas atmospheric research satellite on the ninth day of the planned 11-day mission. The new approach would save fuel and not require any braking. Crista-Spas was to be deployed from Atlantis's robot arm within about 20 hours of Atlantis's launch. (AvWk, Oct 17/94; SP News, Oct 24-30)
NASA announced the crew of the STS-60 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for flight from February 3 to 11, 1994: Mission commander, Charlie Bolden; Pilot, Ken Reightler; mission specialists, Jan Davis, Ron Sega, Franklin Chang-Diaz, and Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut with two long-duration flights aboard the Mir Station. His flight will begin a new three-phase era of cooperation: ten Shuttle--Mir missions, joint work on the core Space Station, and expansion of the Station to all other partners.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Space Subcommittee the Space Station program was proceeding but cost and schedule savings were decreasing. NASA earlier estimated Russian participation would save two years and $2 billion. After the Systems Design Review, it appeared time would be speeded by 15 months and savings probably would be $1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million instead of $400 million for lease of the functional cargo block vehicle. Furthermore, agreement needed to be reached with Russia on the cost of a major component required to provide navigation and reboost capability for the Station. NASA assured the Committee that the agency would never cede control of the Station to Russian ground commanders. Goldin also said it was essential for NASA to have stable funding. (Reuters, Apr 13/94; Defense Daily, Apr 14/94; O Sen Star, Apr 14/94; H Post, Apr 14/94)
NASA showed photographs taken by Galileo spacecraft revealing for the first time an asteroid orbited by its own moon. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory released the photos of asteroid Ida. (NASA Release 94-50; Reuters, Mar 23/94; P Inq, Mar 24/94; LA Times, Mar 24/94; W Post, Mar 24/94; USA Today, Mar 24/94; NY Times, Mar 24/94)
NASA announced names of members of the crew of Atlantis for its mission in mid-1995 to perform the first docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. Robert L. Gibson was to command the 10-day mission, which was to include a Spacelab module. (NASA Release 94-90; H Chron, Jun 4/94; H Post, Jun 4/94)
Construction was getting underway on the Space Station project according to John Winch, Boeing Defense and Space Group manager in charge of building the habitation and laboratory models for the Station. Boeing workers were about to go on a three-shift, five-day week to expedite the program. (Fla Today, Dec 8/94)
Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
NASA's Cleveland Lewis Research Center was scheduled to work with the Russians on a project to use the sun's rays to power the Russian Mir Space Station. In addition, the Lewis Center was to direct the building of two wind tunnels desired by the commercial aircraft industry to help design airliners that fly at 2.4 times the speed of sound. The two projects would help compensate for jobs lost at Lewis by funding cuts. (Plain Dealer, Feb 11/94)
Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)
A feature article described the training program in Russia of U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar. Thagard was scheduled to blast off to Russian Space Station Mir with two cosmonauts in March 1995; Dunbar was his backup. They were studying Russian intensively, both the spoken language and technical terminology. In addition, they practiced on a Soyuz simulator, conducted serious physical workouts, and engaged in Russian psychological training for long-haul space crews. (LA Times, Jul 12/94)
The retrieval of the German Crista-Spas satellite by Atlantis during its recent mission proved the validity of the rendezvous approach that NASA now planned to use for all dockings with Russia's Mir Space Station. Technical details were given of the "plus R bar" approach. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had taken an important step toward determining the age and size of the universe. They had been able to calculate with considerable precision the distance to a remote galaxy, M100, in the Virgo cluster of galaxies. This measurement established the distance to the cluster as 56 million light-years (with an uncertainty of +/- 6 million light-years). The research results, which were to be further refined, were being published in the October 27 issue of Nature. The overall conclusion was that the universe was only 8 billion to 12 billion years old. (NASA Release 94-180; Reuters, Oct 26/94; NY Times, Oct 27/94; W Post, Oct 27/94; USA Today, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; C Trib, Oct 27/94; Bakersfield Californian, Oct 27/94; CSM, Oct 28/94; W Times, Oct 29/94; Time, Nov 7/94; U.S. News and World Report, Nov 7/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
NASA and the California Institute of Technology (CIT) signed a five-year, five-billion-dollar, cost-plus-award-fee contract to manage NASA's 7,300-member Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). This contract consolidated two previous contracts for CIT, which has managed JPL since NASA's inception in 1958. JPL, NASA's lead site for solar-system exploration, designed and built the Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WF/PC II) recently installed on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). It also runs programs such as NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, its Galileo mission to Jupiter, and the Magellan mission to Venus, as well as the U.S. half of the NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the sun, the NASA/CNES TOPEX/POSEIDON, and the SIR-C/X-SAR radar system on the Shuttle. (NASA Release C94-c)
The House Appropriations Committee approved a NASA budget of $14 billion, $240 million less than the Administration's request. The approved budget included full funding, $2.1 billion, for the Space Station. However, opponents threatened a major fight once the budget came to the House floor. Following receipt of assurances "protecting the American taxpayers from any unforeseen failure in the U.S.-Russian space partnership" in a letter from President Clinton the evening of June 22, the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on space, James Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin, said he would support the Space Station. (AP, Jun 22/94; Reuters, Jun 22/94; W Times, Jun 23/94; W Post, Jun 23/94; H Post, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 24/94; USA Today, Jun 28/94; W Times, Jun 28/94 )
NASA announced that it had released the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Cassini mission to Saturn, which would be available for public review and comment over a 45-day period. Cassini was a cooperative scientific mission of the U.S. and European space agencies scheduled for launch in October 1997 for a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey to Saturn. (NASA Release 94-174)
NASA and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) announced their agreement to put their space cooperation on a long-term basis. The arrangement provided for expanded cooperation in space science, microgravity research, and the Mission to Planet Earth, as well as Canada's continued full partnership in the International Space Station program. (NASA Release 94-89)
NASA was preparing three rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir to launch the new cooperative effort between Washington and Moscow. In the first, scheduled for February 1995, Shuttle Discovery would simulate docking with Mir but not in fact touch it. In June 1995, Shuttle Atlantis would actually dock with Mir and remain together for four days, ultimately taking aboard U.S. astronaut Norm Thagard who would have joined Mir in March. In October 1995 Atlantis would be outfitted with an Orbiter Docking System that would be installed on the Space Station to facilitate future rendezvous. (AFP, Dec 16/94)
Vice President Al Gore made a brief fundraising stop in Huntsville, Alabama. He said that the International Space Station had tremendous foreign policy advantages for the United States as part of a new effort to create a partnership with Russia. Gore also cited Russia's decision to channel its resources into the Station rather than ballistic missile programs, for example. (Huntsville News, May 3/94; Htsvl Tms, May 3/94)
A NASA delegation led by Mike O'Brien from NASA's External Affairs Division in Washington was in Moscow to present to Russian officials the draft of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the International Space Station. The MOU detailed services to be provided by Station partners and the percentage of Station resources--power, water, storage space--each would receive. Bill Shepherd, deputy program manager for NASA's Station program, was optimistic about Russian response to the MOU and also optimistic about NASA's purchase of the 20-ton FGB navigation and propulsion tug (the first Station component to be sent up) from Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
The Hubble Space Telescope enabled a team led by Rice University astrophysicist Robert O'Dell to survey 110 young stars in a field of 3,000 in the Orion Nebula, which was 1,500 light-years from Earth. As a result, O'Dell reported at a NASA news conference, scientists found that the material required to create planets was common around stars; the same would be true of Earth's home galaxy, the Milky Way. (Reuters, Jun 13/94; W Post, Jun 14/94; B Sun, Jun 14/94; NY Times, Jun 14/94; LA Times, Jun 14/94; USA Today, Jun 14/94; H Post, Jun 14/94)
The new Canadian Liberal government announced that budget constraints obliged it to discontinue participation in NASA's planned international Space Station. Later, the Canadian government said this was a misunderstanding and that Canada's commitment was to be reduced. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 24/94)
NASA downplayed a slip in the first U.S. assembly launch for the Space Station, promising no more schedule bumps. Originally scheduled for launch in July 1997, the Boeing-built node was now scheduled for launch in December 1997. Moreover, the U.S. Habitation module was now scheduled for launch in March 2002 instead of January 2001. The program changes annoyed congressional staffers because the program put more dependence on the Russians. NASA station chief Wil Trafton remained confident that the changes would not cause serious harm to station assembly. (Defense Daily, Feb 22/94)
NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)
NASA announced the completion of the second of two shipments of solar panel modules, marking delivery of the first U.S. Space Station flight hardware for NASA's cooperative space endeavors with Russia. The shipments each consisted of 45 solar panel modules developed for the Mir cooperative solar array project, an effort that brought together NASA's advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's proven structures and mechanisms. Eighty-four of the modules were scheduled to be integrated with Russian-made frames in 42 hinged parts. The completed array would be returned to the United States to be taken to Mir on the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release 94-217; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
A report by the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on the Shuttle-Mir Rendezvous and Docking Missions criticized the lack of one person being in charge of the Shuttle-Mir phase one (1995-97) project. Accordingly, NASA was moving to remedy the situation and make the Space Station program structure similar to the existing Space Shuttle program structure. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers task force studying budgeting for NASA issued its report to the subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee. It said that "The proposed funding levels are inadequate to support both a balanced aerospace science-technology program and an active program of human spaceflight, including the redesigned space station." The report maintained that the work intended for the proposed Space Station could be done by robotic spacecraft or other efforts. (H Chron, May 21/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
NASA released new pictures of asteroid 243 Ida and its recently discovered moon taken by the Galileo spacecraft. Although similar in color and brightness, Ida and its moon appear to be composed of different types of material. (NASA Release 94-83)
NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
Two groups of astronomers, one centered at Indiana University and the other at Harvard University, announced, based on findings from the Hubble Space Telescope, that the universe was billions of years younger than previously estimated. The Indiana group said the universe could be as little as 7 billion years old whereas the Harvard group estimated the age of the universe at between 9 billion and 14 billion years. The Indiana study was published in the September 29 issue of Nature and the Harvard study in the current Astrophysical Journal. According to Stephen Maran, a senior astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Center and a spokesman for the American Astronomical Society, the findings should lead to further research to explain the discrepancy beween the oldest stars and the age of the universe. (LA Times, Sep 29/94)
With aid from NASA, the University of Florida Medical School created a microcomputer, more than 14 years in the making, which enabled physicians to communicate via satellite or telephone. The computer held the latest information from 12 medical reference books and more than 1,000 medical journals and was updated quarterly. Both an electronic library and a record-keeping system were provided to doctors. System 2000 was originally designed to help ailing crew members on distant space stations diagnose their own illnesses. NASA's director of aerospace medicine and occupational health, Dr. Earl Ferguson, expected the use of telecommunications in health care delivery to "totally revolutionize the way we practice medicine." (Fla Today, Sep 11/94)
In discussing the role of the South Pole infrared explorer (SPIREX), and two other projects operated by the National Science Foundation's Center for Astrophysical Research in Antarctica (CARA), a comparison was made of the way in which work from the South Pole on the ground resembled work of the Hubble Telescope in space. The astronomers involved, together with those at the Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore were seeking NASA support for a design and cost study of a balloon that would float 40,000 feet above the South Pole and carry a powerful telescope. (AP, Apr 22/94)
As part of the Administration's efforts to gain congressional support for NASA's International Space Station project, NASA was considering removal of the Russian Salyut Functional Cargo Block (FGB) vehicle from the redesigned configuration. If the FGB were removed, which some key members of Congress wanted in order to reduce dependence upon Russia, NASA might replace it with Lockheed's Bus-1. Following the March International Space Station System Design Review, international partners and White House advisers, including members of the presidential panel reviewed the Station redesign and, in general, seemed favorably disposed to the Station. The panel was headed by Charles Vest, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (AvWk, Apr 11/94)
The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that members of the NASA Hubble Space Telescope Recovery Team would receive the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association on May 6 for their outstanding work. (NASA Release 94-71; H Post, May 6/94)
NASA's budget situation and the impact of its congressionally mandated budget cutting on contractors were discussed. Spending on the Space Station was cut significantly, but because most of NASA's budget was tied to long-term space projects downsizing trends were slow to affect contractors. A table was given of the 20 major NASA contractors in fiscal year 1993, including the parent company, the subsidiary, the parent's location, and the amount of the contract. NASA was working on reducing the time required to select contractors and improving the internal procurement process. (Government Executive, Aug 94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
Alex Roland, a professor of military history and technology at Duke University, wrote a feature article in the "Outlook" section in which he maintained that promoters of the costly Space Station and the Space Shuttle were forcing abandonment of science experiments that would be more valuable. (W Post, May 22/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that two Russian cosmonauts had returned to Earth near Arkalyk, Kazakhstan, after nearly six months on board Space Station Mir. They left behind a colleague who intended to break the current record of 366 consecutive days spent in space by remaining on Mir 429 days. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; AP, Jul 9/94)
Victor Blagov, deputy head of Russian space missions, said that the six cosmonauts on the aging Mir Space Station would have to ration electricity for several months after the craft's solar batteries were unexpectedly drained. Problems first appeared on October 11 after a powerful piece of electrical equipment suddenly sprang to life, shutting down part of the Station and running down four of the six batteries. Four other solar batteries could not be put aboard Mir until the middle of 1995. (Reuters, Oct 25/94)
In a press release, Jim Waterman, Boeing Space Station manufacturing manager, said that Boeing had built 18,700 pounds of hardware to date for the International Space Station and was on schedule to complete almost 50,000 pounds of hardware within the next year. Using the manufacturing facility at Marshall Space Flight Center originally built for fabricating Saturn rocket stages, it had made a good start on three pressurized modules for the Station as well as hatches and experiment racks. (Aerospace Daily, Oct 26/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had found a new quasar, a mere 600 million light years away in Earth's cosmic backyard, as opposed to other quasars that were billions of light years away. The discovery of a quasar in galaxy Cygnus A would give astronomers their first opportunity for detailed study of a quasar. (NASA Release 94-160)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
An article discussed finding other planetary systems as an inspiring new challenge for astronomy and pointed out NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's proposal that NASA's core mission might be the search for a habitable planet. Mention was made of Proxima Centauri, the nearest neighbor of a bigger, hotter, brighter star: the sun, which made it an easy star around which to look for planets. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope was used to study Proxima Centauri and recently the Hubble discovered discs in the Orion nebula, which might produce planetary systems. Although the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) was eliminated by Congress, SETI continued with private money and became Project Phoenix, scheduled to be connected with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia in early 1995 and to listen for faint radio signals from hundreds of stars. (Economist, Jul 16/94)
NASA announced that the first set of solar array modules for the International Space Station program were to be shipped from the United States to Russia at the end of May. The modules were prototypes of flight units to be delivered in September to be incorporated into advanced solar arrays for use on Russia's Space Station Mir. (NASA Release 94-79; UP, May 23/94)
NASA also announced that the Hubble Space Telescrope had obtained the best images yet of a mysterious mirror-imaged pair of rings of glowing gas that encircle the site of the stellar explosion supernova 1987A. The explanation of the pair of rings was uncertain. (NASA Release 94-77; Reuters, May 19/94; AP, May 19/94; NY Times, May 20/94; B Sun, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; USA Today, May 20/94; CSM, May 26/94)
The requirements for Rockwell International's Space Systems Division in integrating a Russian-built mechanism into airlock hardware it had manufactured so Space Shuttle Atlantis could dock with Space Station Mir were described. The docking assembly would be the first in what could be a long line of hybrid U.S.-Russian space hardware. Rockwell executives were confident they could meet the May 1995 launch date for Atlantis. Rockwell's Russian partner was NPO Energia, with whom it had worked some 20 years previously on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Some of the complications of the collaboration were discussed. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
Russian cosmonaut Krikalev aboard Discovery exchanged greetings with Russian cosmonauts aboard Space Station Mir. The Soviet cosmonaut also got through by ham radio to students in Mars, Pennsylvania. (AP, Feb 8/94; UP, Feb 8/94; Reuters, Feb 8/94; W Times, Feb 9/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94)
A joint statement was issued following a meeting of the heads of space agencies involved in the International Space Station: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), and NASA. This was the first group meeting since Russia accepted the collective invitation to join the International Space Station partnership in December 1993. The heads of agencies discussed the outcome of the recently completed Space Station System Design Review. CSA, ESA, and NASDA noted the remarkable progress made to accommodate Russia as a new partner and to satisfy the interests of all the partners in the new program structure, and they commended NASA for its efforts to improve program efficiency and to clarify the potential for additional partner contributions.
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., announced the selection of a scientific investigation that included the development of a new camera for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). NASA was scheduled to work with Holland Ford of Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, to develop a new camera, called Hubble Advanced Camera for Exploration. The new camera would be installed on the HST by Shuttle astronauts during the third servicing mission scheduled for November 1999. (NASA Release C94-oo)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Appropriations Subcommittee meeting to consider NASA's budget, that NASA needed $2.1 billion for the International Space Station and could not build the station for less. (AP, May 17/94)
Although the November 8 elections gave control of Congress to the Republicans, major changes in funding for the space program were not expected. This was the case despite the fact that Newt Gingrich, Republican from Georgia, who was expected to be the next Speaker of the House of Representatives, was an outspoken space advocate as was Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania and ranking Republican on the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee. NASA was already making plans to sell the Space Station program to the 11 freshman Senators and approximately 85 new House members who were to take office in January. (SP News, Nov 14-20/94)
An unmanned cargo craft bearing food, fuel, and equipment docked with Russia's Mir orbiting Space Station according to Itar-Tass news agency. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)
In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)
Astronaut Bill Shepherd, deputy manager of the Space Station program office in Houston, said that NASA had contingency plans for building the International Space Station without Russian assistance, if necessary. However, NASA fully expected Russian participation. (Fla Today, May 17/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
NASA announced that its Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had provided new insights into how stars might have been formed billions of years ago in the early universe. A preliminary assessment of HST observations indicated that a pair of clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud instead of containing fewer than 1,000 stars as earlier thought, contained nearly 10,000 stars. If this were true billions of years ago, it would have altered drastically the early history of the universe, according to Nino Panagia of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-171)
One of the six ball-screw housings, the $95 million Russian docking system shock absorber, failed its test and the Russian builder wished to replace all six. This might delay the June 8, 1995 launch of Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir. (O Sen Star, Dec 15/94)
Larry DeLucas, recently appointed chief scientist of the NASA Space Station project, said the Station provided the next step for businesses such as pharmaceutical companies that were trying to develop new and improved products such as high quality crystals, uninhibited by the Earth's gravitational environment. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)
Rockwell Aerospace planned to deliver the Orbiter Docking System to NASA on November 21. To achieve a system that would enable a U.S. Shuttle to dock with Space Station Mir, Rockwell Space Systems Division integrated a Russian-built docking mechanism into the system. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 returned valuable new images of the supernova 1994 I in the inner regions of the "Whirlpool Galaxy," M51, located 20 million light-years away in the constellation Canes Venatici. A supernova is a violent stellar explosion that destroys a star while ejecting the products of nuclear burning into the gas between stars. (NASA Release 94-76)
Boeing Company of Seattle, prime contractor for the International Space Station, submitted a proposal to NASA outlining work that would be performed under a final contract and the cost of each task. NASA was to review the proposal and then begin negotiations. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
