As Congress prepared to vote on NASA’s budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAO’s report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAO’s concerns about Russia’s continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that “in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays.” NASA’s spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASA’s projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAO’s critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., “GAO Criticizes NASA’s Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the station’s air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISS’s air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, “Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test,” news release, 10 May 1996.)
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
NASA officials announced that a funding crisis in Russia would delay the human occupation of the International Space Station (ISS) up to eight months. Before the announcement, NASA had learned that the financial problems of the Russian Space Agency had virtually halted Russia’s work on the orbiting laboratory’s nerve center. Without Russia’s contribution to the station, the crew of the ISS would have nowhere to stay during the construction of the station in space. NASA officials remained hopeful that Russia would release funding for the project and keep its commitment to the effort. Nevertheless, NASA officials began revisiting contingency plans to address reductions in funding. Russian Space Agency officials planned to meet with their NASA counterparts to discuss the situation.(William Harwood, “Funding Crisis To Delay Occupation of Space Station,” Washington Post, 6 December 1996.)
During a top-level meeting between officials of the United States and Russia, NASA made public a shift in its policy, announcing that U.S. astronauts would not always have command aboard the ISS. In a compromise meant to encourage Russia to build its portion of the station, NASA conceded that astronauts from other countries would have the opportunity to command the ISS for significant periods.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Command of Space Station Will Be Shared by Other Nations,” 28 September 1996.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft completed a flyby of Jupiter’s largest moon, Ganymede, passing only 519 miles (835 kilometers) above the moon’s surface. NASA had equipped Galileo with 10 scientific instruments to gather data from the expedition. The instruments began making measurements on 23 June, as the probe approached Ganymede. Images revealed an icy surface, with bright, clean ice covering part of the moon and darker, dirty ice covering the rest. This was the first data gathered during a collection mission planned for 1996 and 1997, in which Galileo would pass Ganymede before completing 11 orbits of Jupiter and surveying the planet’s other moons. NASA monitored Galileo’s progress through its Deep Space Network, using control stations in California, Spain, and Australia. Scientists and engineers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had built the Galileo spacecraft.(NASA, “Galileo Readies for Close Flyby of Jupiter’s Biggest Moon,” news release 96-122, June 1996.)
The Galileo spacecraft lost some of its collected data when a problem with one of its computer processors caused a shutdown of nonessential systems. Project Manager William J. O’Neil said that much of the lost data was of little consequence to researchers, but that data from Galileo’s continuous study of Jupiter’s magnetic field had suffered a significant loss, creating an information gap of about one week. The episode, which occurred in the midst of NASA’s string of impressive research achievements, highlighted the difficulty of directing a data-gathering probe thousands of miles from Earth’s surface.(Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft in Orbit Around Jupiter Loses Data,” Washington Post, 27 August 1996; Associated Press, “Computer Error on Spacecraft Exploring Jupiter,” 28 August 1996. See also Michael Meltzer, Mission to Jupiter: A History of the Galileo Project (Washington, DC: NASA, 2007).)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
NASA released new images of Io, one of Jupiter’s moons, obtained by the Galileo spacecraft. Michael J. S. Belton of the National Optical Astronomical Observatories pointed out that radical changes had occurred on the moon during the 17 years between Galileo and the first observation of Io, via the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. According to Belton, active volcanoes had altered the color of the moon’s surface, forming deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide that painted the surface white.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Big Changes on Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon Io,” news release 96-143, 18 July 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) identified what they believed to be the most distant objects observed to date. Researchers based at State University of New York at Stony Brook found several dozen galaxies so far away that they might have existed when the universe was less than 5 percent of its present age. The team of astronomers made its calculations on the distances of the galaxies from the Earth by relying on the relationship between speed and distance in the expanding universe. According to the scientific understanding of the speed-distance relationship, “the expansion of the universe causes the light from distant galaxies to be ‘redshifted’,” meaning that, because of the expansion of space, light leaving a distant galaxy as blue arrives at the HST as red light. The redshifting phenomenon allows researchers to tentatively measure the distance the light has traveled. Noting that other factors, such as dust, also might make a galaxy’s light red, Mark E. Dickinson of the Space Telescope Science Institute categorized the study as “enticing,” but also clarified, “it’s not a proof.”(Associated Press, “Hubble Scope Peers into Universe’s Past with Aid of Starlight,” 27 June 1996; NASA, “Findings from Hubble Deep Field Home in on Distant Galaxies,” news release 96-123, 26 June 1996.)
New audio recordings, gathered from the excursion of NASA’s Galileo spacecrafts to Jupiter’s large moon Ganymede, contained a “soaring whistle and hissing static,” suggesting that the moon possesses a planet-like magnetosphere. According to Donald A. Gurnett, who had conducted the experiments using Galileo’s plasma wave instrument, the data “is kind of like looking at a musical score.” The sound patterns mimic those found on Earth, Saturn, and Jupiter. Gurnett suggested that the new findings would have broad significance for the scientific community, possibly allowing scientists to draw further conclusions about the interplay between magnetic forces and matter throughout the universe.(D. A. Gurnett et al., “Evidence for Magnetosphere at Ganymede from Plasmawave Observations by the Galileo Spacecraft,” Nature 384, no. 6609 (12 December 1996): 535; NASA, “Big Icy Moon of Jupiter Found To Have a ‘Voice’ After All; Europa Flyby Next for Galileo,” news release 96-255, 12 December 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
G. Porter Bridwell retired after nearly 40 years of service at MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Bridwell had served as Director of MSFC from 1994 until his retirement. He left the Center with an annual operating budget of US$2.5 billion and more than 3,000 employees. Bridwell had spent most of his career at MSFC, serving briefly as Acting Director of Stennis Space Center in 1987, and at NASA Headquarters from 1993 to 1994. Bridwell had also been a member of the space station redesign team. During his tenure, Bridwell had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, the Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Exceptional Achievement Medal, attaining the rank of Meritorious Executive.3 NASA announced that J. Wayne Littles would take over as the new Director of MSFC.(NASA, “Littles Named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 96-3, 16 January 1996. 1)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
NASA disclosed the startling discoveries of Rice University astronomer C. Robert O’Dell and graduate student Kerry P. Handron, who had used images captured by the Hubble Space Telescope to pinpoint thousands of gigantic, tadpole-shaped objects surrounding a dying star, the first time that scientists had observed the forms in such abundance. The scientists hypothesized that the final outbursts of the dying star probably caused the gaseous knots, each several billion miles across. O’Dell concluded that if a dying star caused the gaseous knots, then trillions of these forms might litter the universe.(NASA, “Hubble Finds Thousands of Gaseous Fragments Around Star,” news release 96-74, 15 April 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
NASA released images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, revealing a dust storm on Mars nearly the size of the state of Texas. The storm appeared in the pictures of the planet as a 600- mile-long (965-kilometer-long), salmon-colored patch. Scientists believed this was the first time that one of the huge storms had neared the planet’s northern polar ice cap.(Reuters, “Hubble Shows Texas-Size Dust Storm on Mars,” 4 November 1996.)
Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging craft’s lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mir’s state as akin to “a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it.” Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 20 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster?” 19 February 1996.)
With funding from NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, researchers at Utah State University successfully developed a strain of wheat suitable for growth in space. The space wheat, called USU-Apogee, produced a yield equivalent to 600 bushels of grain per acre (21,000 liters of grain per 4,100 square meters), a rate three times more than the rate achieved in previous experiments. Researchers had worked for more than a decade developing the wheat. During the tests, USU- Apogee had thrived under the difficult conditions of artificial sunlight and high levels of carbon dioxide. In conditions approximating the environment in space, the wheat grew on short stalks, produced an unusually large number of seeds, and maintained green leaf tips (reflecting proper calcium levels). Scientists hoped that astronauts would be able to grow the wheat in the future International Space Station, as a more economical means of providing food for long-term space residents than frequent Shuttle supply missions.(NASA, “Utah State University Develops Space Crop,” news release 96-75, 15 April 1996.)
The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the company’s plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCo’s Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. d’Amore called space “the ultimate frontier of global marketing.” The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitor’s advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavour’s Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, “Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit,” USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tank’s strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASA’s External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, “Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests,” news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, “First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite,” news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
NASA released images from its Galileo spacecraft, indicating that water might have existed on Jupiter’s moon Europa in the past, or might still exist there. According to scientists studying the images, Europa may have “warm ice” on its surface. Finding such ice would help scientists determine whether Europa’s climate could support life. “What we are really looking for is niches that could support life,” Ronald Greeley, a Galileo team scientist clarified, at a press briefing releasing the images. At first glance, the pictures, shot from a distance of about 95,700 miles (154,000 kilometers), seemed to depict a series of white stripes stretched across Europa’s landscape. However, the stripes were actually ice glaciers, long of interest to scientists. Researchers had long suspected that Europa might be one of the places in the universe possessing water and, therefore, an environment that could support life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed “skeptical optimism” at the Europa findings and urged the scientific community to examine the pictures further, in a tempered reaction similar to his stance regarding the discovery, one week earlier, of microbiological evidence of life on Mars.(NASA, “Statement by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Release of New Galileo Spacecraft Images of Europa,” news release 96-166, 13 August 1996; Reuters, “Galileo Hints at Water on Europa,” 14 August 1996; NASA, “Jupiter’s Europa Harbors Possible ‘Warm Ice’ or Liquid Water,” news release 96-164, 13 August 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “Jupiter Moon May Contain Ice Floes, Sea,” Washington Post, 14 August 1996.)
Joseph B. Gurman of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHO’s scientists were excited and surprised to find that “movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun.” The scientists observed that the Sun’s plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, “Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found,” news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, “Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal,” 2 May 1996.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin’s efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldin’s mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, “NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston,” 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin’s Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-24 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri and the first female French astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. The crew of Soyuz planned to resupply Mir’s long-term crew.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 514, 25 August 1996, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx514.html (accessed 29 July 2008); Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI), “Russian Spaceship Heads for Space Station,” 18 August 1996.)
NASA released Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images revealing much of the surface of Pluto for the first time. The Pluto imaging team declared the quality of the pictures better than they had expected. “Hubble has brought Pluto from a fuzzy, distant dot of light, to a world which we can begin to map, and watch for surface changes,” remarked Marc W. Buie, a member of the team. The HST took snapshots of nearly the entire surface of the planet during 6.4 days of its rotation. The pictures showed Pluto’s complexity, revealing nearly a dozen distinct provinces, and confirming the existence of a polar ice cap, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to verify. NASA officials were optimistic that the images would pave the way for a proposed Pluto flyby mission in the coming years. Pluto remained the only planet not yet visited by a spacecraft.(NASA, “Hubble Reveals Surface of Pluto for First Time,” news release 96-43, 7 March 1996.)
A delegation from the U. S. Congress traveled to Russia to meet with Russian Space Agency officials. Representatives Jerry Lewis (R-CA) and F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), members of the subcommittee in charge of NASA’s funding⎯the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies⎯led the contingent. Their goal was to keep intact the coalition of countries dedicated to making the International Space Station (ISS) a reality. Faced with Russian insistence that the planned space station connect with the Russian space station Mir, the U.S. lawmakers warned Russian officials not to pursue radical changes in the plans for the space station. Sensenbrenner noted that obstinacy on the part of the Russians might result in the coalition’s building the ISS without Russian involvement.(Ben Lannotta, “Congress to Russia: Drop Mir–Station Link Idea,” Space News, 15–21 January 1996, 3, 20.)
NASA revealed that the joint U.S.-Italian team investigating the failure of the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS) had determined that the tether experiment conducted aboard Mission STS- 75 had revealed numerous fundamental flaws in space physics and plasma theories. The TSS experiment had ended with the tether breaking before reaching its full 13-mile (21-kilometer) length. The scientists concluded that a number of theoretical models, widely accepted for as long as 30 years, were incorrect and in need of revision. According to Noble Stone, a NASA scientist at MSFC, the team’s most significant finding was that tether current flows between the satellite and the orbiter were three times greater than theoretical models had predicted. Because the amount of power generated was directly proportionate to the current, the harnessed energy had the potential to furnish thrust for rebooting a space station, satellite, or shuttle in a decaying orbit. Stone suggested that tether systems might some day supplement solar arrays as sources of power for long-term space platforms.(NASA, “Early Findings from Tethered Satellite Mission Point to Revamping of Space Physics Theories,” news release 96-106, 23 May 1996; NASA Marshall Space Flight Center “Fall Science Meeting Highlights Tether Satellite Results,” http://spacescience.spaceref.com/newhome/headlines/ast15oct96_1.htm (accessed 27 October 2008).)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States’ key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, “Russian Cosmonauts,” 24 June 1996; Associated Press, “Moscow,” 21 June 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft discovered a giant iron core taking up half of the diameter of Jupiter’s moon Io, as well as a large hole in Jupiter’s magnetic field. Galileo Project Scientist Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) identified Io as the most “geographically active body in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Galileo scientists also measured the intense heat Jupiter generates, noting that the planet has a massive gravity field. Galileo managed to come within 559 miles (900 kilometers) of Jupiter during its 1995 flyby, allowing scientists to locate the iron core and the hole in the magnetic field. Although they were still grappling with the significance of the “completely unexpected finds,” scientists reported their early analysis of the data in Science magazine.(J. D. Anderson, W. L. Sjogren, and G. Schubert, “Galileo Gravity Results and the Internal Structure of Lo,” Science 272, no. 5262 (3 May 1996): 709−712; NASA, “Galileo Finds Giant Iron Core in Jupiter’s Moon Io,” news release 96-89, 3 May 1996.)
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope identified 18 star clusters that they believed to be embryonic galaxies. According to the New York Times, because the clusters resided 11 billion light-years from Earth, essentially, the scientists had glimpsed back in time. The observations supported a theory that galaxies begin with stars grouping together. The astronomers from Arizona State University and the University of Alabama called the discovery “the first page in an otherwise blank book.”(Lee Bowman, “Possible View of Galaxies Being Born,” Washington Times, 5 September 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Looking Back 11 Billion Light-Years, a Glimpse at Galaxy Birth,” New York Times, 5 September 1996. 125 NASA, “Lopez-Alegria To Replace Lawrence as NASA Manager to Russia,” news release 96-182, 5 September 1996.)
NASA released time-lapse photographs taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), making the images immediately available on the Internet. Based on these images, lauded as the deepest images of the universe ever taken, scientists raised their estimate of the number of galaxies in the universe from 10 to 50 billion; “Suddenly, Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” the New York Times reported. Using a narrow “keyhole” view and focusing the HST on a portion of the sky only the width of a dime, telescope operators probed deep into the universe. The images revealed the process of a star’s death, as well as new information about how galaxies evolve. HST astronomer Howard E. Bond estimated that the Sun would die out in about 5 billion years.(John Noble Wilford, “Suddenly Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” New York Times, 16 January 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Takes Portrait of Universe,” Washington Post, 16 January 1996; NASA, “New Hubble Images Available,” news release N96-2, 17 January 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
