A Russian Progress M42 cargo spacecraft launched with a Soyuz-U rocket to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Supplies included equipment necessary to keep an uninhabited station operational and equipment for conducting a controlled reentry, in the event that Russia could not obtain the resources necessary to continue operation. The launch was the first since Kazakhstan’s partial relaxation of a launch ban at Baikonur Cosmodrome.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 549, 1 August 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx549.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA announced that new findings from the Galileo spacecraft indicated the presence of sulfuric acid on the frozen surface of Jupiter’s moon Europa. Sulfuric acid is a corrosive chemical found in car batteries. Robert W. Carlson of NASA’s JPL, the lead author of a paper published in the journal Science, was Principal Investigator for Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer, which located the chemical. The new findings corroborated Galileo’s earlier spectrometer data analyses, suggesting the presence of sulfate salts on Europa. Despite indications that a liquid ocean may exist under Europa’s crust, Carlson had initially thought the presence of sulfuric acid would end debate over whether it was possible for Europa to contain biological life. However, his colleague Kenneth H. Nealson suggested the opposite, remarking that sulfur and sulfuric acid are oxidants⎯energy sources known to us on Earth. Therefore, Nealson proposed that the findings should encourage scientists to search for “any possible links between the sulfur oxidants on Europa’s surface and natural fuels produced from Europa’s hot interior.”(NASA, “Battery Acid Chemical Found on Jupiter’s Moon Europa,” news release 99-112, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-112.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); R. W. Carlson et al., “Sulfuric Acid on Europa and the Radiolytic Sulfur Cycle,” Science 286, no. 5437 (1 October 1999): 97–99.)
An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedman’s team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedman’s international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the “Hubble constant,” used in mathematical equations to “gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other.” Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The team’s findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedman’s team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman team’s conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the team’s methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that “what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.”(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe,” news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, “Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years,” Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
An international team of scientists published findings based on research using data from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. The team had sought to locate the origin of solar wind, which interacts with Earth’s magnetic field, creating auroral displays like the Northern Lights, as well as disrupting satellites and communications equipment. The SOHO team believed that the solar wind originated from honeycomb-shaped areas called convection cells, located beneath the coronal holes. Using data from the spectrometer, the scientists had measured for the first time the structure and motion of gases inside the coronal holes. The team reported that, in some places above coronal holes, magnetic field lines do not loop back to the Sun’s surface, but rather, the magnetic lines shoot upward without returning to the Sun, thereby originating the solar wind.(Donald Hassler et al., “Solar Wind Outflow and the Chromospheric Magnetic Network,” Science 283, no. 5403 (5 February 1999): 810; United Press International, “Source of Solar Wind Believed Found,” 4 February.)
NASA announced the departure of Gretchen W. McClain, a senior space station official at NASA Headquarters, naming as her replacement in an acting capacity, W. Michael Hawes, NASA’s Chief Engineer for the ISS. In 1997 NASA had appointed McClain as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station). In that position, she was responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and undertaking liaison activities with the executive branch, Congress, industry, and international partners. McClain left NASA to return to private industry.(NASA, “McClain To Leave NASA; Hawes Named Acting Chief of Space Station,” news release 99-50, 8 April 1999.)
Discovery astronauts placed the HST back in orbit using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Astronaut Jean-François Clervoy operated the arm, grabbing a handle on the telescope’s side. After releasing the latches securing the observatory inside the Shuttle’s bay, the robotic arm lifted the telescope above the spacecraft, and ground controllers opened the door covering HST’s telescopic eye. Once ground controllers gave the command, Discovery’s robotic arm released the telescope. Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and Pilot Scott J. Kelly fired the Shuttle’s thrusters to move away from the telescope slowly.(Robyn Suriano, “Hubble Set Free: Discovery’s Crew Ready for Monday Landing at KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 December 1999.)
Scientists Peter Smith of the University of Arizona and Justin Maki of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory published a report in the Journal of Geophysical Research summarizing the results of the Mars Pathfinder Mission. After an exhaustive review of more than 17,000 images from the Pathfinder’s 1997 mission, the report had concluded that Mars’s air and dirt are yellowish-brown in color, not red. Viking probes of the 1970s had likewise indicated that Mars is not red, but rather yellowish-brown. However, Mars appears red to the naked eye from Earth, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) data had indicated that Mars is red. The scientists reported that the detailed analysis using Pathfinder data had revealed that the HST, not Pathfinder, needed to be recalibrated.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), “The Red Planet? Mars Is Really Yellowing Brown: Pathfinder Discovers What Hubble Missed,” 24 April 1999.)
NASA announced that new analysis of data from the Galileo spacecraft suggested that Jupiter is possibly much older and colder than previously thought. Upon reaching the planet on 7 December 1995, Galileo had dropped a probe carrying a mass spectrometer into Jupiter’s atmosphere to measure its chemical composition. The spectrometer had “detected surprisingly high concentrations of argon, krypton, and xenon,” raising questions about the noble gases’ provenance. Because Jupiter would have trapped the gases through condensation or freezing, scientists did not believe Jupiter’s atmosphere had trapped the gases at its present site. As positioned at present, Jupiter is too close to the Sun and too warm to have trapped the gases. Tobias Owen, an astronomy professor at the Institute for Astronomy of the University of Hawaii and a member of the Galileo probe Neutral Mass Spectrometer team, suggested three hypotheses to explain how the gases had been trapped within the Jovian atmosphere: 1) Jupiter had formed in the area around the Kuiper Belt829 and was dragged inward to its present location; 2) the solar nebula, the cloud of gas and dust that formed the solar system, had been much colder than scientists had previously believed; and 3) the solid materials that had brought the gases to Jupiter had begun to form in the original interstellar cloud of gas and dust, before the cloud had collapsed to form the solar nebula. Owen remarked further that, if either of the last two hypotheses were correct, then giant planets might be able to form closer to their stars than current theories had predicted. Such a finding could help explain “the new observations of planetary systems around other stars, in which such close-in giant planets are relatively common.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Probe Results Suggest Jupiter Had an Ancient, Chilly Past,” news release 99-096, 17 November 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/glprobeargon.html (accessed 12 March 2008); Tobias Owen et al., “A Low-Temperature Origin for the Planetesimals that Formed Jupiter,” Nature 402, no. 6759 (18 November 1999): 269–270.)
GAO published a report, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems,” reiterating its previous recommendation to NASA to plan for a scenario in which Russia was unable to fulfill its commitments to the ISS. Although the report recognized that NASA was in the process of drafting such a plan, GAO’s sole recommendation to NASA was to ensure the contingency plan’s completion before the launch of the Russian-built Service Module.(Jonathan Lipman, “GAO Warns NASA About the Russians,” Space.com, 30 August 1999, http://www.space. com/news/spacestation/gao_30.html (accessed 9 April 2008); U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems” (report no. GAO/NSIAD-99-175, Washington, DC, August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99175.pdf (accessed 25 February 2008).)
After having agreed in June 1998 to abandon the space station within a year, Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny M. Primakov issued a decree to keep Mir in space for three more years, using private funds, so that Russia could dedicate its insufficient space budget to its ISS commitments. The decree reportedly mentioned that Russian and foreign contractors and investors would develop a plan allowing Mir to remain in orbit without using ISS-allocated funds.(Peter N. Spotts, “Saving Mir: At What Cost to New Space Station? Russians Decree That They Will Keep Aging Orbital Outpost Raises Questions in U.S. About Their Ability To Fund International Project,” Christian Science Monitor, 25 January 1999.)
The Russian Space Agency’s “space mirror” failed to unfurl properly at the Mir space station, and Russia officially terminated the experiment. Crew attached the mirror to a cargo spacecraft filled with trash, sending it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. Engineers had intended the 83-foot (25-meter) mirror to “work like an artificial [M]oon,” acting as a prototype for larger mirrors that “could illuminate [S]un-starved northern cities through the long Arctic nights and spotlight disaster areas.” The experiment’s failure was a “big disappointment” for the Russian Space Agency, which had hoped to display “its ability to conduct pioneering, ambitious projects despite a lack of funds.”(Vladimir Isachenkov for the Associated Press, “Russia-Space Mirror,” 5 February 1999.)
Researchers reported in the journal Science that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had detected hydrogen peroxide on Jupiter’s moon Europa. Hydrogen peroxide does not occur naturally on Earth. A scientific instrument aboard the craft⎯the Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (NIMS)⎯had aided scientists in their study of Europa’s surface. Working like a prism, the instrument had broken up infrared light, detecting dark areas of hydrogen peroxide. The scientists reported that the chemical was forming constantly on Europa, through the process of radiolysis; in this case, the process involved “intense particle radiation” emanating from Jupiter. Principal Investigator for NIMS Robert W. Carlson explained that hydrogen peroxide begins breaking down almost as soon as it forms and, therefore, its life on Europa spans no more than a few months. The short lifespan of the chemical limited the scientists’ ability to study the long- term chemical history of Europa. However, scientists would be able to apply their observations of short-term chemical changes on Jupiter to the study of how the moons of Jupiter interact with the planet, as well as to the study of similar processes elsewhere in the solar system.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Galileo Finds ‘Bottle Blonde’ Chemical on Europa,” news release 99-022, 25 March 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/europaperoxide.html (accessed 21 December 2007); R. W. Carlson et al., “Hydrogen Peroxide on the Surface of Europa,” Science 283, no. 5410 (26 March 1999): 2062– 2064.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
The National Research Council (NRC) published a NASA-funded study, which found that NASA needed more safeguards to protect astronauts from potentially cancer-causing radiation during spacewalks they would make while building the International Space Station (ISS). The study recommended that NASA change flight rules, improve space-weather forecasting, and install a radiation-monitoring device outside the ISS. The NRC recommended the extra precautions because the station’s assembly schedule, consisting of more than three dozen flights and 1,500 hours of spacewalks over four years, would coincide with the most active part of the 11-year solar cycle. Moreover, the report estimated a nearly 100 percent chance that at least two assembly missions would overlap with a serious solar storm and a 50 percent chance that five flights would overlap with such a storm. Additionally, the NRC predicted that a change in the station’s planned orbit, which the Russian Space Agency had requested to accommodate Russian launches to help build and resupply the station, would increase the level of radiation exposure. George L. Siscoe, a Boston University physics professor and chairperson of the study, remarked that, although the radiation levels were not life threatening, they exceeded the 30-day and 60-day limits set to protect the skin and eyes. To safeguard crew from exposure to the increased risk of developing cancer later in life, countries participating in the ISS program would have to pay careful attention to flight schedules and crew rotation. Furthermore, the amount of radiation exposure sustained during ISS missions might affect an astronaut’s chances of assignment to additional spacewalks and their selection for future missions.(Michael Cabbage for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Study Urges NASA To Increase Radiation Safeguards,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1999.)
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASA’s Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiter’s moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, “recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data.” James K. Erickson of NASA’s JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileo’s instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, “If we didn’t have the automatic restart software, we wouldn’t be getting any data at the encounters.”(Michael A. Dornheim, “Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
Astronaut Charles P. “Pete” Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who “combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet.” As an example of Conrad’s wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” Conrad had been a member of NASA’s second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident,” news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
GAO reported that NASA had “inadvertently exported radiation-hardened, microcircuit, optical coupler parts to Russia,” relying on the manufacturer’s statement that the so-called rad-hard parts were not on the U.S. Department of State’s Munitions List and that, therefore, NASA was not required to obtain an export license. GAO also reported that NASA was “preparing to export sensitive encryption technology to Japan and Europe,” technology transfers related to building the International Space Station (ISS). Under international agreements related to the space station, NASA was obligated to deliver, disclose, or transfer certain technology, data, and commodities to other nations involved in building the ISS. GAO had investigated NASA’s export-control procedures after members of Congress expressed concern about safeguards to protect technology and information exported to support the ISS. GAO evaluators’ conclusions were similar to those of NASA’s Inspector General, who had reported earlier that NASA’s export-control procedures were likely inadequate for the technology exchanges necessary under the ISS program.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Export Controls: International Space Station Technology Transfers” (report no. NSIAD-00-14, Washington, DC, 3 November 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ns00014.pdf (accessed 21 March 2008); Aerospace Daily, “NASA Illegally Exported Technology for Space Station, GAO reports,” 22 November 1999.)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft was unable to record its closest encounter with Jupiter’s moon Io, as it passed within 186 miles (299 kilometers) of the volcanic moon’s surface. Although radiation shut down the craft’s instruments, NASA was able to restart the instruments 4 minutes later, permitting Galileo to complete more than half of its planned observations. The craft had encountered a similar problem when it had flown within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Io in October. NASA had added the close flybys of Io, located deep within the Jovian system’s radiation belts, to the end of Galileo’s two-year extended mission. The spacecraft had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis on 18 October 1989, had begun orbiting Jupiter in December 1995, and had completed its primary mission in December 1997, thereafter, continuing an extended mission focused on Jupiter’s moon Europa, with flybys of the planet’s moons Callisto and Io, as well.(John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo’s Moon Shots Impeded by Radiation,” Washington Times, 27 November 1999; John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo Spacecraft Faces Huge Doses of Radiation,” USA Today, 26 November 1999.)
NASA disclosed that a sequence of computer commands issued by flight controllers on the ground had failed to fire the ISS’s engines, placing the uninhabited space station in potential danger. The cause of the failure was human error. Flight controllers had sent commands directing the new space station to move out of the path of a piece of space junk, which posed a danger to the craft. A U.S. military organization tracking such objects had predicted that the “fairly large” piece of space junk of Russian origin would pass within 0.6 miles (1 kilometer) of the space station on 13 June. However, the debris came no closer to the new ISS than 4.5 miles (7.2 kilometers). A collision could have destroyed the uninhabited space station. NASA’s Deputy Program Manager for Space Station Operations, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., explained that, because the space station’s computers had rejected the flight controllers’ faulty commands, the station had no motion control for an entire orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 18 June 1999.)
NASA officials announced that the Galileo spacecraft was operating normally again after entering safe mode on 31 January. Galileo’s computer had become confused while flying past Jupiter’s moon Europa. David A. Senske, a member of the Galileo imaging team at NASA’s JPL, explained that the unusual angle Galileo required for studying Europa had caused the computer to malfunction.(Associated Press, “Galileo Craft Resumes Its Jupiter Mission,” 13 February 1999.)
Kazakhstan partially lifted its ban on launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, permitting a Russian Progress cargo spacecraft to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Kazakhstan had agreed to permit the Progress launch after receiving Russia’s promise to pay a US$115 million fee for the use of the launch facility. Russia had agreed to pay US$50 million in cash by November 1999 and US$65 million in goods by 2000. Kazakhstan’s launch ban on Proton-K rockets remained in effect.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan Lifts Space Ban, Russian Launch Cleared,” 14 July 1999; Associated Press, “Russia- Kazakhstan-Space,” 14 July 1999.)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robot’s components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASA’s ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiment’s success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts’ hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine “housekeeping chores,” such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions,” news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
SPACEHAB Inc. and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) signed a contract granting SPACEHAB the use of one of the CSA’s experiment lockers on the International Space Station (ISS), beginning in May 2001. According to the agreement between the two organizations, the CSA had committed to commercializing half of its allocated space aboard the space station, a global first in space commercialization.
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that the plutonium-powered Cassini spacecraft, en route to Saturn, had entered safe mode on 11 January. The craft, NASA’s largest and most complex interplanetary probe, had detected a possible error in its orientation, which prompted it to halt all “non-critical” activity, while maintaining its communications link with Earth.(Associated Press, “Saturn-Bound Spacecraft Develops Problem, JPL Says,” Los Angeles Times, 14 January 1999. 651 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cunningham, Cook Named to Mars Posts,” news release 99-03, 13 January 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/marsappts.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
An Israeli court indicted Israeli teenager Ehud Tenenbaum and four accomplices⎯Guy Fleisher, Ariel Rosenfeld, Barak Abutbul, and Rafael Ohana⎯for illegal entry of computers in the United States and Israel. The group allegedly hacked into the computer systems of the Pentagon and NASA, as well as those of academic institutions in Israel and Israel’s Knesset.(Chicago Tribune, “5 Are Indicted for Hacking in the U.S.,” 10 February 1999. 667 Associated Press, “Hubble May Have Early Planet Images,” 10 February 1999.)
President Nursultan Nazarbayev set Kazakhstan’s conditions for permitting Russia to launch a Progress cargo craft carrying supplies to the Mir space station, scheduled to lift off from Baikonur Cosmodrome on 14 July. Kazakhstan had suspended all Russian launches from the facility, following the crash of a Russian Proton-K rocket on 5 July. Nazarbayev’s terms for permitting the launch of the Progress craft included Russia’s payment of its US$300 million debt for the lease of Baikonur Cosmodrome and a visit of high-level Russian officials to the Proton-K rocket’s crash site.(Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Sets Terms for Russian Space Launch,” 13 July 1999.)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
NASA released new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of the cores of spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, and astronomers studying the images for clues about galactic development discussed their findings at a briefing at NASA Headquarters. Two complementary surveys by independent research teams had concluded that the Hubble images confirmed the evolutionary link between a disc-like cloud of dust and gas at the center of a galaxy and a bulge of millions of stars at the center of the disc-like cloud. The central bulge stabilizes a galaxy’s development, controls the birth of stars in the galaxy’s core, and “holds secrets as to how and when a galaxy formed.” Reynier F. Peletier of the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom confirmed that central bulges of “more tightly wound spirals” formed at approximately the same time in the early universe. C. Marcello Carollo of Columbia University, who had led a team studying galaxies with small bulges and “bar-like structures that bisect the nucleus,” had discovered that such galaxies developed more recently. Both teams had used HST’s visible-light and infrared cameras to determine the stars’ true colors, a measure of the age of the stars inside the galaxies’ core.(NASA, “Starry Bulges Yield Secrets to Galaxy Growth,” news release 99-107, 6 October 1999; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Tackles Questions About Cosmic Bulges,” 6 October 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, established by Congress after the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire on 27 January 1967, submitted its annual report to NASA. The panel found Shuttle safety satisfactory, but cautioned that cutbacks, such as hiring freezes and budgetary restrictions, had created a “looming crisis” of future shortfalls in the workforce. The panel warned that NASA was at risk of “losing the core competencies needed to conduct the nation’s spaceflight and aerospace programs in a safe and effective manner.” Budgetary constraints had also caused NASA to postpone planned improvements to the Shuttle fleet and the International Space Station (ISS). The panel’s chairperson remarked that both programs were operating at an “acceptable level of risk,” but that updating Shuttle computers and refurbishing the supply of spare parts would make the programs safer.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel To Present Report to NASA,” news release N99-8, 4 February 1999; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Space Safety,” 5 February 1999.)
