Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rocket’s successful launch confirmed Russia’s ability to transport its Zvezda module: “This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS.” The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, “Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab,” 5 July 2000.)
The first International Space Station (ISS) crew, Expedition I, arrived at the new station where they planned to live for the next four and one-half months. The crew’s Soyuz craft automatically docked at a port on the Zvezda habitation module. The Russian-built, NASA-financed Zarya propulsion-and-storage module, attached to the other end of Zvezda, was loaded with supplies and equipment delivered by recent Shuttle missions. Unless an emergency or breakdown occurred, the multi-hatch Unity module would remain off limits. A Shuttle crew had installed a structural truss on the Unity module in October, and during a mission scheduled for early December, another crew would attach a set of solar arrays to the truss. Without the solar arrays, the station did not have enough power to heat the module properly or to control the dew point, to prevent dangerous condensation. The ISS crew and their U.S. and Russian managers temporarily named the station Alpha, at least for the duration of the Expedition I mission.(William Harwood, “Crew of ‘Alpha’ Males Moves into Space Station: Docking Complete, NASA Chief Allows Name’s Use for Now,” Washington Post, 3 November 2000.)
NASA announced that follow-up studies had determined that the distant mass known as TMR- 1C, discovered in 1997, was probably not a protoplanet⎯a young, still-forming precursor of one of the giant planets. In 1998 astronomer Susan Terebey of the Extrasolar Research Corporation had published findings suggesting that the body was a protoplanet several times larger than Jupiter. Terebey’s research had received widespread attention. However, although NASA had released the images of TMR-1C captured by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had urged scientists to obtain further verification before identifying the body as a protoplanet. After observing the body over several months, astronomers had concluded that TMR-1C was a bright star, rather than a planet. Reflective dust had likely increased the brightness of the star, located approximately 135 billion miles (217 billion kilometers) from Earth, making it appear to be a planet. After her initial high-profile announcement, Terebey had continued to study the star using the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii and had amended her own hypothesis, reporting, “the new data do not lend weight to the protoplanet interpretation and the results remain consistent with the explanation that TMR-1C may be a background star.” Most newspapers gave as much coverage to the news of the changing assessment as they had given to the original discovery.(James Glanz, “Scientists Retract Claim of Planet Discovery,” New York Times, 7 April 2000; Associated Press, “Presumed Protoplanet May Be a Background Star,” 7 April 2000; NASA, “Suspected Protoplanet May Really Be a Distant Star,” news release 00-58, 6 April 2000.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had located a “small armada of ‘mini- comets’,” the fragmented remains of the nucleus of the comet LINEAR. When it had disappeared behind the Sun on 27 July 2000, astronomers initially thought that LINEAR had disintegrated entirely. Upon losing sight of the comet’s core, ground-based observers had suggested that the nucleus had disintegrated into a “pile of dust,” and, consequently, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute had reprogrammed the HST to search for the nucleus. The exceptional resolution and sensitivity of the HST had revealed the nuclei of a half-dozen mini-comets at a level of detail never before observed in a disintegrating comet. Some astronomers had suggested that the fragments the HST revealed were the “primordial building blocks of the original nucleus.” If so, studying them could help scientists understand how the comet had originally formed.(NASA, “Hubble Discovers Missing Pieces of Comet Linear,” news release 00-122, 7 August 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-122.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev reiterated Russia’s commitment to the international community, stating that Russia definitely would bring Mir safely down in February 2001. Koptev “angrily dismissed Communist demands to keep the nearly 15-year-old station in orbit,” referring to the 20-hour loss of contact earlier in the week as a “final warning that time was up” and an indicator of the level of the station’s wear and tear. Communist lawmakers, including cosmonaut Svetlana Y. Savitskaya, who called the move a concession to NASA, had criticized the government’s decision to destroy the space station. However, Koptev had countered the criticism, saying that, if Mir spun out of control, the Russian president and government would have to explain to the world where the station would fall and how much damage it would cause.(Vladimir Iachenkov for Associated Press, “Space Officials Say Mir Back Under Control, Will Be Dumped in February,” 27 December 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega worked outside the ISS to connect power lines, correcting an electrical shortage that had restricted the station’s first crew to two of three habitable modules. The two astronauts also inspected the first solar panel that they had unfurled, to determine whether the crew could correct its tension. Wearing a small TV camera on his helmet, Noriega beamed down to Mission Control images of the loose tension cables on the array’s right wing. The cables had slipped off their pulleys during the solar panel’s deployment on 3 December. Tanner remarked that an astronaut could place one tension cable back on its pulley without too much trouble, but that the other cable would require more work. Mission Control instructed the spacewalkers to try to fix the cables on their third and final spacewalk the following day.(Chicago Tribune, “Space Station Gets an Electrical Boost from Solar Wings,” 6 December 2000; Associated Press, “Live from Space, ‘Carlos Cam’,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 6 December 2000.)
After a lengthy legislative battle, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a US$60 million increase for NASA in its FY 2001 budget. Although the amount was less than the Clinton administration had requested for NASA, the spending proposal marked the end of several years of cost cutting for NASA. Even during a period of budget surpluses, NASA had not achieved the victory without a fight. Some members of Congress, concerned over the delay in the completion of the ISS, had introduced a floor amendment to delete all funding for the ISS. However, the House had roundly defeated the budget-slashing amendment, as it had in previous years, with a vote of 325 to 98. Noting that the ISS was nearly complete, Representative Robert E. Cramer (D- AL) spoke for NASA proponents when he said, “This is not the time to pull the rug out from under this program.”(Tamara Lytle, “House OKs Giving NASA $13.7 Billion in 2001 Fiscal Year,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 June 2000; Gannett News Service, “House Votes Down Measure To Cut Space Station,” 22 June 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had captured an image of a lone neutron star traveling close to Earth, one of several hundred million neutron stars that scientists believed to exist in the Milky Way. Hubble scientists believed that, at 200 light-years away, this neutron star was the nearest to Earth. No companion star affected its appearance, allowing astronomers to more easily test and confirm stellar theories against its physical properties, such as size, brightness, and true age. Frederick M. Walter of State University of New York at Stony Brook remarked that, as the closest and brightest of the few known isolated neutron stars, this star would be “the easiest to study and is an excellent test bed for nuclear astrophysical theories.”(NASA, “Hubble Sees Lone Neutron Star Streaking Across Galaxy,” news release 00-176, 9 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-176.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
The Russian government earmarked funds to send two Progress cargo spacecraft to the Mir space station, announcing that it would wait until February 2001 to make a final decision about the station’s fate. Earlier, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya I. Klebanov had explained that the decision the Russian government had been wavering about for more than a year rested on the availability of private funds to keep the station in orbit. Executives from MirCorp had promised the Russian government that the company would raise between US$100 million and US$170 million by next year, but Russian space officials were skeptical of MirCorp’s ability to meet this commitment. MirCorp had yet to pay the US$10 million it owed Russia for the 17 October launch of a Progress cargo spacecraft delivering fuel to Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Earmarks Funds for Mir,” 26 October 2000.)
Engineers at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) successfully tested a prototype for the “flying lifeboat” that would transport astronauts to and from the ISS. DFRC officials launched a robotic X-38 from under the wing of a B-52 flying at 39,000 feet (12,000 meters). It free fell for more than 40 seconds before deploying a 5,500-square-foot (511-square-meter) parachute, which provided a soft landing for the spacecraft. The test was a significant step in evaluating the technology planned for the crew return vehicle, a low-cost ISS initiative.(Associated Press, “Space Station ‘Lifeboat’ Prototype Successfully Tested,” 30 March 2000.)
NASA released recently obtained images that further supported the possibility that Jupiter’s moon Europa might be home to a liquid ocean. The Galileo spacecraft had captured the images when passing Europa’s north pole. Using a magnetometer instrument, Galileo had recorded changing currents in the moon’s magnetic field⎯a finding consistent with the presence of a conducting material such as a watery liquid.(NASA, “Galileo Findings Boost Idea of Other-Worldly Ocean,” news release 00-7, 10 January 2000.)
00-114, 20 July 2000; NASA, “First Opportunity Tonight for Zvezda To Dock with International Space Station,” news release N00-36, 25 July 2000. satellite because it was able to meet challenging demands for bandwidth, power, and in-orbit flexibility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Build First Interactive Broadband Multimedia Spacecraft for New Skies Satellites,” news release, 4 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedContractBuildF.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
After spending more than two months aboard the Mir space station, Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth. According to MirCorp, the mission had been the first privately funded crewed mission to Mir. Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri landed safely in Kazakhstan, having spent most of their time aboard the Russian spacecraft conducting crucial repairs. To keep the station running, MirCorp had signed a lease agreement for Mir and paid for the mission. However, with the return of Zalyotin and Kaleri, Russia placed on hold the prospect of continuing Mir, even if supported with private funds. “If there is no money, Mir will not fly,” Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev stated at the end of the mission. Russian officials indicated that the Russian Space Agency would leave the space station unpiloted once again, until private investors could fund another mission. The continuing focus on Mir, while the building of Russia’s ISS module ran far behind schedule, agitated some NASA officials and international space leaders.(Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Prepare To Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; CNN.com, “First Privately Funded Manned Space Mission Blasts Off for Mir, 4 April 2000, http://archives.cnn.com/2000/TECH/space/04/04/russia.mir.01 (accessed 15 July 2008).)
NASA released the first HST images taken after the Shuttle’s Mission STS-103, in which the crew of Discovery realigned and refurbished the telescope. The stunning clarity of the new images suggested that the mission specialists had succeeded in their sensitive work. According to Steven Beckwith, Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the work returned HST to “a condition that was better than it was even before the fourth gyroscope failed.” Astronomers had focused on targets more than 5,000 light-years away to test the upgraded telescope. During the servicing mission, astronauts had also installed a Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 and a Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, new instruments that would contribute to the already formidable strength of the HST.(NASA, “Hubble Reopens Eye on the Universe,” news release 00-16, 24 January 2000.)
When the automatic docking system failed, cosmonaut Yuri P. Gidzenko used remote control to dock the first Progress cargo spacecraft arriving at the ISS. The craft, loaded with food, boots, and supplies, had traveled smoothly to the ISS until within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the station. When the spacecraft’s automatic docking system failed to lock onto the space station, Gidzenko took control, guiding the craft to within 15 feet (4.6 meters) of the station. Glaring sunlight and a fogged camera lens forced him to wait 40 minutes, before he was able to complete the maneuver safely.(Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonaut Forced To Dock Cargo Ship by Remote Control,” 19 November 2000.)
Ground controllers in Russia restored communication with Mir, after they had been unable to contact the uninhabited space station for 24 hours. Spokesperson for Russian Mission Control Valery Lyndin allayed fears that Mir would crash to Earth shortly, announcing that Russia had received no indication that the space station was losing pressure. Mission Control Chief Vladimir A. Solovyov explained that the station’s batteries had lost power and no longer had sufficient energy to communicate with ground controllers. Once ground controllers had identified the problem, they had switched off specific systems to direct more energy to ground communications. Although Mir’s solar panels were recharging the batteries, the cause of the power shortage remained unclear.(Washington Times, “Contact with Mir Restored After Loss of Battery Power: Mission Control Allays Fears of Crash,” 27 December 2000.)
The Zvezda service module successfully docked at the ISS, immediately increasing the size of the space station by 50 percent. Through a series of rocket firings, Zvezda had drawn steadily closer to the ISS during its two-week journey to its new home 220 miles (354 kilometers) from Earth. Experts had deemed the successful launch and docking of the Russian component of the ISS vital to the long-term success of the collaborative venture. The Russian-built Zvezda, nearly identical to a core section of the Russian Mir space station, was to provide living quarters for researchers on the station, as well as vital electronic, computer, and communications systems. Anticipating significant interest in the historic linkup, NASA provided information on its Web site explaining how to view the space station as it traveled over Earth.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Is Connected to Module from Russia,” New York Times, 26 July 2000; NASA, “No Telescopes Needed: NASA Web Sites Let Stargazers Track Impending Space Station ‘Nuptuals’,” news release)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) issued a report stating that the Russian components for the International Space Station (ISS) did not meet NASA’s standard safety requirements. GAO’s findings were the latest in a long series of controversies, particularly between the United States and Russia, in the international effort to build the space station. Most significant of its safety deficits, the Russian crew module did not have adequate shielding to protect the ISS crew from orbiting space debris. At the time of the report, the Russians were already more than two years behind in delivering the crew module.(Patty Reinhert, “Space Station Safety at Center of Debate,” Houston Chronicle, 17 March 2000; Associated Press, “General Accounting Office Slams Russian Modules,” 17 March 2000.)
NASA suspended all of Cassini’s observations of Jupiter that required the spacecraft to point⎯to take magnetic-field measurements⎯in order to capture images, after the craft developed a problem with a maneuvering system. NASA permitted Cassini to continue making observations that did not requiring pointing. On 17 December, Cassini’s No. 2 reaction wheel had begun to require extra force to turn, prompting the craft to switch from electrical power to a hydrazine- thrusting system, which Cassini needed to conserve for use in its primary Saturn mission. Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell remarked that, if tests of the maneuvering system were favorable, the craft could begin its observations again in a week to 10 days.(Los Angeles Times, “NASA Halts Spacecraft’s Observation of Jupiter,” 21 December 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Sun’s atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets,” news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)
European Space Agency (ESA) engineers announced the discovery of a flaw in the European receiver on NASA’s Cassini spacecraft, prompting an inquiry into why engineers had not identified the problem before NASA had launched the craft, and how the issue could be resolved before the craft reached its destination. Cassini’s probe data relay subsystem (PDRS) lacked sufficient bandwidth to navigate the Doppler shift with the Huygens probe as the probe parachuted toward the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan. Therefore, the system would be unable to recover all of the data that Huygens’s six instruments would generate. Cassini and Huygens launched on 15 October 1997, with Huygens scheduled to separate from Cassini on 6 November 2004, break through Titan’s atmosphere on 27 November 2004, and descend to the moon’s surface using a parachute system. The mission plan called for Huygens to measure the composition and winds of Titan’s atmosphere and to collect images. The probe would send the data via the S-band PDRS to Cassini, which would then transmit the data to Earth. However, the ESA stated that the inadequate bandwidth of the PDRS meant that link margins would degrade, because the Doppler shift on the data subcarrier would be outside the bandwidth of the receiver- phase lock loop, leading to a potential loss in the link of 10dB over what engineers had assumed for the mission.(Frank Morring Jr., “ESA Sets Inquiry After Tests Reveal Flaw in Titan Probe Link,” Aerospace Daily, 6 October 2000.)
Astronomers using images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered what they believed to be the first examples of “isolated stellar-mass black holes adrift among the stars of our galaxy.” They announced their discovery at a convention of the American Astronomical Society. The findings supported a long-standing theory that black holes could form with the collapse of just one massive star, although an opposing theory had concluded that multiple stars must collapse in tandem. Moreover, the researchers’ contribution was the latest in a string of recent findings illuminating the relatively commonplace nature of black holes.(NASA, “Lone Black Holes Discovered Adrift in the Galaxy,” news release 00-4, 13 January 2000.)
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
The Netherlands-based MirCorp, the company originally established to keep the Mir space station in orbit for commercial purposes, announced that, following a board meeting during the previous week, the company had decided to “retool the company to work with other Russian space equipment.” The company planned to develop a new orbiter capable of docking with the ISS, to market existing space technologies, such as cargo spacecraft, and to explore commercial projects involving access to a future Russian module on the ISS.
Cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri conducted a 5-hour spacewalk to repair tiny cracks weakening the hull of the Mir space station. The cracks, the result of the June 1997 collision of a cargo craft with the station, had caused the module to lose air pressure steadily. The spacewalk was not the first attempt to solve the problem, but previous teams had been unable to locate the cracks. Zalyotin and Kaleri tested a new “cosmic version of super glue,” designed to seal the fractures even in the harsh environment of space. The Russian Space Agency clarified that the cracks were not crippling to the space station, and that the crew could maintain acceptable levels of air pressure by manipulating oxygen outflow inside Mir. However, the agency hoped to solve the problem permanently, because Russia planned to use the aging space station for commercial purposes. The Netherlands-based MirCorp, which had committed nearly US$20 million to leasing Mir, observed the cosmonauts’ activities, calling the mission the first privately funded spacewalk in history.(Reuters, “Russia: Russian Cosmonauts Leave Mir and Start Spacewalk,” 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Experiment with Space Glue To Seal Cracks,” 12 May 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiter’s solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileo’s magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelson’s team had measured the moon’s magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings “best explained by a thick layer of water⎯about as salty as Earth’s oceans⎯hidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath” the moon’s surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared “to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface.” Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiter’s intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Solar System’s Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean,” news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, “Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiter’s Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life,” Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour docked successfully with the International Space Station (ISS), the first Shuttle docking at an inhabited ISS. William M. Shepherd, Commander of the ISS, noted the festive mood at the space station, even though the two crews would not meet in person until later in the mission. Soon after Endeavour docked, Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to lift the 49-foot-long (15-meter-long) tower containing the solar array out of the cargo bay, where it would remain suspended 10 feet (3 meters) above the Shuttle while the crew slept.(Steven Siceloff, “Endeavour Docks at Station: Astronauts To Attach Arrays Today,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery arrived at the ISS. Shuttle Commander Brian Duffy successfully executed the rendezvous without the Shuttle’s radar, relying on a star-tracking system and on handheld lasers operated by his crew. The Ku-band antenna had failed after launch, disrupting the radar and television link. The Shuttle docking was NASA’s first conducted without radar.(Associated Press, “Bad Antenna Blacks Out Shuttle’s Television,” Charleston Gazette (SC), 13 October 2000; New York Times, “Astronauts Rendezvous with Space Station,” 14 October 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Discovery Docks Safely with Space Station,” 14 October 2000.)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross reported that the Boeing Company would have to forfeit most of its profit from the ISS contract because of its nearly US$1 billion in cost overruns. NASA’s incentive-laden contract with Boeing allowed for significant bonuses for meeting timeline and cost limits. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had ordered an audit of the NASA-Boeing contract in 1999, because projected cost overages had continued to rise. Nonetheless, as Boeing neared completion of the construction of its portion of the ISS, both NASA and the aerospace giant were optimistic that cost overruns had stabilized, and that the space station hardware would perform well in space.(Tony Capaccio, “Boeing Overruns on Space Station Near $1Billion,” Los Angeles Times, 23 February 2000.)
Laurence Vico released a study on astronauts’ loss of bone density because of time spent in space. Vico and his team of researchers had examined the bone-mineral density of 15 cosmonauts who had spent from one to six months aboard the Mir space station. They had found a “striking” loss of bone density, in some cases as serious as that experienced by paraplegic patients. The team of doctors suggested that physicians should examine astronauts more closely for susceptibility to bone-weakening conditions such as osteoporosis, before they traveled into space, and that postflight recovery periods should be much longer than previous standards dictated. The sample study found that astronauts experienced an average bone-density loss of more than 5 percent, and that the lost bone did not immediately regenerate after postflight recovery periods. Scientists had long been aware of the physical challenges posed by the lack of gravity in the space environment. Therefore, NASA and the space agencies of other countries had carefully dictated diet and exercise programs for astronauts. The study had special relevance, however, because the international space community was continuing work on the ISS and anticipating even longer stays in space.
Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mir’s days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russia’s commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today,” 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
NASA announced a partnership with Dreamtime Holdings Inc., a start-up company backed by Lockheed Martin to provide the International Space Station (ISS) with high-definition television and to create digital archives for NASA. The agreement was NASA’s first involving a commercial partner that would provide support for the ISS. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the partnership at NASA’s Ames Research Center, located in the high-technology hub of California’s Silicon Valley, predicting that the partnership would move NASA to the forefront of the information age and terming it “innovative government at its best.” Dreamtime planned to spend US$100 million on the project, which would give civilians access to neverbefore-seen images of the Space Shuttles and of NASA missions. The pact resulted from the Commercial Space Act of 1998, enacted to increase commercial involvement in and funding for the ISS.(NASA, “NASA, Dreamtime Partnership Propels Space Information Age to New Heights,” news release 00-87, 2 June 2000; Frank Morring Jr., “Startup To Spend $100 Million Digitizing Station, NASA Archives,” Aerospace Daily, 2 June 2000.)
The Russian government decided that it could no longer afford to maintain the Mir space station and would destroy it in February 2001 during a controlled descent. The Russian government had previously decided to abandon Mir, but had extended the space station’s time in orbit after the private MirCorp, based in the Netherlands, had leased time on the station, financing its operation. According to the Russian government, a primary factor in its decision to end Mir’s orbit had been increasing skepticism over MirCorp’s continued ability to finance Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia To Dump Mir Space Station,” 16 November 2000.)
Three astronauts attached a new docking port to the ISS, with two of the crew spacewalking and one operating Discovery’s robotic arm from inside the Shuttle. Astronauts Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff and Michael Lopez-Alegria, assigned to work outside the ISS, had difficulty loosening the latches securing the docking port inside Discovery’s cargo bay. However, once they had freed it, Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata lifted the 2,700-pound (1,200-kilogram) port using the Shuttle’s robotic arm and positioned it on the space station. When the port was within 1 foot (0.3 meters) of its position, the astronauts outside gave Wakata “invaluable” instructions, necessary because the crew was working without the assistance of the camera at the end of the robotic arm. The camera had been out of commission since the short circuit on 14 October.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Docking Port Nudged Carefully into Place,” Sun-Sentinel (Ft. Lauderdale, FL), 17 October 2000.)
A Russian Progress cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying fuel to the uninhabited ISS for use in adjusting the station’s orbit. The craft also carried scientific instruments, linens, and personal-hygiene supplies in preparation for the October arrival of the station’s first permanent crew.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Ship with Supplies for Space Station Launches,” 7 August 2000.)
NASA’s JPL announced that the Cassini spacecraft, after successfully undergoing a series of tests, was resuming the use of its electrically powered reaction wheels to control its orientation. Although mission scientists were uncertain of the cause of the spacecraft’s switch to a different maneuvering system, they suggested that a small piece of material, perhaps from the motor’s magnets, might have lodged in an area where it caused friction. Because the scientists were unable actually to detect any such material, they speculated further that either centrifugal force had subsequently forced the material out, or the motor had ground it up. Scientists also suggested that reduced lubrication in the bearings, during prolonged operation at reduced speeds, might have caused the problem, and that, perhaps, the increased motor speeds used during the tests had restored the lubrication.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Resuming Use of Reaction Wheels,” news release, 21 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=6 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
Russian space officials announced a decision to alter plans for the Enterprise module of the ISS, which the company RSC Energia was building in conjunction with the U.S. company SPACEHAB. In the original plans, the module had been noncommercial, providing docking and cargo space, but in an effort to increase revenue, RSC Energia had revised the plans to allow the module to hold multimedia equipment for various business projects.(Associated Press, “Russia Seeks Space Station Revenue,” 23 August 2000.)
Soyuz successfully docked with the unoccupied Mir space station. At the last minute, cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri docked Soyuz manually, because Russian space officials feared the autopilot was about to malfunction. The cosmonauts planned to concentrate on plugging a small air leak and conducting several scientific experiments during a spacewalk.(Associated Press, “Latest Space Crew Docks Flawlessly with Mir Space Station,” 6 April 2000.)
In another escalation of the increasingly tense debate over how to handle Russia’s repeated delays in building and launching the service module of the International Space Station (ISS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, if Russia did not meet a July 2000 deadline, the United States would provide a substitute module. Russia was already more than two years behind schedule, affecting the ISS’s timeline and hampering the cooperative international effort. Goldin’s decision followed Russia’s announcement of its plan to direct more resources to the failing Mir space station. Some space experts perceived Russia’s designation of scarce financial funds to Mir, rather than to the ISS, as a signal of Russia’s reluctance to participate fully in the international space consortium. In his strongest criticism to date, Goldin said of Russia’s ISS involvement: “To say we are frustrated and disappointed is an understatement . . . We want the Russians to be there, but we felt we had to be responsible custodians to keep the program on track.”(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Dictates Date for Russia on Station Port,” New York Times, 4 February 2000; Associated Press, “NASA: We’ll Launch if Russia Fails,” 4 February 2000.)
Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, only the 14th time that a NASA Shuttle had landed in darkness. NASA controllers used infrared cameras to monitor the Shuttle’s final descent. The return of the Shuttle ended the crucial mission to repair the ISS and reset the space station’s orbit to an optimal altitude. NASA’s Mission Control, congratulating the crew on a “super mission,” began almost immediately to anticipate the flurry of missions that would finally complete construction on the ISS. Atlantis had sustained minor damage during the trip, mainly dents and scratches on its wings caused by ice. Three members of the returning crew, astronauts Susan J. Helms and James S. Voss and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, had a special interest in monitoring the ISS’s completion, because they had been selected for the second research crew to the ISS and would make a long-term stay aboard the research station.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Ends Repair Trip to Station,” Washington Post, 30 May 2000; USA Today, “Shuttle Crew Returns from Space Station Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000; Associated Press, “Nighttime Landing Ends Shuttle Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
Space Media Inc. and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), prime contractor of the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS), announced a new multimedia partnership called Enermedia LLC. Under the new partnership, Space Media Inc. would use the Russian Space Program archives to develop and provide multimedia, which the Russian service module would broadcast on television and the Internet.(SPACEHAB, “Space Media Inc and RSC Energia Join Forces Forming New Multimedia Partnership,” news release, 2 August 2000, http://www.spacehab.com/news/2000/00_08_02.htm (accessed 8 May 2008).)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttle’s robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crew’s sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed,” New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
Russian space experts agreed that the Mir space station was in fine condition to continue orbiting Earth, and the Russian government extended the station’s time in space indefinitely, after the Netherlands-based MirCorp agreed to fund a new mission. Russia’s council of space engineers, known as the Council of Chief Designers, authorized plans to launch a Progress cargo spacecraft, in the middle of October, to deliver fuel and equipment to Mir.(MirCorp, “MirCorp Statement on the Mir Space Station’s Future,” news release, 3 October 2000; Associated Press, “Russian Space Experts Determine Mir Fit To Continue Orbital Flight,” 3 October 2000.)
NASA released time-lapse movies created from images produced by the Hubble Space Telescope, showing “spectacular outbursts from young stars,” changing “dramatically over a period of just weeks or months.” NASA had combined individual images of young star systems XZ Tauri and HH 30 in the Taurus-Auriga molecular cloud, captured over several years, to create the time-lapse movies. Documenting the activity of the early stages of stars’ lives, the movies demonstrated that images “taken of the universe today won’t necessarily look the same as those snapped a few months from now.”(NASA, “Hubble Movies Show the Changing Faces of Young Stars,” news release N00-044, 21 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/2000/n00-044.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Russia launched a Progress supply spacecraft to deliver fuel to the uninhabited Mir space station, which was slipping from orbit. Increased solar flare activity had expanded the atmosphere, creating friction between Mir and the thin gases above Earth and causing the station to descend steadily, ever since its last crew had returned to Earth in June after a 73-day mission. The fuel would enable the station to achieve a higher orbit, preventing it from falling into thicker layers of the atmosphere and burning up. Some Russian politicians had called for disposal of the station, and U.S. space officials had urged the Russian government to dedicate its “scarce space funds” to the ISS. However, MirCorp, a private company based in the Netherlands, had leased time on Mir and agreed to fund the Progress launch, thereby saving the station.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches Progress Cargo Space Ship,” 17 October 2000.)
Hatches between the ISS and Space Shuttle Endeavour opened for the first time, and the three members of the space station crew, who had been living aboard the ISS for five weeks, received their first visitors. ISS Commander William M. Shepherd commended Endeavour’s crew for their installation of the giant solar array on the space station. The two crews spent their day together transferring supplies, such as food, water, mail, and gifts, to the space station and removing trash, damaged items, and unneeded items for return to Earth.(Reuters, “Hatch Is Opened; Endeavour, Space Station Crews Become One,” Chicago Tribune, 9 December 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Crew Visits Space Station,” 9 December 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Crew Greets First Visitors,” New York Times, 9 December 2000.)
Scientists at the American Astronomical Society convention also unveiled the first detailed map of the region of the universe inhabited by Earth. Using an Australian robotic telescope, which measured distances between more than 100,000 galaxies, researchers had charted the locations of galaxies, dark regions, and cosmic clusters. Perhaps most significantly, the new map supported a long-standing theory regarding the size limits of cosmic structures. Because of the relatively small scope of previous mapping surveys, scientists had questioned whether the known standards of cosmic size were representative. The newest map, however, did not reveal any cosmic structure outside of previous standards. Therefore, scientists could support with greater conviction the idea that size limits existed as the universe evolved. The researchers termed the limits the “end of greatness.”(James Glanz, “Robotic Telescope Affirms Assumption on Universe’s Birth,” New York Times, 7 June 2000. 933 Mark Carreau, “Rocket Gives Space Station a Life,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 2000.)
The Russian Space Agency announced another delay in the launch of the crew compartment for the International Space Station (ISS), after two Proton rockets exploded when metal and mineral particles contaminated their engines. The Russian Space Agency had planned to use a Proton rocket to launch the ISS module. The S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, which built the boosters, promised to replace the Proton rocket’s faulty parts. Funding problems had previously slowed construction of the crew compartment, disrupting the timeline for the international project.(Associated Press, “Russia Again Delays Launch of Space Station Unit,” 12 January 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Launch Delayed,” 12 January 2000.)
