NASA announced the selection of Boeing’s Delta 2 expendable launch vehicle to launch medium-class payloads between 2006 and 2009. The selection was part of an existing NASA launch-services contract with Boeing that had a maximum value of US$1.2 billion, if NASA exercised all options. The procurement contract called for 12 definite launches, with options for an additional seven. Boeing’s rockets would launch both NASA’s payloads and NASA- sponsored payloads.(NASA, “NASA Picks Delta II To Launch Medium-Class Payloads,” news release C02-ii, 6 December 2002. 335 NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 31 October 2008).)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri would replace Sergei I. Moschenko as a member of the ISS Expedition 7 crew. Russian officials had proposed the change to the Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, which formally certified and assigned ISS crew, and the panel had formally approved the proposal on 10 October 2002. Kaleri had served three separate missions on the Russian space station Mir between 1992 and 2000. In addition to Kaleri, the Expedition 7 crew would include U.S. astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko.(NASA, “Expedition Five Backup Crewmember Named to Expedition Seven,” news release 02-235, 3 December 2002; NASA, “Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America and the Russian Space Agency Concerning the Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station” (MOU, Washington, DC, 29 January 1998), Article 11.3, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/reports/1998/nasa_russian.html (accessed 5 November 2008).)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
NASA scientist Zdenek Sekanina published new findings challenging existing ideas about comets. Existing theory had posited that comets rarely break up and that, when they do, the fragmentation usually occurs in close proximity to the Sun. However, basing his research on the analysis of images taken by the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), operated jointly by NASA and ESA, Sekanina had discovered that comets fragment throughout their lifetimes, often at distances far from the Sun. Moreover, Sekanina had found that such fragmentation generally occurs in a somewhat orderly pattern, with a single comet fragmenting into clusters of smaller comets. Sekanina had analyzed a type of very small comet called a sungrazer and discovered that sungrazers are actually fragments of other comets that have broken apart during a previous encounter with the Sun. Moreover, he had found that sungrazers continue to break into pieces throughout their orbits around the Sun. Sekanina had also examined another type of comet―57P/du Toit-Neujmin-Delaporte, finding that this type of comet shows the same pattern of fragmenting into smaller comets as it moves farther from the Sun.(NASA, “Comets Break Up Far and Near,” news release 02-158, 5 September 2002; Zdenek Sekanina, “Runaway Fragmentation of Sungrazing Comets Observed with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory,” Astrophysical Journal 576, no. 2 (10 September 2002): 1085–1089.)
Using the most sensitive images ever taken by the HST, scientists found new evidence of star creation, challenging the findings of much of the existing research on the origin of the universe. Although the HST had captured images of portions of the skies that appear empty to the naked eye, the images revealed nearly 5,000 galaxies. Led by Kenneth M. Lanzetta of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, a team of scientists had examined approximately 150 of those galaxies spectroscopically, inferring from color variations their actual distance from Earth, as well as the properties of less visible light from even fainter and more distant galaxies. The scientists had also conducted spectroscopic analysis of remote quasars to measure the early universe’s gas density, because high gas density implies high creation rates of stars, which are the building blocks of galaxies and the birthplaces of solar systems. The new images indicated that countless stars had begun forming at a period closer to the birth of the universe than previous research had suggested. Although the HST had captured the images in 1995 and 1998, using the most advanced available technology, the findings suggested that the peak of star creation had occurred earlier than Hubble’s ability to detect it. However, the scientists believed that they could date the peak of star creation to within a few hundred million years after the Big Bang.(NASA, “Hubble Suggests First Stars Opened in a Blaze of Glory,” news release 02-01, 8 January 2002; William Harwood, “Stars May Have Brightened Infant Universe,” Washington Post, 9 January 2002.)
The leaders of the space agencies participating in the ISS met at ESA’s headquarters in Paris to discuss the program’s status. The attendees included representatives of NASA, the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. All of the agencies reaffirmed their commitment to work on developing, assembling, and using the ISS for both applied and scientific research. In addition, the agencies agreed on a timeline for the next measures they would undertake to ensure that the construction and operation of the ISS met system engineering and safety requirements, so that participants could use it for various research objectives.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 02-105, 3 June 2002.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, “Major Component of Space Station Is Attached,” New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
For the first time, scientists made combined internal and external observations of Jupiter’s magnetosphere, the biggest object with distinct boundaries within the solar system. In the first conjunction of two spacecraft at an outer planet, the Galileo spacecraft conducted observations from inside Jupiter’s magnetosphere, a comet-shaped region of space filled by the planet’s magnetic field. Meanwhile, on the outside of the magnetosphere, the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft monitored the effects of solar windparticles that flow from the Sun through the solar system. Scientists augmented the data gathered during these observations with data from near- simultaneous observations collected from radio telescopes on Earth and from spacecraft orbiting Earth, namely the HST and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Researchers found that, although Jupiter’s magnetosphere deflects solar winds, shock waves carried by solar winds compress the magnetosphere, stimulate radio emissions from within it, and brighten auroras at the planet’s poles. The observations helped bolster researchers’ confidence in their understanding of Earth’s own protective magnetosphere.(NASA JPL, “Solar Wind Buffets Vast Jupiter Region, Team Approach Reveals,” news release, 27 February 2002; Thomas W. Hill, “Magnetic Moments at Jupiter,” Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 965–966.)
The GAO submitted a report to Congress examining the reasons for the increasing costs of the ISS and the potential effects of those costs on the station’s ability to conduct scientific research. The report stated that changes in the program, scheduling delays, and other issues had substantially increased the program’s costs, and that NASA’s management had not taken steps to address cost growth. Consequently, the ISS’s scientific research capabilities had diminished, raising concerns among the station’s international partners. Although GAO made no formal recommendations, it cited NASA’s own newly established management and cost-estimation reforms, noted challenges NASA faced in implementing those reforms, and suggested that NASA develop a credible budget to complete the ISS. NASA formally responded that the report reasonably portrayed the problems with the ISS, as well as NASA’s efforts to address them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Actions Under Way To Manage Cost, But Significant Challenges Remain” (report no. GAO-02-735, Washington, DC, 17 July 2002), www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO- 02-735 (accessed 26 September 2008).)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft took its last pictures, images of Io, a planet-sized moon orbiting Jupiter. Galileo had launched in 1989 from Space Shuttle Atlantis and had entered Jupiter’s orbit six years later. The spacecraft had eventually made 33 orbits around Jupiter, capturing nearly 14,000 images of the planet and the objects around it.(NASA, “Farewell, Io; Galileo Paying Last Visit to a Restless Moon,” news release 02-10, 15 January 2002; NASA, “Solar System ExplorationGalileo: Overview,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/ /index.cfm (accessed 31 July 2008); Andrew Bridges, “NASA Awaits Last Photographs from Jupiter Probe’s Long Trip,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2002.)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASA’s SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the “One NASA” initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASA’s various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASA’s MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFC’s Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASA’s KSC.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director,” news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
The ISS’s international partners made several decisions during a meeting held in Houston, Texas. The meeting’s purpose was to discuss the provision of crew return vehicles (CRVs) for the ISS and plans for the station’s construction, through 2008. NASA announced that the collaborating space agencies had agreed to a modified launch schedule for components provided by Canada, Japan, and ESA. In addition, they had discussed the possibility of Russia’s continuing to provide Soyuz CRVs until NASA had completed the construction of a replacement vehicle.(John Kelly, “International Space Station Partners OK Modified Launch Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 October 2002.)
NASA awarded Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems a US$936 million modification to its contract for the ISS. Under the contract, which had commenced in 1995, Boeing was providing construction, integration, and operations for the ISS. The modification extended Boeing’s integration and operation work until 31 December 2003 and increased the total contract value to US$10.7 billion.(NASA, “NASA Awards $936 Million Modification to Boeing Space Station Contract,” news release c02-d, 7 February 2002.)
NASA announced the backup crew members for ISS Expedition 10, including Jeffrey N. Williams, acting as backup for the ISS station commander, Russian cosmonaut Konstantin M. Kozeev, and U.S. astronaut Sunita L. Williams. The primary crew members for Expedition 10 were ISS Commander Leroy Chiao, U.S. astronaut John L. Phillips, and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov.(NASA, “Space Station Expedition Backup Crew Named,” news release 02-258, 23 December 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
Crew of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 finished installing several new instruments on the 12- year-old HST and sent the observatory back into orbit. During a series of five spacewalks conducted in as many days, Columbia’s crew had installed a new power-shunting unit, an improved solar panel, and a cooling unit that would restore the Near-Infrared Camera and Multi- Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) to operational status. In addition, Columbia’s crew had installed a new main camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), which NASA had designed to give the telescope unprecedented ability to observe distant galaxies and other objects.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Returning to Mission Able To Peer Deeper Into Space,” New York Times, 10 March 2002.)
The National Research Council (NRC), the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences, released a report on the ISS, outlining NASA’s efforts to limit cost overruns on the project. The report concluded that, if NASA proceeded with its plans to halt construction, once the ISS’s core was complete, and to limit the station’s crew, equipment, and other components, the ISS would be unlikely to become a first-class laboratory. NRC reported that capping the crew to three persons would have a highly detrimental impact on the quality of scientific research conducted on board the ISS, because a crew of such a small size would have to devote most of its time to station maintenance and operation. In addition, NRC stated that NASA had made its decision to cancel or delay equipment for experiments without assessing scientific priorities or determining which research plans the curtailments would affect most. NASA’s official representative responded that NASA was committed to building the ISS beyond the core-complete stage. Moreover, NASA intended to continue developing the ISS based on decisions concerning the station’s scientific priorities and planned to take any steps necessary to achieve those goalsfor example, increasing the size of the station’s crew.(Warren E. Leary, “Cuts Lessen Space Station’s Value to Science, Report Says,” New York Times, 20 September 2002.)
of two objects that orbit around a common center of mass as they both orbit the Sunwith a highly eccentric orbit and a long period. However, they had found that 1998 WW31 is very different from the Pluto/Charon system, which was previously the only known binary in the Kuiper Belt. The Kuiper Belt is the region of space that extends from Neptune, at 30 AU (astronomical units)the approximate mean distance between Earth and the Sun) to more than 100 AU. Since its discovery in 1992, the Kuiper Belt has helped scientists understand the solar system’s formation. Although scientists had discovered 1998 WW31 in 1998, they had reported it as a single Kuiper Belt object. However, analysis of observations made in 2000 indicated that the object might contain two components. Further analysis, using ground-based and HST observations made in 2001 and 2002, confirmed 1998 WW31’s binarity.(Christian Veillet, “The Binary Kuiper-Belt Object 1998 WW31,” Nature 416, no. 6882 (18 April 2002): 711– 713; NASA, “Hubble Hunts Down Odd Couples at the Fringes of Our Solar System,” news release 02-70, 17 April 2002.)
Observations from the HST revealed the existence of medium-sized black holes. According to scientists, the discovery provided important information about the creation of many types of celestial bodies. Scientists were surprised to find that the black holes in the cores of globular star clusters―bright clusters of stars that orbit galaxies, including the Milky Way―are nearly 10,000 times less massive than galaxies. The HST data revealed that black holes in globular star clusters are proportionally smaller than massive black holes found in galaxies, demonstrating that the mass of a black hole is proportional to its stellar surroundings. The results also indicated that when the globular star clusters had formed they had black holes, suggesting that, to form large star clusters, black holes must act as gravitational anchors. Scientists believed these findings might illuminate the process by which galaxies and globular clusters formed. The discovery also suggested that black holes are more ubiquitous than scientists had previously thought.(NASA, “Hubble Discovers Black Holes in Unexpected Places,” news release 02-174, 17 September 2002; William Harwood, “Finding May Connect Dots on How Galaxies Form; Mid-size Black Holes Are Discovered,” Washington Post, 18 September 2002.)
NASA announced the assignment of three crew members to begin training for the ninth expedition to the ISS. The three were Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. NASA assigned American astronaut Daniel M. Tani to serve as backup for his fellow compatriot Fincke and selected cosmonauts Alexander F. Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko to serve as backups for fellow Russians Kononenko and Padalka.(NASA, “Astronauts Assigned for Space Station Expedition Training,” news release 02-55, 18 March 2002.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 and the ISS installed the first Starboard truss segment, the S1 Truss, connecting it with the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Installation of the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long) S1 Truss was the mission’s main objective. Astronauts David A. Wolf and Piers J. Sellers accomplished the task during three spacewalks, with astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Sandra H. Magnus operating the ISS’s robotic arm to attach the S1 to the central truss segment, the S0 Truss. The astronauts also installed the Crew and Equipment Translation Aid, a cart that runs on rails along the top of the truss.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Install Girder on Space Station,” New York Times, 11 October 2002; NASA, “ISS Assembly Mission 9A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/ iss_assembly_9a.html (accessed 17 October 2008).)
The five partner space agencies of the ISSthe Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency approved the 2002 Program Action Plan for the ISS at a meeting held in Tokyo, Japan. The partner agencies agreed to expand the station’s capabilities, to increase the number of permanent ISS crew members, and to provide additional crew rescue vehicles. They also agreed to a process for selecting an ISS configuration, once the ISS had accommodated the remaining components. In this process, each of the station’s partner agencies would make additional programmatic and technical assessments, cost estimations, and internal budget reviews. In addition, the agencies announced that they would approve a station configuration option by March 2003, select a revised configuration by June or July 2003, and agree upon a final configuration by December 2003.(NASA, “Space Station Action Plan Approved,” news release 02-241, 6 December 2002.)
Scientists from California Institute of Technology announced that they had used NASA’s HST to measure the true size of an orbiting, planet-like body beyond Pluto. The sphere was the most distant object that a telescope had measured within Earth’s solar system. Like its neighbor Pluto, the object, which is nearly 4 billion miles (6.4 billion kilometers) from Earth, lies in the Kuiper Belt, an icy debris field that extends 7 billion miles (11.3 billion kilometers) beyond the orbit of Neptune. Using the HST, scientists Michael E. Brown and Chadwick A. Trujillo were able to determine several properties of the sphere, including its diameter of 780 miles (1,250 kilometers). Although too small to be a planet, the sphere, which Brown and Trujillo named Quaoarafter a creation deity of the Native American Tongva peoplehas planet-like traits that Pluto lacks. For example, Brown and Trujillo found that Quaoar has a circular orbit around the Sun and is in the same plane as the other planets in Earth’s solar system. Brown and Trujillo announced their findings at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences.(NASA, “Hubble Spots an Icy World Far Beyond Pluto,” news release 02-190, 7 October 2002; Usha Lee McFarling, “Pluto’s Not So Alone Out There, It Appears,” Los Angeles Times, 8 October 2002.)
Scientists announced an estimate of the universe’s age based on new HST images of very faint white dwarf stars in Messier 4 (M4), a cluster of stars in the constellation Scorpius. The researchers had closely examined M4’s white dwarf starslow-mass stars that have exhausted their fuel sources for thermonuclear fusion. Although white dwarfs cool at a predictable rate, enabling scientists to estimate their age, they become progressively fainter as they cool, making them difficult to observe. The HST had provided the first deep exposures of these dim stars, which the astronomers discovered were M4’s oldest white dwarf stars, at around 12 to 13 billion years old. Earlier Hubble observations had revealed that the first stars in the universe had formed less than 1 billion years after the universe’s emergence from the Big Bang. Thus, the researchers had discovered that the age of these M4 white dwarfs supported the previous estimates that the universe’s age is 13 to 14 billion years old. The use of this new methodology to estimate the universe’s age represented a major departure from those used previously.(NASA, “Hubble Uncovers Oldest ‘Clocks’ in Space To Read Age of Universe,” news release 02-73, 24 April 2004; Brad M. S. Hansen et al., “The White Dwarf Cooling Sequence of the Globular Cluster Messier 4,” Astrophysical Journal 574, no. 2 (1 August 2002): L155–L158.)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic “wrist roll” joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, “Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced,” Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, “STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18,” 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
