The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleet’s grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the station’s two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the station―completed and ready to launch―had reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASA’s ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAO’s September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAO’s findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Shuttle Fleet’s Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress” (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 1–11, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, “Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says,” Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Report: Shuttle’s Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in ‘Survival Mode’,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
The ISS marked its five-year anniversary in space. Since the Russian Zarya control module had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 20 November 1998, the ISS had grown from an uninhabited module to a permanently staffed research facility the size of a three- bedroom house. After five years, the ISS was not completely constructed―NASA was preparing more than 80 tons (72,575 kilograms or 72.58 tonnes) of equipment and hardware, including solar arrays and support structures, for launch at the Space Station Processing Facility at its KSC. Also in launch preparation at KSC was the Node 2 module, which would connect the U.S., European, and Japanese research laboratories; and the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module. The eventual launch of the European Columbus laboratory under construction in Bremen, Germany, would expand the station’s volume to that of a five-bedroom house. The first crew to live aboard the orbiting facility had arrived on 2 November 2000, and since that date, eight successive crews―22 people―had staffed the ISS, conducting research in bioastronautics, physical sciences, fundamental space biology, space product development, and spaceflight disciplines.(NASA, “International Space Station Marks Five Years in Orbit,” news release 03-374, 19 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03374_iss_five_yrs.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space record―Foale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russia’s former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walz’s previous record for an American in space―230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight―196 days.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record,” news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Michael Foale’s 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, “Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space,” 9 December 2003.)
The Canadian Space Agency awarded a four-year, US$116 million contract to MD Robotics to provide engineering services for robotic elements for the ISS. Under the contract, MD Robotics, a subsidiary of MacDonald, Dettweiler and Associates Ltd., would maintain and upgrade software for robotic components and would continue developing and testing a two-armed robot called Dextre, scheduled for installation at the ISS in 2005. MD Robotics had designed Dextre for attachment to the ISS, either at the end of the robotic arm currently in place―Canadarm 2―or on the mobile base station. Dextre would perform external maintenance tasks at the ISS.(Jason Bates, “MacDonald Dettweiler Nabs Space Station Contract,” Space News, 3 June 2003.)
Japan’s Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japan’s NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
NASA released an 84-page report, “Implementation Plan for the International Space Station Continuing Flight,” detailing NASA’s plans to improve exterior inspections of the ISS and to shield the station from debris strikes, while continuing to maintain a crew aboard the ISS during the disruption of Space Shuttle flights. Before the Columbia accident, Space Shuttle crews visiting the ISS had routinely photographed the exterior of the station; NASA expressed concern that in the absence of Shuttle flights, external damage would go undetected. The report outlined plans to conduct thorough inspections of external surfaces of the ISS using external cameras and classified satellite images, as well as to inspect more closely the wiring and equipment inside the station.(Patty Reinert, “Armed with Lessons, NASA Outlines Safer Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 November 2003; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “NASA: Space Station Safety Can Be Better,” 7 November 2003.)
NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASA’s plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, “Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition,” news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, “Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary” (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, “Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission,” Space News, 19 August 2003.)
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched on STS-107 from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:39 a.m. (EST). NASA had postponed the launch, originally scheduled for July 2001, because of technical and scheduling problems. Flying an orbital mission, a rare event since the ISS partners had begun construction of the space station in 1998, STS-107 was a “pure research mission.” The crew would conduct scientific investigations in two 12-hour shifts each day in the laboratory module of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. The crew included Shuttle Commander Rick D. Husband; Pilot William C. McCool; Payload Commander Michael P. Anderson; Payload Specialist Ilan Ramon, Israel’s first astronaut and a fighter pilot with the rank of colonel in Israel’s Air Force; Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, an aerospace engineer originally from India; and Mission Specialists David M. Brown and Laurel B. Clark, both physicians. The launch occurred under exceptionally tight security with more than 300 dignitaries and guests from Israel in attendance.(Broward Liston for Reuters, “Space Shuttle Launches with First Israeli Astronaut,” 16 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “Columbia Takes Off Under Tight Security,” New York Times, 16 January 2003.)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
NASA’s Galileo mission ended when the Galileo spacecraft disintegrated in Jupiter’s atmosphere. NASA had managed the course of the craft’s demise to prevent its becoming uncontrollable once it had depleted its propellant. Galileo had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, following multiyear delays―originally, NASA had planned for the craft to launch in 1982 aboard a Centaur rocket. The probe had made significant contributions to scientists’ knowledge of Jupiter and its moons, including collecting evidence of the possibility of life on Europa. Galileo had outlasted its prime mission by six years, despite enduring numerous technical problems and more than four times the amount of radiation that engineers had designed the spacecraft to withstand.(NASA JPL, “Galileo End of Mission Status,” news release, 21 September 2003, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=129 (accessed 2 February 2009); Usha Lee McFarling, “Stalwart Galileo Is Vaporized near Jupiter,” Los Angeles Times, 22 September 2003.)
Progress M-47 launched atop a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome one day after the loss of Space Shuttle Columbia “threw future missions to the orbiting complex in doubt.” The launch, scheduled long in advance, took place as “stunned Russian space officials offered condolences to their American colleagues.” Russian officials also expressed concern that the loss of Columbia and the ensuing suspension of Shuttle missions might place Russia’s “cash-strapped space program under more pressure to deliver crews and supplies to the station.” Sergei Gorbunov, a spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency, explained that Russia had no reserve of Soyuz spacecraft. He pointed out that if the U.S. space program intended to use Russian craft to transport crews to the ISS, NASA would need to buy Russian Soyuz TMAs, the type of craft designed to carry cosmonauts to the ISS. Russia had routinely built only two Soyuz spacecraft per year.(Associated Press, “Russians Send Supply Ship on Way to Space Station,” 2 February 2003.)
