NASA’s Cassini spacecraft provided data revealing two previously unknown moons orbiting Saturn―a new total of 33 identified moons orbiting the planet. The two moons―designated S/2004-S1 and S/2004-S2, until receiving their formal names―measured 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) and 21⁄2 miles (4 kilometers) in diameter. Because of the moons’ diminutive size, scientists suspected that they might be fragments from a larger moon.(Mark Carreau, “Cassini Finds Two More Saturn Moons,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2004; New York Times, “2 Little Saturn Moons,” 17 August 2004.)
After more than six months in space, the crew members of ISS Expedition 8 returned to Earth, safely landing in Kazakhstan at 8:12 p.m. (EDT). The crew of Expedition 8 consisted of NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri. During their tenure at the ISS, Foale and Kaleri had conducted scientific research. Expedition 8 had been the second- longest expedition to the ISS, with the two men spending a total of 194 days, 18 hours, and 35 minutes in space. Returning with them to Earth was ESA astronaut André Kuipers, who had spent nine days on the space station conducting research as part of ISS Expedition 9. The other two members of Expedition 9, Gennady I. Padalka and E. Michael Fincke, remained at the ISS for a mission scheduled to last nearly six months.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-007, 29 April 2004. 195)
NASA and the ISS partners announced crew assignments for the next two expeditions to the space station. NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka would serve on Expedition 9, and NASA astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov would provide the crew for Expedition 10. In addition, Chiao and Sharipov would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 9, while NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 10. Although NASA and its partners had previously scheduled Tokarev to pair with Chaio on Expedition 10, the ISS partners had decided to replace Tokarev with Sharipov, because Sharipov had previously trained with Chiao.(NASA, “New Crews Named for 2004 Space Station Missions,” news release 04-056, 6 February 2004.)
Representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States―the nations participating in the ISS project―met to discuss their cooperative activities for the station. At the meeting at ESA’s Technical Centre in the Netherlands, ESA officials reviewed ISS operations and plans, unanimously endorsing a new technical configuration for the space station that would incorporate components from each of the ISS partner space agencies. Upon completion, the ISS would have improved research capabilities and would accommodate more crew members than the current maximum of three.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 04-237, 23 July 2004; Warren E. Leary, “More Astronauts Approved for Space Station,” New York Times, 24 July 2004.)
NASA officials announced that the crew members of the ISS were experiencing a food shortage and would have to eat less until a Russian supply capsule could bring additional food supplies. Russia had scheduled the resupply capsule to arrive at the ISS on 25 December 2004, but if it missed the delivery, crew members Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov would have to return to Earth aboard the Russian Soyuz capsule docked at the ISS. NASA also noted that, if the crew members had to evacuate the space station, Russia and the United States could continue to operate the ISS from Earth. Officials cited a number of reasons for the supply shortage on the ISS, including the postponement of regular supply missions after the Columbia accident and the necessary removal of some food supplies from an August 2004 resupply flight, to make room for equipment to monitor air quality in the ISS.(Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Endures Food Shortage,” Houston Chronicle, 10 December 2004.)
ISS crew members repaired an air leak in the space station. Astronaut C. Michael Foale and cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri fixed a leak in a flex hose located in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. The orbiting space station had begun to lose air on 22 December 2003. After examining the station’s air pressure readings, NASA’s Mission Control had informed ISS crew members of the leak on 5 January 2004. The air leak had not endangered either the ISS crew or operations. By systematically isolating the ISS’s compartments and using an ultrasound device to determine the location of a hissing sound emitted by the faulty hose, Foale and Kaleri had discovered the source of the air loss.
A group of astronomers announced the most detailed telescopic view ever taken of the visible universe. NASA’s HST had captured a 1 million-second-long exposure of a small portion of dark sky, with a resulting image containing an estimated 10,000 galaxies, some so far away that astronomers had never before seen them. Astronomers called the image the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. They believed that the Hubble Ultra Deep Field might have revealed light from galaxies created near the time of the Big Bang and hoped that the image would provide information about the creation of the universe.(NASA, “Hubble’s Deep View of the Universe Unveils Earliest Galaxies,” news release 04-086, 9 March 2004; Dennis Overbye, “Images Reveal Deepest Glance into Universe,” New York Times, 10 March 2004.)
The ISS’s main oxygen generator stopped working, but the equipment failure posed no immediate danger to the station’s crew members. ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka stated that the crew could repair the generator, which had failed on previous occasions. The malfunction did not pose an immediate threat to Padalka or his fellow crew member E. Michael Fincke, because they could access several alternative sources of oxygen stored in the orbiting space station.(New York Times, “Oxygen Generator on Space Station Fails,” 10 September 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035,” news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, “Next International Space Station Crew Named,” news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
Passing by Saturn’s furthest moon Phoebe, the Cassini spacecraft returned analyses of the moon indicating that Phoebe’s chemical composition is similar to the composition of comets, a finding that supported previous scientific theories about the enigmatic Phoebe. Because Phoebe has an unusually dark appearance and orbits Saturn in a direction opposite that of the planet’s other moons, scientists had theorized that the moon is a captive object of Saturn. Cassini’s analyses of Phoebe indicated that the diminutive moon’s surface is composed of carbon dioxide, water ice, water-bearing minerals, and various organic chemicals. The results indicated possible chemical similarities between Phoebe’s composite materials and materials observed in comets. The Cassini spacecraft was one of two in the Cassini-Huygens mission, a joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA. Besides Cassini―an orbiter designed to orbit Saturn, studying the planet and its system of moons―the project included the probe Huygens, created to examine Saturn’s largest moon Titan. (Richard A. Kerr, “Dirty Old Ice Ball Found at Saturn,” Science 304, no. 5678 (18 June 2004): 1727; Warren E. Leary, “Craft Confirms a Comet Link for Peculiar Moon of Saturn,” New York Times, 24 June 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, “Station Crew Returns to Earth,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, “Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station,” New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
NASA announced that astronaut Leroy Chiao would replace William S. McArthur Jr. as Commander of Expedition 9, the next mission to the ISS. NASA had disqualified McArthur from Expedition 9 because of an unspecified medical issue. Chiao, who had trained as McArthur’s substitute, would join Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev for the mission, scheduled to launch in April 2004.(NASA, “Chiao Replaces McArthur as Next Space Station Commander,” news release 04-019, 12 January 2004. 581 Mark Carreau, “Leak on Space Station Stopped,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 2004.)
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members’ spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, “Finally, Spacewalk a Success,” Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Gennady I. Padalka performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the arrival of new unpiloted cargo ships, scheduled to launch in late 2005. ESA had created the new cargo vessels, formally called Automated Transfer Vehicles (ATVs). Fincke and Padalka installed new communications antennas and laser reflectors to facilitate the docking of the ATVs at the ISS. During the 41⁄2-hour excursion, the two men also replaced a circuit breaker and rotated scientific experiments.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-024,” news release SS04-024, 3 August 2004.)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
Data from NASA’s Cassini spacecraft revealed a new radiation belt around Saturn. Researchers already knew that Saturn had radiation belts―ring-shaped concentrations of ionized particles―outside the orbit of the planet’s rings. However, the newly discovered rings were inside Saturn’s rings. Previously, scientists had thought that a radiation belt could not exist inside the planet’s rings, because they believed that the rings would absorb any ionized particles that approached Saturn. The presence of radiation within the orbit of the rings indicated that the radiation belt’s particles are able to move through Saturn’s rings.(John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Finds Belt Around Saturn Unlike Any Ever Seen Before,” New York Times, 6 August 2004.)
