Explosion in hydrogen system canceled full-power run of AEC Kiwi B-1A reactor at Jackass Flats, Nev. Five men were injured, and the reactor was not damaged. NASA announced award of a contract to North American Aviation Co. to study the feasibility of a large erectable manned space station based on Langley Research Center concept.
First full-scale research model of an inflatable space station was displayed at nasa Lewis Research Center. Developed by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for nasa, the doughnut-shaped, three-story-high structure was made of rubberized fabric and equipped to accommodate three to ten astronauts.
nasa management meeting held to brief key officials on a manned space station program and to discuss possible FY 1964 funding.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing the Air Force Association in Las Vegas, said: “The United States, in keeping with our motivations in freedom and peace, has embarked upon a space program aimed at peace building, constructive exploitation of space—second to none. “In the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the nation has mobilized an effort unprecedented in history, nasa is making progress, because it has imaginative leadership, a competent staff, extensive facilities, and wholehearted support from all elements of industry and government which can contribute, especially the Air Force. “In addition to our contribution to the success of the nasa program, the Air Force is required by its own mission to put its energies into a different kind of space effort. We are reaching a clearer definition of that mission as it relates to space. . . . “The United States is dedicated as a matter of national policy to the peaceful exploitation of the space medium. The United States does not intend to extend the arms race into space. “We are, however, taking the step to enable us to protect ourselves in the event the Soviets or any other nation were to undertake missions in space that would endanger our security. . .. “The dual-vehicle orbital experiment of the Soviets, when coupled with their previous claims, seems to indicate that the need for protection against possible threats to our security will be in the near orbital stage of space, rather than farther out. One possible instrument of security that might be useful at this level in space may be found in extending the X-15 and X-20 technology, leading to craft which could operate from surface to orbit and back, and perform defense missions at the edge of the atmosphere. Another might be the permanently manned orbital space station designed for military purposes. Progress toward utilization of such a vehicle for security and protection would be speeded by capitalizing upon the nasa program to acquire knowledge and competence in manned orbital flight. . . . “These are the principles on which Air Force space program must be based: (a) Ample preparation to utilize the space medium; (b) Ample preparation to defend ourselves in case others choose to extend the threat of aggression to outer space; (c) Concentration on the really important tasks, including today’s job and not just tomorrow’s, and finally, (d) An organizationally disciplined space program—well planned and specific—which fits into overall national plans and objectives. “We in America have no choice but to extend our defenses as far as they need to be extended to save freedom on earth. . . .”
In meeting at nasa Langley Research Center, Langley and msc personnel presented reports on space station studies to officials from nasa Hq. and other interested agencies.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in first annual Theodore von K arm an Lecture of the American Rocket Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include the development of a [manned] space station now without still larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally believe that the next large manned space flight project [after Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth. “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather arbitrary subdivisions of our program will coalesce, for the manned space station wlli be useful for both manned and unmanned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .”
Decision on whether nasa or usaf would be assigned development of orbital space stations was reported in process within the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
nasa announced selection of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to build lunar excursion module (lem) of the three-man Apollo spacecraft. In announcing the selection, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We are affirming our tentative decision of last July . . . using lunar orbit rendezvous as the prime mission mode to accomplish initial manned lunar flight. . . . Studies [of alternate approaches], now completed, along with a great deal of related analyses . . . during the intervening months, make us confident that our present course is the proper one.” D. Brainerd Holmes, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa and Director of Manned Space Flight added that more than 1,000,000 man-hours of some 700 scientists, engineers, and researchers had been devoted to studies of the Apollo mission. “. . . The results of these studies added up to the conclusion that lunar orbit rendezvous is the preferable mode to undertake.” Apollo lunar spacecraft will be composed of command module, service module, and lunar excursion module.
Aerojet-General Corp. reported first successful firing of development engine for Apollo spacecraft’s service module, full-scale prototype engine with ablative thrust chamber assembly fired for checkout runs up to 50 sec.
First details of an orbital space station underjfeasibility study, one shaped like a doughnut and inflated once in orbit, revealed at Langley Research Center. Design of space stations had begun in November 1960 at Langley. Paul Hill, chief of the Applied Materials and Physics Division, stated that structures were now under study which could hold from four to thirty people.
Tropical storm developed 420 mi. east of Puerto Rico, traveling on path that would cross impact area for Astronaut Schirra’s third orbit, nasa flight officials were closely watching the storm to determine whether it would necessitate postponing Schirra’s MA-8 flight scheduled for Oct. 3. During September: Conclusion that wheel-shaped space station was technically feasible and identification of problems that still exist were revealed in nasa Technical Note D-1504, compilation of 11 papers by nasa Langley Research Center staff. Selection of this 150-ft.-diameter, 171,000-lb. structure was result of studies by Langley for more than 2 years and detailed analyses by North American Aviation, Inc., for past 6 months. The report indicated the space station primarily would provide a means of learning to live in space, where zero-gravity and variable-gravity experiments could be performed, closed life-support systems could be qualified, and rendezvous techniques and systems developed. Chosen model could support up to 38-man crew.
Houston Chronicle reported nasa Manned Spacecraft Center was planning 30-man space station that could stay in orbit for five years; msc had solicited contractors’ proposals for electrical power system capable of producing 40,000 watts. (Houston Chron. in upi. Boston Sunday Advertiser, 1/13/63)
Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by International Academy of Astronautics to succeed the late Dr. Theodore von Karman as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Director since 1961. (iaa Release No. 14) During May: Paul D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, permanent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,” replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and because, being much closer, we can send back information and samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space station, the moon has the advantage of providing a large, stable platform with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a stratigraphic record of its history and of meteoritic material which has accumulated on it. These advantages are in a sense a one-way street. We can make many of the observations proposed for the space station from the moon as well, because the moon has essentially a space environment. But we cannot examine the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release) During May: nasa awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of F-l engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which had initiated F-l development. {M&R, 5/6/63,13)
Design for 216-ft. nuclear-powered space station had been awarded patent by U.S. Patent Office, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. announced. Invented by S. B. Kramer and E. H. Visscher of Lockheed, prefabricated station would be assembled in orbit from cylindrical and spherical subsections. Lockheed said it would be useful as a manned space station and observation platform. (NYT, 4/9/63,10)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $100,000 contract to Boeing Co. for six-month study of logistics spacecraft to be used for ferrying men and equipment to and from orbiting space station. Studies would be of two wingless lifting bodies: M-2, developed by nasa Ames Research Center, and HL-10, originated at nasa Langley Research Center, (msc Space News Roundup, 7/24/63, 8)
Dr. James E. Roberts, usaf scientist, told aerospace medicine conference at sam that permanent five-man space station could be established “in the late 1965 or early 1966 time period.” Such a station, called “Mark I,” could be placed in orbit by Saturn I or Titan III vehicle, he said. Mark II station, three times as big as Mark I, could replace the initial station by the end of the decade. The space stations discussed by Dr. Roberts would be primarily for scientific and engineering research. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/63, A3)
General Electric Co. said four men would spend one month inside full-scale model of space station at GE’s Space Technology Center, in test of man’s reactions and performance in simulated space-flight conditions. Experiment would begin in September. (AP, NYT, 7/8/63,25)
usaf fired Minuteman icbm from underground silo at Vandenberg afb “with complete success,” fourth successful firing of Minute-man from West Coast in past four weeks, (dod Release 616-63; upi, Wash. Post, 5/1/63) During April: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center issued requests for proposals for preliminary study contracts on (1) rotating manned space station to house 18 crewmen; (2) non-rotating, zero-gravity station to house 25-30 crewmen; (3) reusable logistics vehicle. (M&R, 4/29/63, 18)	_
A working experimental model of a one-man space scooter was successfully flight-tested at naa’s Space and Information Division. The jet-powered platform was designed by Jack Bell, director of Lunar and Planetary Systems, who made the first flight, and John W. Sandford, research specialist in Advanced Systems. According to Bell, “precision control of platforms can be learned in a few minutes’ flight time.” The vehicle hovers, rotates, or moves in any direction desired. An extremely versatile piece of equipment, the lunar scooter could permit moon explorers to traverse flat, rough terrain where walking is difficult and where surface vehicles would stall; as a “crater hopper,” it would permit a space-suited moon explorer to span or descend into fissures or crevasses; as a “lunescape climber,” it would serve as a vehicle to scale steep cliffs. As a “shuttle bus,” it would transport crew members between orbiting space vehicles, or it might be used to support man in assembling advanced space stations in earth orbit. Finally, its potential for use in military maneuvers on earth is considerable, (said Skywriter, 6/28/63)
Georg von Tiesenhausen, chief of future studies for nasa Launch Operations Center, told ias meeting in New York that by 1970 U.S. would need an orbiting space station to launch and repair spacecraft; space station could double as a manned scientific laboratory. Describing station 300-ft. long and 33-ft. in diameter, von Tiesenhausen said it could be launched in two sections by Saturn C-5 vehicles and joined together in space rendezvous. (L.A. Herald-Examiner, 1/22/63)
Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Cdr. of afssd, reported to ias that AF Systems Command considered three fundamental projects as “space programs of prime military necessity: rendezvous and inspection, space station development, and communications satellites.” (Av. IF*., 1/28/63,26f) 741-623 O—64-3 Chemist Harold C. Urey said that only about three per cent (about $15 billion) of this country’s gnp was spent on education, and that amount “should be doubled.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/24/63, A4)
Under Secretary of the Air Force Brockway McMillan said in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Our assessment of the nasa programs in the light of your questions has strengthened our conviction that the potential joint value of the nasa and Defense Department programs can be more fully realized by closer collaboration in the early conceptual phases, to insure that the objectives of each agency are clearly recognized at each successive stage of program evolution. Our point is illustrated by recent experience in developing experiments to be sponsored by the Defense Department on the Gemini flights. Although the concerted joint effort, under the guidance of the Gemini program planning board, has been fruitful, it has become obvious that an earlier beginning of intensive collaboration might well have allowed greater results. Looking to the future, we hope to apply this lesson in the establishment of an orbital space station program. We view a space station as an essential preliminary to an operational space defense system, and as a valuable source of experience which will apply to nasa objectives. As this program is in the early conceptual phase, we think it possible to begin now to fully exploit its high potential to serve both civilian and military needs. As you know, the Defense Department has proposed to nasa that there be collaboration in studies leading to the definition of the space station program. . . .” (Letter, CR, 8/9/63,13900)
Proposed nasa-usn program of high-altitude, long-duration balloon flights was outlined m Missiles and Rockets. Pending dod approval, program would be conducted by nasa oart and usn BuWeps and would call for three types of flights: three-man, three-day flight using basic gondola and existing balloon of 10-million-cu.-ft. class; 14-day flight, possibly with larger crew and expanded equipment; and 30-day nights with six- or seven-man crew. Program objectives: to check out space station equipment and components and to study biomedical and psychological factors. (M&R, 5/27/63,18)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced two types of orbital manned space stations would be studied to compare concepts for 24-man operational station—one concept by Lockheed Co. California Div. and the other by Douglas Aircraft Missiles and Space Systems Div. Each station would be designed to remain in orbit at 200- to 300-mi. altitude for about three years, with resupply and crew changes every three months. {L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 7/6/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $30,500 contract to Whirlpool Corp. for design and development of feeding system for four astronauts for long periods of time, first hardware fabrication for space station simulation facility. (M&R, 9/9/63, 9)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced signing of definitive contract valued at $7,658,000 with Kollsman Instrument Corp. for guidance and navigation equipment for Apollo spacecraft’s command and service module, (msc Release 63-147)
Five men entered Boeing Co. space chamber, simulating quarters in manned space station or manned lunar base, for 30-day engineering test of integrated life-support system. Designed and built for nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, system included all elements of life support necessary for 150 man-day space mission. Associated with life-support equipment were specific crew tests simulating problems of space flight. Members of test crew: R. H. Lowry, Boeing Chief of Bioastronautics; Maj. Edward Westlake (usaf) of Air Force Systems Cmd.; Roger Barnicki, nasa Flight Research Center X-15 personnel equipment specialist; Charles Proctor, Boeing biochemist and food specialist; and Richard Farrell, Boeing psychologist. ( nasa Release 63-155)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Director of White House Office of Science and Technology, testified before the House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development on the nasa-dod agreement on joint study and recommendations on National Orbital Space Station (noss) : “We have finally made a good start. Now, we are going in the right direction.” He also said that mucb of nasa’s r&d was work that dod would have to do for itself if not done by nasa, that dod’s r&d budget was leveling off and would continue to do so because the U.S. was no longer behind U.S.S.R. in weapon systems such as the icbm. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/25/63, 145)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center proposal to establish manned orbital space station which stressed that such a station and associated equipment could be established using rockets, equipment, and materials under development now for Project Apollo. Plan called for (1) orbiting space station with capacity for 18 crewmen; (2) sending six men in adapted Apollo-type spacecraft to board the orbiting station; and (3) sending two more such crews within a month of each other to staff the station, docking the shuttle spacecraft at the station’s three arms. Report said space station would be a national laboratory for studv of space. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/2/63)	'	_	_
A “flying carpet” escape system from orbital space stations has been advanced by Douglas Aircraft Co. The escape system would be a saucer shape that would expand into a blunt-nosed, cone-shaped vehicle 25 ft. across at its base. Passing through the atmosphere, the vehicle would act as its own brake. Re-entry heating problems would be met by using fabrics woven with filaments of nickel-based alloys that can withstand 1,600-degree temperatures. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/9/63, 52)
Project Mercury officially ended. Initiated in autumn of 1958, Mercury had achieved its goal of placing manned spacecraft, in orbital flight around earth, investigating man’s survival ability and performance capabilities in space, and recovering man and spacecraft. Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights paved the way toward ultimate goal, with Astronaut Alan B. Shepard becoming first U.S. man in space in freedom 7 (May 5, 1961), followed by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom in liberty bell 7 (July 21,1961). First U.S. manned orbital space flight was achieved with Mercury-Atlas MA-6 flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn in friendship 7 (Feb. 20, 1962). This three-orbit space flight was followed by: MA-7, three-orbit flight of Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter in aurora 7 (May 24, 1962); MA-8, six-orbit flight of Astronaut Walter Schirra in sigma 7 (Oct. 3, 1962); and MA-9, 22-orbit space flight of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in faith 7 (May 15-16, 1963). Project Mercuiy logged 34 orbits of manned space flight with 52 hrs. 23 min. of flight tune. Jwne 12: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of six-month study contract to Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for establishment of environmental control and life support requirements for manned earth-orbiting space station. Duration of 24-man station would be from one to five years, (msc Release 63-100)
President Johnson’s active leadership in space program since early 1958 was reviewed in Missiles and Rockets by Hal Taylor, who predicted the new President would give the space program even greater support than did President Kennedy. Added support could mean growth of military space projects, Taylor said, possibly including assignment of manned space station development to usaf. But FY 1965 budget estimates would be virtually unchanged. Article in Aviation Week and Space Technology indicated President Johnson was likely to “play a more direct role than his predecessor in the nation’s military space and supersonic transport programs after the current transitional period, during which the emphasis is on showing the nation and the world that President Kennedy’s commitments will be fulfilled.” (M&R, 12/2/63,14-15; Av. Wk., 12/2/63,26-27)
National Aeronautics and Space Council considered nasa-dod coordination in Project Gemini and space stations. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, nasc Chairman, said after the meeting: “Coordination is a natural and effective enemy of duplication .... I am encouraged by the coordination already being exhibited between these two agencies in these important fields, but continuing attention is required if this country is to fulfill its destiny as the leading space-faring nation.” (nasc Release)
usaf announced issuing Requests for Proposals for studies of manned orbital space station. From the bidding industries usaf will select three contractors to conduct parallel four-month studies “to define characteristics from which a space station could be designed to demonstrate and assess quantitatively the utility of man in space for military purposes.” (dod Release 1261-63)
Dr. L. R. Shepherd, President of British Interplanetary Society, urged European Space Research Organization (esro) and European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) combine to form a European space agency to “develop the technology and logistics of an economically viable space transportation system.” Suggesting it would be wasting time and money for Europe to attempt to duplicate U.S. communications satellite systems, he said European agency should concentrate on advancement of transportation techniques—including construction of orbital stations and establishment of lunar base capable of constructing and supplying space vehicles. (Wilcke, NYT, 5/22/63, 37; M&R, 5/27/63,14-15) Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau, Special Assistant for Space, dod ddr&e, said: “None of us harbors any illusions about the expense of developing and operating military space systems. Any and all military efforts in tins field will be costly. Of the two, development costs may well prove to be the relatively minor one. Building and supporting an operational military space force may involve costs far out-distancing the investment in its research and development. Military mission capabilities in space will not ipso facto evolve merely 'because we are able to attain an experimental capability in the medium. The fundamental point here is that military needs, by definition, require the capacity to conduct reliable repetitive space operations .... “One of the important aspects of the [nasa-dod] Gemini agreement is the stipulation that neither agency will initiate any major new programs or projects in the field of near-earth orbit manned space flight without the consent of the other. That paragraph was inserted for a specific purpose. The concept of a Manned Orbital Space Station, Manned Orbital Development System, or similar names by which such a facility has been called has been proposed and considered in the Department of Defense for at least five years ... a limited space station project need not represent a national commitment as far-reaching and as large in scope as the manned lunar landing program. It Should, nevertheless, require a national, rather than a single agency decision, to get it under way. There is no question that, if a decision is made to proceed, the Department of Defense should be a full partner in this enterprise all the way, and may even qualify for management of the national project to satisfy both nasa and dod needs. This, of course, requires a Presidential decision if and when the project is approved.” (Text, dod Release 718-63) Col. James W. Little, Director of Pilot Training, usaf Air Training Command, said: “We envision that the basic preparation for space flight taught now by the Edwards afb Aerospace Research Test Pilot Course will be taught eventually to all pilot trainees in the Air Training Command. Student training will be conducted into the suborbital area above 200,000 feet instead of below 50,000 feet as it is at present . . . .” {A-N-AF Joum. & Reg., 6/1/63,2)	.... William Littlewood, American Airlines vice president, said: “The United States is woefully deficient in funds and efforts to solve the essential research problems, to gain the basic knowledge, to develop the potentials of atmospheric flight, as to safety, comfort. and efficiency, or to compete successfully and for long with +|io foreign s.d.v&.ntsges in tins field .... “Whereas all efforts and expenditures of naca were devoted to aeronautic research, including large assignments in safety and reliability, we now find aeronautic research relegated to a fifth echelon level in nasa and reduced to a negligible portion of the total budget and to a fraction of the former naca effort.” (AP, NYT, 5/22/63,65)
Plans for modular Mars spacecraft as presented by D. M. Hammock, Assistant Chief of Spacecraft Technology Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, were described in Missiles and Rockets. Six-man crew would undertake 400-day expedition to Mars in three-module spacecraft—Mars mission module, Mars excursion module, and earth entiy module. Hammock said nasa was evaluating merits of manned space stations, permanent lunar bases, and Mars expedition as follow-on to Project Apollo, and that technology needed for Mars spacecraft would be simpler in many ways than that required for lunar base or space station. (M&R, 5/13/63,34)
At 39th annual joint meeting of Virginia Engineering and Technical Societies Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of Langley Research Center, announced that whenever the U.S. decided to go ahead with a manned orbiting laboratory, Lane would be ready. “Although there is no nasa approved flight project for a manned space station at the present time, Langley will be in a position through its studies to provide many of the answers to design and operational problems when such a program is given the go signal.” (Newport News Daily Press, 6/22/63)
Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, chief Soviet space scientist, quoted as saying he “believes” that by 1968 there would be 100-ton space stations and an automatic scientific station on the moon. {Space Bus. Daily, 12/16/63, 400)
NASA announced requesting from industry proposals for feasibility and design study of possible payloads for manned lunar exploration with an Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) . One of the payloads was a mobile laboratory capable of supporting and transporting two Apollo astronauts for about 14 days; the other payload concept included both a stationary base and a smaller vehicle. The ALSS concept, making maximum use of Apollo-developed systems, provided for Saturn V launch vehicle to launch into earth-moon trajectory a manned Apollo command module, service module, and lunar excursion module modified for landing equipment rather than men on the. moon and called the lem Truck. Following alss landing, astronauts would land nearby in unmodified Apollo lem. MSFC would manage the nine-month study. (NASA Release 64-62)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, recommended in letter to President Johnson that USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs be merged. Jointly operated national space station program would best utilize U.S. resources, according to his letter which Aviation Week cited in its Dec. 7 issue. Senator Anderson argued that $1 billion could be saved over* five-year period if mol were canceled and usaf funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; nasa Archives)
Goodyear Aerospace Corp. developed solar collector for usaf. The 4-story-high mirror, to be used in tests of electricity sources for manned space station, was capable of setting fire to buildings or blinding people with a single flash of sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/64)
22,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine for Project Apollo service module, to return Apollo astronauts from the moon, was test-fired twice at Las Cruces, N. Mex. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/16/64)
Thomas E. Dolan, nasc staff member, proposed at aiaa Symposium on Space Stations and Their Logistics Support in Pasadena that “saddlebags” be attached to lem to increase its carrying capacity for use in equipping a lunar base. 3,000-5,000 lbs. of supplies would be attached to manned Lunar Excursion Module. Hie system would make it possible to set up a lunar base with a 7- to 10-day staytime. He said saddlebags mode would increase total Apollo spacecraft weight by 15,000 lbs., but Saturn V/Apollo system theoretically had growth option of 100% and 15—20% growth was entirely possible. “The LEM saddlebag concept would avoid multiple launches, hardware development programs for unmanned landing systems, dependence on successful unmanned landing system performance prior to manned landings, and dependence on surface rendezvous. As such, the post-Apollo exploration phase could be carried on with higher mission success and with less total investment than that estimated for the other systems.” (M&R, 4/20/64,15; SBD, 4/17/64, 98)
NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston divulged that its post-Apollo study emphasis would be on a Y-shaped 36-man National Multipurpose Space Station that could be launched by Saturn V and be the primary space scientific and technical experimental center for at least five years in the mid-1970’s.	(Av. Wk., 11/16/64, 51)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
Researchers reported the centrifugal experiment conducted for the Air Force by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. indicated that a centrifuge device in a space station could help to recondition astronauts living for prolonged periods in a weightless condition. Tests in which five college students spent 42 days in a horizontal position showed that tendency to faint on standing diminished after periodic centrifuge rides. (NYT, 12/20/64, 42)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Missiles and Rockets interview that NASA was tentatively planning to initiate program definition of Apollo-X spacecraft in FY 1965. He stressed, however, that NASA manned space station of from six-months to one-year lifetime would receive no hardware funding until the 1970’s. He also said NASA’s Apollo-X study did not compete with usae Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program: “mol is important for the military as a method of determining what opportunities there are for men in space. It is not suitable to fulfill NASA requirements to gain scientific knowledge.” {M&R, 10/26/64,14)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), usaf Space Systems Div. Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, said at AIAA space station symposium in Pasadena that USAF planned to assign to a single contractor the task of integrating the Gemini spacecraft and the manned orbiting laboratory (mol). He said astronaut transfer from the Gemini to the mol was a major problem and described several alternative methods of transfer being studied. (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 39)
Large manned space station design was described before Orange County, Calif., Section of AAIA >by Edward H. Oiling, head of MSC Space Station Program Office. The 24-man station would be 150 ft. in diameter with three radial modules, rotate at maximum speed of 4 rpm. Lifetime would he from one to five years. Saturn V could launch it into orbit and Saturn IB would launch logistics vehicles. (M&R, 4/20/64, 22)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Aviation Week & Space Technology that U.S. space program had “entered a whole new period,” in which U.S. was faced with exploring all the practical applications of knowledge suddenly gained through the space effort. “My view is to create stability, and the satellite may be one of the most important tools yet developed to create stability ill the world. ... In this effort, modern technology is going to play a very important role. The balance of technological power may be more important than any other form of power balance in the next decades ahead.” He said NASA was developing a broad technological capability to conduct missions with vast international application. “This will enable our nation to say to other nations of the world, ‘Join with us and we will undertake these missions together.’ ” “Overt expression” of this new focus of national space program planning would be expressed in forecast report NASA was completing for President Johnson, the article continued. Report would emphasize broad range of general space capabilities available in the future and describe specific possible post-Apollo missions—such as manned lunar base, earth-orbiting space stations, Mars probes—stressing that selection of such a goal should be a national decision. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64, 22)
Discussing mol’s growth potential in testimony before House Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on R&d, Director of dod Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown said: “I want to make a distinction between its ultimate capability and what is in the program. . . . What is in the program is not a space station in that sense. It is an experimental laboratory. But . . . this could grow to be a space station, if and after ... we conclude . . . that a man can have a substantial military purpose [in space].” Dr. Brown said dod should “move more aggressively into the manned space flight arena in order to explore more fully man’s utility for the performance of military space missions and to develop . . . his full capabilities in any area where potential exists.” (SBD, 2/17/64, 260; M&R, 2/24/64, 15)
Soviet Union announced that the spacecraft, zond ii, headed for Mars in an apparent race with mariner iv, had run into difficulties. The Soviet report said that in the first few radio contacts between zond ii and the ground “the power supply on board the space station was about half of the expected level.” Position information indicated the probe was 25,000 mi. from earth. (Witkin, NYT, 12/2/64, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64)
USAF fired advanced Minuteman icbm down the Atlantic Missile Range and 30 seconds later followed it with a Nike-Javelin sounding rocket to study the Minuteman’s exhaust. This was first in 16-test series, (upi, NYT, 4/1/64,60; M&R, 4/6/64,10)	. During March: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received design recommendations for 24-man Large Orbital Research Laboratory (lorl) that could be operational by 1968—the six-month study conducted by Douglas Aircraft’s Missile & Space Div. and IBM’s Federal Systems Div. The cylindrical space station would operate under zero gravity conditions in a 260-mi.-high orbit. (Maloney, Houston Post, 3/21/64)
Lockheed-Califomia Co. engineers disclosed concept for a reusable rocket plane to transport 10 passengers between earth and orbiting space station. Prepared in a study for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, the design concept was a winged, two-stage carrier with two-man crew in each stage and capable of hauling three tons of cargo in addition to the passengers. Lockheed engineers said if the vehicle system development program were begun in 1967, the transport could be operational in 1975.	(Huntsville Times, 8/19/64)
The last in a series of 11 tests of the F—2 Apollo service module engine was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The engine was fired for 20 sec. and then shut down for a five-min. “purge” before a 100-sec. test firing. The F—2 rocket engine would be expected to bring astronauts back to earth from the moon. (Lee, Houston Post, 12/10/64)
NASA and dod established the National Space Station Planning SubPanel of the NASA—dod Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board ( aacb ), charged with studying and then making recommendations to aacb on the best configuration for follow-on manned space station to the mol. Co-chairmen were Dr. Michael I. Yarymovych of NASA Advanced Manned Missions Office and Col. Kenneth Schultz, Deputy Director of Development Planning for Space, Hq. usaf. (M&R, 3/9/64, 13; SBD, 3/11/64,383)
Lt. Col. Robert S. Buchanan (USAF) of Aerospace Research Pilots School, Edwards afb, told space medicine conference at Brooks afb that the greatest potential dangers to large scientific space station with crew of 15 or more men would be fire and collision with a meteoroid or space debris. Studies were considering possibility of separating space stations into individual compartments that could be sealed off in case of catastrophes such as fire. (AP, Houston Post, 2/6/64)
NASA position paper on DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, embodying eight principles of NASA policy toward the mol, was made public. The paper stated: “The dod Manned Orbital Laboratory is a single military project (a specific goal; not a broad program) within the overall National Space Program. . . . “The mol should not be construed as the national space station, a separate program currently under joint study by NASA and the DOD. Such a space station project would be considered under the terms of the Webb/McNamara agreement on manned orbital research and development systems larger than Gemini and Apollo. The mol is, rather, a specific experimental test bed utilizing NASA’s Gemini project and the Titan III for certain potential military space applications not within the scope of NASA’s activities. . . .” (Text; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/2/64,1; A&A, 2/64,90; AF Mag., 74)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. summarized study on Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (morl) made for NASA Langley Research Center. Douglas said it would be possible for U.S. to have a six-man operational space station within the next five years. MORL would be launched with Saturn IB, would remain in orbit just over one year. (Houston Post, 5/25/64)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported on a letter (dated Nov. 9, 1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, to President Johnson in which he recommended a merger of the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program and NASA’s Apollo X program. He argued that $1 billion could be saved over a five-year period if mol were to be cancelled and the Air Force funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. A jointly operated national space station program would, according to Anderson, best utilize U.S. space resources. Sen. Anderson felt that mol lacked growth potential because it could not progress beyond its two-man, 30-day mission without development of a resupply system. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
Edward Z. Gray, Director of Advanced Studies in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that when NASA builds a manned space station it would be “more sophisticated” than the dod Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), nasa now has 13 studies dealing with concepts leading toward development of an orbiting manned space station; when these studies are completed, NASA would be able to appraise “the space station requirements and what will be the best method of pursuing the development of a manned orbiting space station system.” (SBD, 1/8/64, 34)
USAF announced selection of Douglas Aircraft Co., Martin Marietta Corp., and General Electric Co. for orbital space station study-contracts. The studies would aid in defining tests and experiments for usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), (dod Release 148-64)
Douglas Aircraft Co. was awarded follow-on study contract for Manned Orbital Research Laboratory by NASA Langley Research Center, to refine the NASA concept and examine the feasibility of cylindrical six-man space station using equipment providing intermittent artificial gravity. Selection of Douglas for contract negotiation was announced last December. (larc Release)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., predicted that assignment of Manned Orbiting Laboratory to dod was “an ominous harbinger of a reversal in trend, an indication that the military services may play a more prominent role in future space exploration at nasa’s expense. . . . “mol is a starting point. Whether you label it development platform, satellite or laboratory, it is clearly intended as a beginning for space station technology. It is also clearly the intent of this Administration that, at least in the initial stages, space station development shall be under military rather than civil, cognizance. . . .” (A—N—AF J&R, 1/11/64, 10)
Lockheed-CaUfornia Co. released details of its recommendations to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on a scientific space station program. Lockheed study concluded manned station with crew of 24 could be orbiting the earth in 1968. Total cost of program—including logistics spacecraft and ground support—for five years’ operation was estimated at $2.6 billion. Study recommended launching the unmanned station into orbit with a Saturn V launch vehicle, then launching manned logistics vehicle to rendezvous and dock at the station. (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/27/64; msc Roundup, 3/4/64,8)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $9.2 million increase to contract with North American Aviation, Inc., calling for construction at Downey, Calif., of seven new buildings and modifications to existing structures to permit expansion of naa’s research and development. Naa is prime contractor for Apollo command and service module under contract signed with msc Aug. 14, 1963. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 1/24/64)	_
Patent for manned space station design was awarded to its inventor Emanuel Schnitzer, technical assistant at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The space station was designed to erect itself in space after being lofted into orbit. Crewmen could be sent up in an auxiliary spacecraft or launched to it later in a ballistic “ferry.” Until two weeks ago, Schnitzer was at NASA Hq. in Advanced Manned Missions Program Office. (Justice, Houston Post, 8/15/64; nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8/15/64)
Engine for Apollo service module fired for one second in programed 10-sec. test. Automatic cutoff device shut down the engine because of excess vibration due to unstable combustion. NASA spokesman called the test a “minimal success,” said results were “not entirely unexpected. The engine had been fired three times previously in acceptance tests, but it wasn’t fired in as complete a form as it was today.” (AP, L.A. Times, 9/23/64)
In an editorial in Astronautics and Aeronautics, H. H. Koelle said: “Suppose . . . that a space station could be made available with working area in the station and a round-trip ticket purchased by individual countries for their scientists, and that an advanced aerospace transportation system will be developed anyway as part of the U.S. space program. Analysis of such an operation indicates that an international research station of this kind could be built in the late 1970s, and that the price of a three-month field trip to the station might well be kept in the order of a million dollars a person. Many countries . . . would be able to pay this price and would enthusiastically participate in the project. During the 1980s, . . . the charges should be reduced considerably, thus increasing international participation.” (A&A, 11/64, 20-21)
Aerojet General Corp. successfully test fired Apollo service module engine in long duration test at Sacramento, Calif. The multiple-restart, 22,000-lb.-thrust engine was activated four times for total of 421 sec. (upi, Houston Chron., 4/29/64)
In an interview with U.S. News & World, Report, Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, defended the U.S. program to land a man on the moon by 1970 and stated that it was his belief that at the present time the chances were “better than 50%” that the project would be successful by the target date. In commenting on reports that the Russians had forsaken a race to the moon, von Braun ventured that it was possible that the Russians had “picked another focusing point besides the moon for their manned spaceflight program” such as the development of a large manned space station orbiting earth. In addition, he commented: “I don’t think the Russians have ever said they aren’t going to the moon. But, even if we are going alone, this would not hurt one bit. The purpose is not so much to race the Russians—or, for that matter, even to land on the moon—but to design a hard-hitting program to develop an American space-flying capability.” (U.S. News, 6/1/64)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. proposed 100-ton space station that would support up to 24 men on long-duration earth-orbiting missions. Known as Olympus, the station would be 63 ft. long and 118 ft. in diameter with central hub and three radiating spokes. Each of spokes would carry cylindrical module 18 ft. in diameter and 40 ft. long. (Tulsa Daily World, 7/12/64)
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
usaf awarded General Electric Co. a $1,494,000 increment to a $33,552,224 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for flight testing of the Maneuvering Ballistic Re-entry Vehicle, (dod Release 536-65) “Before the end of this decade, man will have set foot on the Moon’s surface. This will be an event of historical magnitude. “By 1970, manned satellite stations will be circling the Earth for a month or more. A crew of three or four will be on board, performing many kinds of scientific experiments, ranging from astronomy to zoology. Much larger manned space stations could become a reality in future years.	_ “Before the end of the next 5 years, world-wide communication by means of satellites will be a routine accomplished fact, as will detailed observation of weather patterns and collection of meteorological data around the globe. “Radio and TV broadcasting to large areas of the Earth from satellites could become a reality in the next 10 years. “Before 1975 unmanned vehicles from Earth will be circling Mars and Venus and sending exploratory probes to the planets’ surfaces. “To look into the future beyond 1975 is much more uncertain, but experts judge that if Man has the desire and will, he can have gone, by 1985, a long way toward the goal of sending a manned expedition to Mars, perhaps with the aid of some kind of nuclear propulsion. . . .” (Text) Leonard Jaffe, Director of NASA Communication and Navigation Programs, told the Conference that recent announcement that DOD’s navigation satellite system was operational demonstrated the great potential of artificial earth satellites for providing position determinations to the maritime industry. He said NASA had under study a number of techniques, different from those employed in the DOD system, by which satellites located in medium or synchronous orbits could provide position fixes to ships and aircraft. Techniques whereby the craft’s position would be determined at ground computer stations might make the satellite system attractive to U.S. industry, he said. For the future Jaffe foresaw the combination of a position determination method and a communications system integrated into a single satellite to provide capability of aiding in air traffic control. He said: “Accurate position data and reliable communications readily available to air traffic controllers by use of satellites may provide the answer to the acute problem of safely reducing the present separation standard of aircraft flying across the crowded Atlantic Ocean region. Similar data supplied to a maritime regulatory agency may provide a means for preventing marine collisions.” (Text) “Space has at least four unique characteristics which offer advantages for military operations. These are: first, extremely high altitudes which offer line of sight to large areas of the earth’s surface; second, very high speeds; third, almost infinite flight duration; and fourth, highly predictable flight paths. “These recognized advantages have led to the development of a number of space systems which provide support to military land, sea, and air operations. These include satellite systems for communications, weather, and navigation. The capabilities they provide are either unique or represent a distinct improvement over other means of accomplishing the same task . . . “On the other hand, the advantages of space are frequently offset by several disadvantages. The first of these is the cost of launching payloads into space. Presently this amounts to about $1000 a pound in low earth orbit, although it is estimated that the Titan ill will reduce this figure to about $500 a pound, and we foresee methods of reducing the cost to the neighborhood of $100 a pound. The second is the requirement for extremely high reliability—the need to build satellites that will operate for long periods without maintenance and repair. Third is the absence of a demonstrated method of returning from space to a controlled landing at a specified point. And fourth is the environment of space itself—the problems associated with hard vacuum, temperature extremes, and intense radiation. “The need to overcome these disadvantages leads to consideration of the second way in which space may be regarded—not merely as a place, but as a primary focus for man’s scientific and technological efforts in the years ahead. The success of these efforts will determine the practical use that can be made of space for a variety of purposes, including military purposes.” (Text)
Caption under a photograph in East German newspaper Berliner Zeitung read: “A model of a future Soviet space station envisages six hermetically grouped sections around a central core. These are: the control station, a laboratory and a garden, an orientation system, the radar equipment, and a heliostation. In addition, the station has facilities for voice communications with space ships.” (Berliner Zeitung, 7/25/65, 4)
Pegasus B, second of the “winged” micro meteoroid detection satellites, arrived at Cape Kennedy to he readied for launch during the next two months. Similar to pegasus i, Pegasus B would occupy a simulated Apollo service module aboard the sa-8 vehicle. A boilerplate model of the Apollo command module would be placed above the Pegasus; in orbit, the Apollo modules would be jettisoned and the satellite exposed. Preliminary data from PEGASUS I indicated it was confirming current theory on micrometeoroid density, (msfc Release 65-85; Marshall Star, 4/21/65, 1, 2)
A full-scale aluminum model of a 1,400-lb. telescoping space structure had been fabricated to verify design theory and manufacturing techniques, afsc announced. Built by Martin-Denver, the 15-by-8-ft. expandable structure could be launched into space in a compact package and then, like a telescope, opened to full size after reaching orbit. Several of the expandable structures stacked on a booster’s upper stage could be sent into space and expanded to form a rotating space station. (afsc Release 4.64)
Saturn I (sa-9) two-stage launch vehicle, launched by NASA from Cape Kennedy, orbited a 33,000-lb. multiple payload, of which 3,200 lbs. was the pegasus i meteoroid detection satellite. Orbital data:	apogee, 745 km. (462 mi.); perigee, 496 km. (308 mi.) ; period, 97 min.; and inclination, 31.7°. This was the eighth successful test in eight flights for Saturn I; pegasus i was the first active payload launched in the Saturn tests. At launch, an Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-16) and launch escape system (Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with pegasus I folded inside the service module. After first-stage separation and second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. When second stage (s-iv) attained orbit, the 10,000-lb. Apollo boilerplate command and service modules were jettisoned into a separate orbit. Then a motor-driven device extended winglike panels on the Pegasus satellite to a span of 96 ft. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and made up of 208 panels, pegasus i remained attached to Saturn I’s second stage as planned. A television camera, mounted on the interior of the service module adapter, provided pictures of the satellite deploying in space. PEGASUS I exposed more than 2.300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface, with thicknesses varying up to 16/1000 in. As meteoroid particles collided with the surface of the panels, they would be registered electronically and reported to earth. Exposure of the large panel area over a long period would give designers of manned and unmanned spacecraft a good sample of meteoroid data. pegasus I would be visible from the earth without the aid of telescope on clear nights. (NASA Release 65-38; Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 1, 5; ap, Houston Chron., 2/16/65; Clark, NYT, 2/17/65; ap, Benedict. Wash. Post, 2/17/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/17/65; Sehlstedt. Balt. Sun, 2/17/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 133-134) February 16: On the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) commented upon the successful Saturn I launch: “ . . . this morning the United States took another giant stride in the exploration of space. At 9:37 a.m. a Saturn rocket . . . with its 1,500,000 pounds of thrust, lifted off the launch pad at Cape Kennedy, Fla., on a mission to place in orbit around the earth the Pegasus satellite. “This was the eighth launch of the Saturn rocket out of eight attempts, a truly outstanding scientific and engineering accomplishment of the men of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and of the many contractors who worked so long and hard to make this event a success. “I may say that the gratifying success of the Saturn booster has been matched in other programs as well. “I need only point to the Tiros weather satellite. “Nine have been launched out of nine attempts. “I think we have every right to be proud of our space team on this day of outstanding achievement.” (NASA LAR iv/30-32; CR, 2/16/65, 2630)
Dr. Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Lunar and Planetary Mission Studies, told Twin Cities aiaa Chapter in Minneapolis that NASA was “investigating and planning manned missions and experiments beyond the presently approved Gemini and Apollo programs. . . . “A logical sequence for future NASA manned space flight programs . . . begins with the Gemini and Apollo program base. The next logical development is the Apollo F.xtension System ( aes ) which is a stepping stone to advanced Earth-orbital operations, to lunar-orbital surveys, and to lunar surface exploration. The AES Earth-orbital activities are a development phase for an orbital research laboratory or early space station as well as a lunar exploration station. Based on the Apollo Command and Service module technology, we can also develop advanced logistic systems for larger orbiting space stations of indefinite life or for greater expansion of lunar exploration if desired. The advanced orbiting space station can likewise lead to an orbiting launch complex for planetary missions such as Martian flyby and exploration shelters or a lunar base for potential exploitation of the lunar environment. ... In Earth orbit, the AES can provide for experimental operations in the three major fundamental areas . . . : (1) flights to conduct scientific research in space requiring man’s presence; (2) Earth-oriented applications to increase the nation’s strength, and (3) development of advanced technology for support of both manned and unmanned space operations. ... In the field of Earth-oriented applications of manned space operations, NASA has been conducting studies and investigations jointly with the Departments of Commerce, Agriculture, Interior and Defense to determine how we might apply Apollo’s unique capabilities to improve our ability to forecast weather, to communicate globally at high data rates, to make an up-to-date inventory of the world’s resources, to monitor air and sea traffic on a global scale, to support a world-wide air-sea rescue service, to make better forecasts of food production and to provide a data-gathering system on a global scale. Experiments are also being evaluated to enhance over-all development of space operations. Biomedical, behavioral and other medical studies would be conducted as well as the development of advanced subsystems and technology for spacecraft. . . .” (Text)
zond III automatic space station was launched into a heliocentric orbit by U.S.S.R. from a heavy artificial satellite placed in a parking orbit around the earth by a multistage carrier rocket, Tass announced. Tass said that the “trajectory of the automatic station is close to the expected one,” that communications were stable, and that all systems were functioning normally. The purpose of the launch was to “check the station’s systems in conditions of prolonged space flight and the holding of scientific studies in interplanetary space,” Tass said. Pictures of the farside of the moon taken by ZOND ill were later released on Aug. 20. (Tass, 7/18/65; Grose, NYT, 7/19/65, 1, 31; Loory, Wash. Post, 7/19/65)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
“The space station relayed to the earth comprehensive data on the interplanetary magnetic field, cosmic radio emission, interplanetary ionized plasma, longwave cosmic radio emission, and micrometeorite particles. . . . During the flight around the moon, data were also obtained on the spectrum of its infrared and ultraviolet radiation.” (Tass, 9/18/65; Pravda, 9/19/65, 2)
Commenting on the U.S. need for a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in the San Antonio Express: “The nearly simultaneous launch of NASA’s Gemini and Air Force’s Titan ill—c caused some commentators to suggest that there is competition and rivalry in the space effort. Investigation convinces me that there is complete collaboration and accord between NASA and the military in the space program. “There is now little reason to doubt that NASA will succeed with Apollo, the Moon mission. Our continued leadership in the exploration of the peaceful uses of space seems assured. “It is now time to survey where we stand in the military implications and dangers from space. . . . “The first step in a needed military space program, which the Air Force earnestly and urgently proposes, is a manned orbiting laboratory (mol). It is visualized as an experimental space station in low orbit to determine what man can profitably do in space. “The anti-MOL advocates have suggested that the fall-out from the NASA space program will provide all the building blocks to produce military space vehicles quickly when the need is more clearly evident. Fall-out from the automobile industry did not provide the Patton tank. It was necessary to cut and try, build and test many experimental tanks over a period of 25 years. “Building blocks from civil air transports did not produce the b-52 bomber. We had to build and test 51 earlier bomber models. Effective space weapons will never come solely from the fall-out from the NASA program. “mol is said to be held up until the Air Force can precisely define and defend a military mission which MOL can be certain to accomplish. To require anyone to visualize and indicate definitely and in detail now, all that man may ultimately do in space, would be like having asked the Wright brothers in 1910 to lay down the specifications for a supersonic transport.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/14/65, 18)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
First major piece of flight-type hardware for the Apollo program, Service Module 001, successfully underwent a 10-sec. shakedown static test firing at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s White Sands Operations. Service Module 001 was unlike previous boilerplate models in that it was constructed primarily of aluminum alloy and had an outside skin of honeycomb bonded between two aluminum sheets. Made by Aerojet-General, the service propulsion system engine had 22,000 lbs. of thrust. It would slow down the Apollo for entry into lunar orbit and speed up the spacecraft for escape from lunar orbit and the return to earth. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 8; naa S&ID Skywriter, 2/12/65, 1, 3)
U.S. News and World Report commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory: “President Johnson has now committed this country to a vital and far-reaching race against Russia for military supremacy in space. “It is a strategic decision regarded as important as any since World War II. “The race actually has started. At this point it is largely silent and secret. But both powers are known to be conducting military missions with unmanned satellites, and results are described as striking and enormous. “Next, both countries will make major strategic moves by putting up space stations with military crews. Beyond that, plans are being readied for armadas of orbiting platforms and fleets of space planes— and, in case of hostilities, possible confrontation in space. “The U.S. goal: to make certain Russia is denied control of space that might enable it to tip the balance of power here on earth. . . .”	(U.S. News, 9/13/65, 10)
proton I, a scientific space station, was orbited by the U.S.S.R. with a “powerful new booster,” Tass announced. The 26,880-lb. payload—claimed to be heaviest ever launched—was placed into an orbit with the following initial parameters: apogee, 627 km. (389.4 mi); perigee, 190 km. (118 mi.) ; period 92 min.; and inclination, 63.5°. In addition to scientific and measuring instruments, the space station was equipped with special equipment for the study of cosmic particles of super-high energies and a radio transmitter. Tass said: “In order to insure realization of the planned space research program, a powerful new booster rocket has been developed in the Soviet Union.” Commenting on the Soviet launching, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said he was “impressed but not astonished” by the Russian accomplishment. “W’e have been predicting for some Lime that they would develop into the space station field,” he said. “We have anticipated that they would practice rendezvous and docking before they developed what they said was a space station, but they haven’t followed that particular line.” (Tass, 7/16/65; NYT, 7/17/65, 6; Wash. Post, 7/17/65, Al)
NASA successfully conducted the first tethered test firing of the Apollo 009 Service Module propulsion system at Kennedy Space Center. Test was marred by failure in the master countdown clock, which—a split second after ignition-—recycled to T minus 99 sec., throwing the count out of real time. The ground computer, which operated in plus time only, was thus unable to send the signal to shut off the engine. Instead of the two planned 15-sec. firings, the system was fired only once for a total of 20 sec. and shut off with a signal from the blockhouse. For the same reason, the ground computer was unable to send the signal to gimbal the engine and this apparatus was not tested, (upi, NYT, 11/20/65, 21; M&R, 11/29/65, 28)
PROTON I space station, launched July 16 by the U.S.S.R., had, for the first time, trapped particles with energy of 100 trillion electron volts and a measured energy spectrum of cosmic rays containing such particles, Nikolai I. Grigorov, head of Cosmic Ray Laboratory at Moscow Univ. Institute of Nuclear Physics, told Pravda. He said that precise measurements of high-energy particles required the use of a heavy ionizing calorimeter which could not have been orbited without the lifting capacity of Russia’s new large rockets. Prof. Grigorov explained that high-energy particles never reached earthbound registering devices because they were absorbed and transformed as they collided with atoms of earth’s atmosphere. (Pravda, 8/20/65, atss-t Trans.; Shabad, NYT, 8/22/65, 72)
PEGASUS ill meteoroid detection satellite was launched into orbit from Eastern Test Range, with a Saturn I booster—last(sA-lO) in a series of ten launch vehicle test flights. Initial orbital data: apogee, 336 mi. (541.9 km.); perigee, 324 mi. (522.6 km.); period, 95.5 min.; inclination, 28.9°. Main assignment of the 3,200-lb. spacecraft with wing-like panels was to add information on the frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment, for use in the design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft. Eight of its detachable panels carried 352 thermal surface samples collected from the aerospace industry. If NASA should program an astronaut-PEGASUS III rendezvous, the astronaut would detach as many panels as possible and return them to earth for study. Also orbited was Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-9), which served as shroud for PEGASUS III. Apollo launch escape system was jettisoned during launch vehicle’s ascent. PEGASUS ill—expected to return meteoroid data to ground stations for at least one year—was identical to PEGASUS II, in orbit since May 25, 1965. pegasus I was sent into orbit Feb. 16, 1965. (nasa Release 65-232; msfc Release 65-185; msfc Release 65-190)
proton i, unmanned space station launched by U.S.S.R. July 16 with instrumentation for studying high-speed cosmic particles, was functioning normally, Tass reported. (Tass, 7/29/65)
Service module of Apollo spacecraft 009 was delivered to KSC from North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant aboard the Pregnant Guppy aircraft. (KSC Historical Office)
Picketing over a contract dispute by Las Cruces, N. Mex., Carpenters Union Loca 1 1962 of White Sands Missile Range construction project resulted in a partial temporary shutdown of the $133,900 project to build an addition to NASA Warehouse No. 1. Activities on the site included testing Apollo service module engines and preparation of test equipment for the Lunar Excursion Module. (Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/23/65)
Tass released a picture of what was described as a working model of an orbiting space station. Six hermetically sealed compartments branched out from a central stem. The compartments included a control desk, a laboratory, a garden, an orientation system, radar section, and a heliostation with a system for carrying on conversation with incoming spaceships. (Tass, ap, Wash. Post, 7/8/65, D5)
Soviet Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov was quoted by Zolnierz Wolnosci on the future Soviet space program: spacecraft would remain in orbit much longer and their crews would be larger; highly trained teams would assemble permanent orbital space stations, orbital laboratories, and interplanetary spacecraft while the remainder of the crews would work inside the craft. Spacecraft participating in these flights would rendezvous and dock, using a flexible concertina-like passageway. Leonov said problems still to be solved included transfer of crews for interplanetary flights, accomplishment of engineering work in space, and return of spacecraft to earth. (Badowski, Zolnierz Wolnosci, 9/7/65,1)
Saturn I (sa—S> launch vehicle, launched from Eastern Test Range, orbited a 23.0004b. payload of which 3,200 lbs. was the PEGASUS U meteoroid detection satellite and 9.700 lbs. was Apollo boilerplate command and service modules (bp-26(. This was the ninth successful test in nine flights for Saturn I, At launch. Apollo command and service module boilerplate spacecraft and launch escape system I Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with PEGASUS II folded inside the service module. After second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. After injection into orbit, the Apollo boilerplate was jettisoned into a separate orbit and a motor-driven device extended 96 X 14-ft. winglike panels on fecasus n, exposing 2,300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface. The satellite was attached to the Saturn’s s-iv second stage and would remain so during its lifetime. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and providing mountings for a total of 208 detector panels. As particles collided with this surface, the penetrations would be registered and reported to earth. Orbital data: apogee. 460 mi. (741 km.); perigee, 316 mi. (509 km.); period, 97 min.; inclination, 31.8°. Primary purpose of the flight was to gather information on frequency of meteoroids encountered in the near-earth environment for use in design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft, pecasus n, an improved version of pegasus r launched Feb. 16, 1965, would be visible to the naked eye under favorable conditions near dawn and dusk. (NASA Release 65-151; msec Release 65-121; Marshall Star, 5/26/65, 1: ap, NYT, 5/26/65. 10; V.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 143)
nasa bioscience programs were discussed in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications by nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell: “Results recently submitted by the U.S. and U.S.S.R. from flights up to five days in length indicate that long term space flight may have several important and serious physiological and behavior effects upon the performance and well being of man that need to be investigated further. There were changes in the circulation system, in the biochemical characteristics of the blood and urine, and in the electroencephalogram indices, all pointing to a need for more detailed investigations. The results from the Biosatellite studies will have broad application to long term, manned space flight, including manned space stations and lunar and planetary bases. “Prolonged manned flights may involve changes similar to those observed after 10 days of strict bed rest on the ground. These are moderate losses of bone minerals such as calcium, particularly in the vertebrae; loss of muscle tone and physical capability; certain cardiovascular changes; and metabolism in general. The effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Biosatellite experiments are of both scientific and practical importance and extremely profitable to investigate. We do not presently have sound theoretical bases for making precise quantitative (and in some cases qualitative) predictions of what we expect to happen. It is, therefore, important to carry out Biosatellite studies of suitable duration to critically demonstrate and test the effects of weightlessness on living organisms.” Outlining approaches to the search for extra-terrestrial life in nasa’s bioscience programs, Dr. Newell testified: “(a) An attempt is being made to synthesize models of primitive single-celled organisms in the laboratory. . . . “(b) The physical environments of the planets are being studied and characterized by instruments from the Earth, from high altitude balloons and from planetary fly-bys. . . . “(c) Living Earth organisms are being grown under simulated planetary environmental conditions. . . . “(d) Plans are being made for both unmanned and manned direct exploration of planets. . . .” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 806-41)
proton ii 26,900-lb. unmanned scientific space station was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit: apogee, 638.7 km. (396 mi.); perigee, 191.9 km. (119 mi.); period, 92.6 min.; inclination, 63.5°. Tass said that instrumentation on proton ii would study cosmic particles of superhigh energies, cosmic rays and their radiation danger, and the nuclear interaction of cosmic particles with super-high energies up to 1,000	billion electron volts. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. (NYT, 11/3/65, 5; ap, Balt. Sun, 11/3/65, 4; upi, Wash. Post, 11/3/65, A21)
Announcement by Soviet Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov at the 16th International Astronautical Congress in Athens that the U.S.S.R. planned to orbit a permanent manned space station as the next major project in its space program received editorial comment in the Philadelphia Inquirer: “To be sure, Cosmonaut Leonov adds that after ‘many space laboratories’ have been established, ‘with crews being periodically changed,’ his country expects to give attention to ‘a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon.’ It has been understood all along, of course, that this was the method Russia would use in sending men to the moon. The emphasis on many permanent manned space stations orbiting close to earth, however, shows all too plainly that the real concern of the generals running the Communist space program is in the military advantages that lie in control of the space immediately beyond the atmosphere and over the heads of free nations around the world.” (Phil. Inq., 9/19/65)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was named chairman of the International Sponsors Committee for Clark Univ.’s $5.4 million Robert Hutchings Goddard memorial library scheduled for completion by 1968. Several nuclear-powered, self-supporting lunar bases and a wide variety of space stations would be in operation by the year 2000, Dr. von Braun told the luncheon meeting of the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He made his predictions during the question and answer period following his speech on Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s contributions to American rocketry. The greatest activity in space 35 yrs. hence would be in earth orbits, von Braun felt, and space would provide a “tremendous military field.” This field would not be the science fiction concept of orbiting hydrogen bombs, but rather a broad program of military reconnaissance. Photography and direct observation of foreign military developments were cited. Space stations would be in a variety of orbits and many would be manned by scientists and repairmen shuttling back and forth in reusable vehicles. Scientists would spend up to six weeks at a time in the stations to make their observations. The use of reusable boosters would cut the cost of delivering payloads to orbit down to some 10% of today’s costs, von Braun added, (nsc Newsletter, 5/65, 6/65)
We must use a completely different approach. We must get away from this launching from pads, which costs millions and billions of dollars, to the more conventional way of taking off from a runway.’ ” Witze continued: “He predicts that after we have gone to the moon we will start over again. Project Apollo cannot be turned back, he says, but the next time ‘we must create an environment in space that can be used by men, not only for research but for commercial and military purposes.’ “This environment he is talking about is a permanent space station, one that will never come back into the atmosphere. This will require a logistics system—a recoverable, reusable space transporter to carry people and supplies back and forth to space. The Dyna-Soar was a crude but necessary step in this direction, replaced today by the concept of the aerospace plane. . . . “The Dornberger thesis is that a manned station in near space is as practical as a military base on Okinawa, a laboratory at the South Pole, or an aircraft parts and maintenance depot in Chateauroux. Once established, all that is needed is a logistics system to keep it going. From such a space station, expeditions can be sent to the moon, or many other places in space, with engines that give a thrust of only 20,000 pounds, instead of the millions of pounds required on one-way booster trips. . . .” Quoting Dr. Dornberger: “ ‘It took mankind hundreds of years to learn to use the sea, but only fifty years to use the air. Space can be used in twenty-five years, if we get started. I doubt that the use of space vehicles will be more hazardous than the use of submarines.’ ” (AF Mag., 10/65, 80-88)
Apollo Spacecraft 009, first Apollo flight spacecraft of the type that would carry three U.S. astronauts to the moon and back, was accepted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center during informal ceremonies at North American Aviation, Inc.’s, Downey, Calif., facility. Largest U.S. manned spacecraft built to date, Spacecraft 009 included a command module, service module, launch escape system, and adapter. {Marshall Star, 10/27/65, 1, 10; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/22/65, 1)
proton hi unmanned scientific space station was launched by U.S.S.R. into earth orbit with 630-km. (391-mi.) apogee; 190-km. (118-mi.) perigee; 92.5-min. period; and 63.5° inclination. Instruments —including "special scientific apparatus” for continuing complex investigations of cosmic rays—were functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/8/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-202 mission was successfully launched from etr’s Complex 34 at 1:16 p.m. edt: 56,000-lb. unmanned Apollo spacecraft (Oil) was boosted into suborbital flight by Uprated Saturn I launch vehicle generating 1,600,000 lbs. thrust in second flight test of major spacecraft systems; second performance check of command module (Cm) heatshielding; and third flight test of Uprated Saturn I. Liftoff and powered flight were as programed. After spacecraft separation, 21,500-lb.-thrust service module (Sm) propulsion engine burned 3 min. 35 sec. to boost spacecraft to 706-mi. (1,128.6-km.) altitude. Sm’s engines ignited three more times to test rapid restart capabilities, with last burn separating Sm. Cm reentered earth’s atmosphere at more than 19,900 mph. Maximum temperature of spacecraft’s surface was calculated to be about 2,700°F; temperature inside Cm was 70°F. Main parachutes deployed at 23,850-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown in Pacific Ocean some 500 mi. southeast of Wake Island—200 mi. from target—at 2:49 p.m. edt. Recovery was by aircraft carrier U.S.S. Hornet. Apollo heatshield well withstood high heat-load test, and the spacecraft was in "stable condition 1.” Officials said that during flight, minor problem developed in unit which was to cool drinking water and various electrical components. They did not consider problem serious. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told postflight press conference that "the results of today’s flight—once examined—will provide us with the information necessary” to make a final decision whether to commit the next Apollo flight to a manned mission, (nasa Release 66-213; NASA Proj. Off.; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/26/66, A4; AP, Wash. Post, 8/26/66, A3; Wilford, NYT, 8/26/66, 1)
U.S.S.R. launched 3,608-lb. luna xi space station toward moon for "further testing of systems of an artificial moon sputnik and scientific explorations of near lunar space.” Preliminary data indicated that spacecraft was traveling close to calculated trajectory and equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 8/24/66)
Use of personal radar units by astronauts to counteract optical illusions which they might encounter while assembling a space station or exploring the moon was recommended by Cambridge Univ. Prof. Richard L. Gregory, author of Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing, in a New York press interview. Gregory believed astronauts might experience spatial distortion when seeing spacecraft’s structural elements gleaming luminously in sunlight or sharply etched against a jet black background. In addition, he thought they might experience reversed depth perception which would cause distorted images. Gregory recommended aiding astronauts with tones, heard through earphones, of a variable pitch which would be determined by a beam from radar unit each man would wear. Variations in pitch would indicate distance to different objects and astronaut’s rate of approach or retreat from them. Gregory was conducting his research at New York Univ. on a senior foreign scientist fellowship financed in part by NASA. (Osmundsen, NYT,	31; Houston Chron., 2/16/66)
nasa Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968 at ieee conference in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain; or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee /., 10/25/66)
NASA had canceled hardware development and fabrication of Apollo experiments pallet whifch was designed to hold modular experiments and to fit into a section of the Apollo service module. Four firms selected in November 1965 for four-month Phase 1A design studies had been advised of decision: Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Martin Co.; McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; and Northrop Space Laboratories. (nasa Release 66-224)
nasa ApoUo Service Module (Sm) propulsion engine test phase was completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
Apollo spacecraft—command module, service module, and adapter section— is raised up the gantry for mating to Saturn IB launch vehicle at Launch Complex 34, Eastern Test Range.
Possible space developments in 1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight: (1) improved propulsion, including nuclear; (2) merging of aeronautics and astronautics in development of lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry capability; (3) lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of lunar bases; (4) manned earth-orbiting space stations; (5) unmanned probes within solar system and manned expeditions to planets "whenever that becomes promising and practicable”; (6) voice and TV direct communications from satellites to home receivers "throughout large sections of the world,” and advances in operations and research on other applied satellites. (Text)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh spoke at the dedication of Boeing Co.’s Industrial Research Center in Huntsville, Ala. "I believe that the next decade will find us marrying more closely the major features of aeronautics and astronautics so that manned spacecraft will take off and return to spaceports with reusable propulsion systems and reusable spacecraft. The near future will find us engaged in the exploration of the lunar surface, the development of manned earth orbiting permanent space stations, unmanned and then possibly manned travel to the planets, as well as in the progressive utilization of space technology in such fields as communications, navigation, meteorology, and observation. "In addition, I believe the next decade holds great promise for the utilization of space systems technology in the solution of many of the economic and social problems of this complex civilization. . . .” (Text)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
usaf selected Martin Co. to develop SV-5P manned lifting-body vehicle to explore flight characteristics and atmospheric maneuverability of wingless lifting bodies. Initially, the 5,000-lb., 24-ft. wingless vehicle would be dropped from a B-52 bomber at 40,000- to 50,000-ft. altitude at 500 mph for powerless, gliding flight, landing at Edwards afb at 120 to 150 mph; in later powered tests, it would accelerate to mach 2 speeds at 100,000-ft. altitude and then maneuver to landing. Airfoil shape of vehicle, which resembled "a delta shaped porpoise with vertical fins,” provided lift normally derived from wings. Future vehicles, developed as part of afsc’s Piloted Low Speed Test (Pilot) project, would be launched to ferry supplies and crews between earth and orbiting space stations, (dod Release 343-66; Wilford, NYT, 4/27/66, 22)
Commenting on success of Project Gemini in developing techniques and experience vital for manned lunar landing, William J. Coughlin said in Technology Week: "Gemini technology will ... be applied to the manned scientific space stations still to come. This fanning out of technology from the direct-line effort to effect a manned lunar landing is a dramatic demonstration of the rapid maturing of the national space program.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 50)
Proposed further reduction in NASA FY 1967 appropriation because of Vietnam war would amount to "national disaster,” Ira C. Eaker wrote in San Antonio Express: "Such desertion of our present space program would give the Soviets an advantage they are now striving mightily to achieve. The U.S.S.R. is now spending about twice what the U.S. is spending for space research.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 10/24/66) October 25: Propellant tank rupture occurred on Apollo spacecraft 017 service module during proof pressure test at 240 psi conducted by naa at Downey, Calif.; inflight operating pressure would be 180 psi. No test personnel were injured. NASA had established board of inquiry to investigate, (nasa Release 66-285; naa s&id Skywriter, 10/28/66, 4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/28/66, D18)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-201 mission was successfully launched from etr at 11:12 a.m. est. Unmanned Apollo spacecraft (009) was boosted into suborbital flight by two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle (SA-201) to qualify command module (Cm) heatshielding and service module (Sm) of spacecraft-launch vehicle combination and major spacecraft systems. Liftoff and powered flight events were as programed. After ignition of liquid-hydrogen-powered 2nd stage (S-IVB), launch escape tower was jettisoned and recoverable cameras ejected. After seven-minute burn, 2nd stage and instrument unit separated from spacecraft; spacecraft reached 310-mi. (499-km.) altitude. Descending, service module performed ullage maneuver, firing reaction-control system rockets for 30 sec. to increase spacecraft’s reentry speed; Sm’s main propulsion engine was fired twice—once for 100 sec. and once for 10 sec. Sm was jettisoned and Cm reentered at 27,500 fps—2,000 fps faster than Apollo reentry from earth orbit—testing ability of spacecraft’s ablative heat shield to withstand reentry heat of about 4,000° F. Three main parachutes deployed at 12,000-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown in Atlantic at 11:51 a.m. est within 35 mi. of target. Recovery was by helicopter from carrier U.S.S. Boxer. Spacecraft was in "good” condition. Mission was first launch of Saturn IB and Apollo spacecraft. Saturn IB, uprated version of Saturn I, was being developed under direction of msfc and Apollo spacecraft, under direction of msc. (nasa Release 66-32; nasa Proj. Off.; msc Roundup, 3/4/66, 1-2; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/27/66, Al, A8; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 2/27/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, 1, 60)	.. >/, 3/1/66, 32)
Apollo Applications (aa) briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented most detailed statement to date on the program. He said plans were to form an “embryonic space station” in 1968-69 by clustering four aa payloads launched with Uprated Saturn I boosters. First mission would be launch of manned spacecraft, followed several days later by launch of spent S-IVB stage converted into a workshop. After two spacecraft had docked, crew would enter workshop through an airlock. They would prepare workshop for storage and return to earth in their spacecraft 28 days later. In three to six months, second manned capsule would be launched on 56-day mission to deliver resupply module to workshop and rendezvous with unmanned Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), fourth and last launch in series. Cluster would be joined with multiple docking launched on S—IVB workshop. Emphasizing the importance of manning the atm, Dr. Mueller said: “. . . if there is one thing the scientific community is agreed on it is that when you want to have a major telescope instrument in space it needs to be manned. “First of all you need him to point it. Second, you need him to be able to change the films and so on. Thirdly, you need him to maintain it so when something goes wrong he can fix it instead of having to sit here on the ground and be frustrated by the fact that some little gadget didn’t quite trip when it should have. . . .” Dr. Mueller said principal areas toward which $454.7 million FY 1968 post-Apollo effort would be directed were “development of extended flight capability, the conduct of manned astronomical and Earth observations from space, and continued exploration of the Moon.” (Transcript; Marshall Star, 2/1/67, 7-8; Clark, NYT, 1/30/67, 2; Reistrup, W Post, 1/27/67, A7)
msc awarded SI million in six-month study contracts to General Dynamics, Boeing Co., and McDonnell Co. for space station facilities that could be assembled in orbit early in the 1970s. General Dynamics would study engine room module, a separately launched unit to furnish electrical power and life-support equipment for space station. Boeing would study space station design to include a 38-in optical telescope that would be launched with the space station by a Saturn V booster. McDonnell would study logistics/ferry spacecraft to provide ground landing capability for astronauts. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 23-4)
usaf Space and Missiles Systems Div. had awarded a contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., for $1.2 million for Agena launch services at Vandenberg afb Oct. 1, 1967, through Sept. 30, 1968. (dod Release 896-67) Detailing systems engineering activities of U.S. manned space flight program, nasa Saturn Apollo Applications Director Charles W. Mathews said that efforts had encompassed three flight systems—Mercury, Gemini, 324-801 0—69and Apollo—and included many other aspects, worldwide instrumentation and communications networks, control centers, recovery support elements, and scientific and technical experimental equipment. Thus, systems engineering had had to be all inclusive in providing for logical development of flight hardware, successful conduct of flight operations, and achievement of maximum benefits from each mission. (Text) T. J. Gordon, L. M. Dicke, and J. S. Nieroski of McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. (mssd) presented “Economics of Commercial Space Stations.” Space station would pay its own way by taking a share of increased customer profits. According to mssd representatives, customers would be “those enterprises who, by virtue of their use of the orbital services, can offer new or higher quality profits or services, or lower operating costs for existing products or services.” Possible space station uses were described as locating fish, reducing ocean shipping transit time and hazards, locating petroleum and mineral reserves, controlling and routing air traffic, reducing air and water pollution by detecting sources, improving fresh water reserves by surveying sources, and improving agricultural and forest productivity by use of detectors of disease, damage, and other factors. (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 11/25/67, 9) Soviet Academician L. I. Sedov described “Ten Years of Space Exploration in the Soviet Union” and said: “Cosmic systems have become necessary not only for the study of fundamental problems of physics and the Universe, but also for various practical purposes of importance to national economies [and] there is no doubt that cooperation will favourably affect many sides of international life. We hope that this cooperation and its benefits will grow deeper in the future.” (Text) Worldwide cooperation in space was urged by msfc’s former advanced mission planner, Dr. H. H. Koelle, now professor of space technology at Technical Univ. of Berlin. To get around tremendous costs and avoid reduction in space activity in all countries, he urged “international organizations to plan and coordinate advanced manned missions in the 1980s.” He said space powers should begin by increasing coordination of mission objectives in their national space programs. For a cooperative concept, he called for annual investment of $4 billion and work force of 350,000 persons, with 200,000 persons from U.S., 60,000 from U.S.S.R., 60,000 from Western Europe, and 30,000 from rest of world. (Fink, Av Wk, 10/2/67, 21-2; Van Osten, Aero Tech, 10/9/67, 43-7)
msfc used aedc facilities to investigate preparation of spent rocket stage for human occupancy in space by dumping. 840 gal of super-cold liquid nitroeen through “dead” or inactive J-2 rocket engine. Simulating 100,000-ft altitude, dumping experiment would pave way for astronauts to move inside orbiting stage and use tanks as living quarters for space station, (msfc Release 67-203)
U.S. could have a permanent manned space station in orbit by 1970, predicted Charles W. Mathews, Director of Saturn/Apollo Applications, NASA Hq. omsf, in Space Business Daily interview. Mathews said that by clustering various modules, instrument packages, and spacecraft in orbit for reuse and utilizing resupply of expendables and crew replacement, it would be possible to extend capabilities of hardware currently under development to the point where such a space station could be permanently manned in about three years. (SBD, 1/16/67, 63)
First flight test of Saturn V, designated Apollo 4, was scheduled no earlier than Nov. 7, announced m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director. “This is a target date,” he said. “We are in a very complex learning process and we are going to take all the time we need on this first launch.” Launch vehicle and Apollo spacecraft combination was 363 ft tall and weighed 6 million lbs. Thrust of Saturn V’s first stage was 7.5 million lbs. Key objective of flight planned for Nov. 7 would be evaluation of Apollo command module heat shield under conditions encountered on return from moon mission. Flight would also test thermal seals for use in new quick-release spacecraft hatch which would be installed on all manned Apollo missions. Apollo 4 flight plan would call for Saturn V to place spacecraft and launch yehicle 3rd stage (S-IVB) into 117-mi circular orbit. After completing two orbits, 3rd stage would he re-ignited to place spacecraft into orbit with apogee of 10,800 mi. After separation from 3rd stage, service module propulsion system would be fired to rafee spacecraft apogee to 11,400 mi. During descent the service module motor would fire again, boosting velocity of spacecraft to about 25,000 mph, the reentry speed of a lunar return flight, (nasa Release 67-274; B Sun, 10/26/67, A6) • GSFC officials completed week of checkout of Oso IV and turned on last of nine experiments. All experiments were performing well and spacecraft was transmitting satisfactory data. The 599-lb spacecraft, launched from etr Oct. 18, had received 1,500 commands. It was 3,000th object in orbit since Sputnik I in 1957; 100th satellite orbited in 1967; and 50th satellite orbited by Delta launch vehicle in 53 attempts. (NASA Release 67-273)
The Washington Post commented on NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Exploration of the moon. Giant orbiting space stations, with as many as a dozen men living and working in them for as long as a year. Unmanned landings on Mars. “These are the goals the United States has set for itself in outer space in the 1970s. With a budget request for fiscal 1968 of $5.05 billion, more than $500 million of it for dramatic new programs to carry us beyond a manned landing on the moon, President Johnson has made it clear that the United States is in space to stay, no matter what the Soviet Union does or does not do. ...” (W Post, 1/25/67, A18)
Lifting-body vehicles, with their ability to maneuver and land on conventional runways, might become the spacecraft of the future, J. V. Reistrup suggested in the Washington Post. Because a naval recovery fleet would not be required, space missions could become a day-to-day operation; crews might use the vehicles to inspect foreign spacecraft, repair U.S. satellites, make reconnaissance flights, fly in search and rescue operations, or take replacement crews and supplies up to manned space stations. NASA and USAF had been testing various types of lifting-body vehicles: M2-F2 and HL-10 in piloted glide tests, and a small automated model of SV-5 as part of Prime—Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry—program. (Reistrup, W Post, 1/22/67)
Low-orbit space operations from a manned orbital base “has the potential to reduce operating costs by a factor of two” for the mission traffic anticipated for post-1970, G. A. Sears of the rand Corp. had concluded. His papier, Orbital Baaing: Key to Low Cost Space Operations?, compared present earth-based manned spaceflight program with concept of basing spacecraft at manned space station. Spacecraft would be injected into mission orbits as required and later rejuvenated for reuse by rendezvous with station. Spacecraft would have to operate nearly coplanar with base, a constraint acceptable to many but not all low-orbit missions; however, as method of reducing costs, orbital basing “deserves attention on a par with recovery-to-earth and reuse and extended-life concepts,” Sears stated. (Text)
NASA was negotiating nine-month, $275,000 contract with Planning Research Corp. to identify, analyze, and evaluate potential economic returns from possible space station activities in mid-1970’s. Earth-oriented application areas such as natural resources, meteorology, and communications would be considered as they might affect both the national and world economy. Univ. of Michigan would be major subcontractor to Planning Research in technical feasibility of remote sensing. Contract would be managed by omsf Advanced Manned Missions Program. (nasa Release 67-^54)
NASA contract activity:	Negotiations were initiated with McDonnell Douglas Corp. on a 121-million contract for Improved Delta launch support services. Contract would cover 20 launchings from WTR and ETR during 21-mo period beginning Jan. 1, 1968, and would provide for inspection, checkout, and actual launch. Negotiations were concluded with North American Rockwell Corp. on a $812-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for continuation of Apollo Command and Service Module Program from Dec. 4, 1966, through program completion. Contract covered engineering, design, manufacture,-analysis, and testing for Apollo spacecraft and related equipment, including production of four additional spacecraft through S/C 115A; contained improved plans for quality, reliability, assurance, and safety; and provided for an award fee based on achievement of specified management objectives. (nasa Releases 67-298,67-299)
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, discussing Soviet space plans in Ogonyek, hinted that U.S.S.R. was preparing to launch a large manned space station in the near future. It had been speculated that U.S.S.R.—which had not launched a manned spacecraft since March 18, 1965—would conduct major manned launch in 1967 to commemorate 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. Gagarin said there was little value in repeating feats already accomplished: “. . . it is not sensible in the future to put expensive spacecraft into orbit for several days. ... It is apparent that they will have to stay in orbit a long time. It will be necessary to supply them and change crews with the use of simplified types of space vehicles. . . . The time is not far off when longer and more distant space flights will be made.” In later Novosti press agency report Soviet Academy of Sciences Chairman Anatoly A. Blagonravov supported Gagarin’s predictions and said: “Mankind is entering the 7th year of the age of man’s space flight, and we do not doubt that in the not very distant future we will witness new space victories which will exert a growing influence on the life of people.” (Anderson, NYT, 4/9/67; upi, W Star, 4/9/67, A13; C Trib, 4/10/67)
NASA and Boeing Co. signed a $20-miUion letter contract extending the scope of Boeing’s work with NASA to include integration of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle [see May 9]. Boeing would: (1) assist and support NASA and its three manned spaceflight centers—MSC, msfc, and KSC—in performance of certain technical tasks for Apollo missions AS-501 through AS-515; and (2) be responsible for supporting Apollo Program Office in integrating Saturn V booster with Apollo Command Module (cm), Service Module (sm), and Lunar Module (lm). Work would be performed under overall direction of OMSF Apollo Program Office. Boeing Co.’s currently contracted Saturn work included engineering, construction, and testing of Saturn V 1st stage; support of assembly and system integration of Saturn V 2nd and 3rd stages with the 1st; and design engineering support of certain ground support equipment at KSC. (nasa Release 67-161)
NASA’s Apollo 4 (AS-501) was successfully launched from etr at 7:00 am EST in first all-up test of three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle, first in-orbit restart of third (S-IVB) stage, and first use of Launch Complex 39 and ground support equipment. Launch vehicle stages performed nominally; orbital insertion, 3rd stage restart, and injection into earth-intersecting coast ellipse were accomplished satisfactorily; Command Module (cm) encountered no functional problems; and splashdown occurred within 10 mi of planned landing point. Third stage ignited to insert Command Service Module (csm) into orbit with nominal parking apogee, 119 mi; perigee, 114 mi; period, 88.2 min; inclination, 32.6°. After two revolutions in parking orbit, 3rd stage was reignited for simulated translunar injection burn, injected stage and spacecraft into earth intersecting orbit with 10,774-mi apogee. Following stage/cSM separation, Service Propulsion System (sps) ignited for 16-sec burn, raising apogee to 11,314 mi. Spacecraft was aligned to a specific attitude to achieve thermal gradient across cm heat shield. Attitude, with cm hatch window directly toward sun, was maintained for about 41/2 hrs. [cm hatch window had been replaced with instrumented test panel containing simulations of flexible thermal seals and gaps between hatch and surrounding heat shield. Successful performance of thermal seals during reentry heating would qualify seals for use on manned cms,] SPS was then reignited for 271-sec bum to accelerate spacecraft to the most severe entry conditions that could possibly occur in a lunar-return trajectory, sps cutoff was followed by cm/sm separation and orientation of CM to entry attitude. Atmosphere reentry at 400,000 ft occurred at flight path angle of — 7.077° with inertial velocity of 36,537 fps (24,911 mph). cm landed in mid-Pacific near Hawaii at 3:37 pm, est, and was recovered by uss Bennington 2 hrs 14 min after touchdown. In significant step toward developing manned lunar landing capability, Apollo 4’s flight was the first of two to three missions designed to qualify Saturn V for manned flight, and the first test of the structural integrity and compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft. By subjecting cm’s heat shield to high heat load and heat rate, NASA was evaluating cm’s design adequacy for reentry from lunar missions—primary objective to achieve successful manned lunar mission. Other primary mission objectives were to: confirm launch loads and dynamic characteristics; demonstrate stage separation; verify operation of launch vehicle subsystems and spacecraft subsystems; evaluate performance of space vehicle Emer
Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell, was convinced the Soviet Union would attempt one or more space spectaculars during 1967, possibly during October, reported Richard Lewis of Chicago Sun-Times. October would mark the 10th anniversary of the launching of the first satellite, Sputnik I, and the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. The possibilities included a flight around the moon or a lunar landing with animals as passengers, a manned space station in earth orbit, and the first photographs of the planet Venus, the astronomer said. Sir Bernard Lovell said: “I have always believed that 1967 was the year they would try the circumlunar (around the moon) flight, but I should think they would do it unmanned because of the difficulties of the return at lunar flight velocity.” (Lewis, C S/T, 9/18/67, 16)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 crew was participating in verification test of electrically mated spacecraft and launch vehicle. For Apollo 8 mission, combined systems test on Command and Service Module 103 and checkout of Apollo Saturn 503 launch vehicle would continue through week at KSC. (Text)
In major organizational changes at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. W. R. Lucas, Director of Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, was named Director for Program Development, effective Dec. 16; Dave Newby was named Director of Center Operations; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Space Sciences Laboratory, was named Associate Director for Science. All were new positions, msfc Research and Development Operations would become Science and Engineering, with Hermann K. Weidner remaining Director; Industrial Operations would become Program Management under same director, E. F. O’Connor. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, said major function of new Program Development organization would be to “harden” complete package plans for new programs, such as space station. Director for Program Development would “help chart the course for this Center in the post-Apollo period, keeping in mind our Apollo program requirements and aap obligations.” (msfc Release 68—276; Marshall Star, 12/11/68,1)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V automatic space station [see Sept. 15—21] had carried first living organisms—wine flies, turtles, meal worms, plants, bacteria, and seeds—around moon and returned them safely to earth, Pravda announced. Turtles had lost about 10% of their body weight but remained very active and showed no loss of appetite. Preliminary blood tests indicated no substantial deviation from laboratory control animals, but analysis of test turtles 21 days after flight revealed excess glycogen and iron in their livers. (AP, W Star, 11/15/68, A4; B Sun, 11/16/68, A4)	.
NASA released transcript of Jan. 27 background briefing on NASA FY 1969	budget, in which Administrator James E. Webb explained how Apollo program had been kept close to schedule in spite of severe budget cuts. Although budget had been reduced $600-million in 1964, NASA had been given great deal of flexibility to reprogram funds. “This in effect permitted the driving forward of the program even though there were substantial reductions in the plan. I think if you examine all of the very large systems development in the country, you will not find a one that has kept more on schedule, given more for the money, and more nearly realized its goals on time than the Apollo, in spite of the fire, in spite of the reductions. The kind of rolling readjustment that we have had to make . . . has involved very large problems. And the projections we made as to our capability to meet problems of that kind have pretty well been borne out. . . . The fact is within this short period of time the Saturn V has flown. The heat shield on the Apollo has been improved. Service module has been tested. LM has been tested. And we have I think moved about as rapidly as any program—certainly more rapidly than any program of a comparable complexity.” Webb said NASA and dod were studying closer cooperation “in the area of orbiting laboratories,” such as mol and Saturn V Workshop. He envisioned production of “a basic capability of a rather primitive sort, something like an Antarctic base flown on the Saturn V which could be used for any national purpose.” (Transcript)
Command module for Apollo 7, first manned Apollo flight, left North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant enroute to Kennedy Space Center. Service module had arrived at ksc May 17. (nasa Release 68—100)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C., unique conditions in space suggested use of orbiting space stations for certain manufacturing processes. “For instance, liquid floating in a weightless environment takes the shape of a perfect sphere. Thus, it is conceivable that metal ball bearings could be manufactured in space to tolerances impossible on earth, yet at a cost, including transportation, less than we can now achieve. Perfect bearings would reduce friction and noise levels to the vanishing point. Free-fall casting techniques could be utilized to cast large flawless optical blanks for telescopes and by proper combinations of spinning and electrostatic forces we should be able to shape the surface as well.” Stable foams for mixtures of liquefied materials and gases, impossible to produce satisfactorily on earth, could be produced in weightlessness, resulting in “a steel foam almost as light as balsa wood with many of the properties of solid steel.” Composite materials like steel of different densities and properties and glass also could be produced. (Text; Schmeck, NYT, 11/27/68, 48; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/27/68, A6)
Workmen loading super-cold oxygen into Apollo 8 service module discovered gas had been contaminated, apparently by nitrogen used to flush tanks. Oxygen would be changed and tanks reflushed and launch was expected to take place on schedule (Lannan, W Star, 12/20/68, A5)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Integrated Systems Test had been completed on Apollo 7 command and service module (csm), Apollo 8 CSM would undergo combined systems tests at KSC early in week. Saturn 503 had been erected on mobile launcher. (Text)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 spacecraft would be electrically mated to Saturn IB launch vehicle at ksc Complex 34 next week. In Apollo 503 program, command module was scheduled to be mated to service module after Aug. 20. The three stages and instrument unit of Apollo 8 launch vehicle were mated at Complex 34 and undergoing tests. Modification and retests continued on Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages and modification and checkout on Saturn V 2nd stage for 504 mission. (Text)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary. In preparation for first manned Apollo flight, Apollo 7 spacecraft command module (cm) and service module (sm) had been mated in ksc altitude chamber to confirm compatible operation systems. Saturn IB launch vehicle 2nd-stage engine was being modified to strengthen propellant feed lines to augmented spark igniter. Apollo/Saturn 503 mission might be first manned Saturn V flight. Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle had successfully completed eight-day vacuum chamber test of Apollo 2TV—1 cm and sm at msc June 24. All tests necessary to help verify Apollo for first manned flight had been completed, with review of test data in progress. Last of seven scheduled verification tests of modified Apollo earth landing system had been postponed to complete analysis of all possible test conditions before drop of 13,000-lb full-scale Apollo cm from aircraft at Naval Air Facility, El Centro, Calif. Test would simulate severe landing condition using one of two drogue parachutes and two of three main parachutes. Ultimate load test of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes in reefed condition was scheduled no earlier than June 27. Repeat of unsuccessful test, it would be conducted from 13,00-lb parachute test vehicle at aircraft altitude of 46,000 ft. (Text; upi, W Post, 6/22/68, A8; SBD, 6/25/68, 270; 6/27/68, 285)
Apollo 7 spacecraft, which would carry three astronauts on 11-day earth-orbital mission in late 1968, was undergoing combined systems tests at KSC. Unmanned and manned altitude runs would follow, before spacecraft would be sent to Cape Kennedy to be placed on Saturn IB launch vehicle. Saturn had undergone tests and checkout on Launch Complex 34 for several months. NASA announced Apollo mission—which would demonstrate performance of spacecraft’s command module (cm), service module (sm), crew, and support facilities—would begin with mid-morning launch, carrying commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., CM pilot Donn F. Eisele, and lm pilot Walter Cunningham into earth orbit. During second revolution, crew would separate Apollo from rocket’s upper stage and perform transposition and simulated docking maneuver similar to one to be performed on lunar mission. Reentry under manual control of crew would culminate in splashdown in Atlantic at approximately 7 am EDT on 11th day. (nasa Release 68—108; ksc Release 285-68)
nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz announced William W. Rubey, professor of geology and geophysics at Univ. of California at Los Angles had been named Director of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex. NAS had accepted interim responsibility for operation of Institute until consortium of universities could be formed to assume its direction. Formation of Institute had been announced by President Johnson March 1, 1968, to provide base for academic scientists participating in lunar exploration program, working in Lunar Receiving Laboratory, or using other facilities of Manned Spacecraft Center devoted to study of the moon. It was to serve also as center for analysis and study of lunar data obtained from NASA unmanned missions, (nasa Release 68—191; NAS Release) October 31—November 1: Soviet academician and aerospace scientist, Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, visited Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute during AlAA-sponsored tour of U.S. At press conference he said U.S.S.R. would reach moon from orbital station but this was not crux of Soviet effort in space. “Other planets are just as important.” Zond-type satellites would circumnavigate other planets and return. In question and answer period following lecture he said U.S.S.R. would not conduct manned lunar space operation within following six months. In lecture, Prof. Sedov said it was “obvious that space technology and the associated research have a pronounced stimulating effect on the development of the technological fields . . . essential for large-scale progress—particularly in the development of automatic control systems; in radio engineering, television, and telemetry; in computer technology; in the preparation of new materials and new devices; in miniaturization and minimum-weight design; in problems associated with accuracy and reliability of automatic systems. . . It was clear that “space technology has become pivotal in modern industry in the broadest sense of the word.” Dr. G. G. Chernyi, Moscow Univ. professor, also participated in seminar. (Transcripts; Aero Daily, 11/7/68,29) During October: Soviet Science in the News, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., publication, said review of Soviet technical press indicated U.S.S.R. would attempt to orbit manned space station within the year and that it possessed “well-devised and thoroughly realizable designs.” First “rooms” of station would comprise Cosmos or Proton booster joined with Soyuz spacecraft. Additional rooms would combine solid and inflatable elements like polyethylene. Tests of water recovery systems in Pacific indicated broadening of Soviet techniques. Six vessels had been completed for ocean recoveries of spacecraft. Conclusion of Soviet scientists that weightlessness had adverse effect on human skeletal composition seemed to indicate space station would use artificial gravity. ‘Rotation of space station of from 40 to. 60 meters in diameter would generate sufficient artificial gravity to allow large number of scientists to work in space.” (SSN, 10/68, 1; Aero Daily, 10/16/68)
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
Boeing Co. said it would build one-fifth size thermal models of manned space stations under $156,500 NASA contract to determine their feasibility for predicting temperatures in full-size earth-orbiting station. (Boeing Release S—9840)
msfc awarded nine-month, $99,000 contract to Raymond Loewy/William Snaith, Inc., to conduct habitability studies of planned earth orbital space stations. Basic goal would be to ensure that workshop configurations were comfortable and functional structures in which to live and work, (msfc Release 68-79)
John A. Manke, NASA research pilot at prc, stands before wingless HL—10 lifting-body vehicle which he flew in first powered flight, after air launch from. B-52 aircraft. Manke reached 610 mph in NASA—usaf program to evaluate possible forerunners of reusable spacecraft. Eventual 1,000-mph speed was expected. Donn F. Eisele, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Flight crew support team wa3 Astronauts Joseph H. Engle, James B. Irwin, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Mission probabilities ranged from earth orbital operations to lunar orbital flight, with separation and docking of command and service module and lunar module. (NASA Release 68-201; AP, W Star, 11/14/68, A7; W Post, 11/14/68, A12; AP, NYT, 11/14/68, 21; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/14/68, 1)
Food, land, and raw material shortages might compel man to establish mining operations on other planets and to grow food in space stations, according to Dr. K. A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. He said farms growing food in chemicals could be established in earth-orbiting stations fertilized by chemicals produced on Mars and other planets. (AP, NYT, 7/15/68, 6)
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy called for prompt DOD action to revive work on quiet electric-drive nuclear submarine halted in May by DOD order when it decided to proceed with new high-speed nuclear submarine [see July 24]. (Transcript; Greene, NY News, 9/20/68, 8) characteristics of outer space near moon. Research mission had been completed and spacecraft was continuing to relay information to space stations. Zond V’s reentry and splashdown in Indian Ocean Sept. 21 was recorded by U.S., U.K., and West German space scientists, but U.S.S.R. made no official announcement until Sept 22. Tass then said Zond V had circled moon, explored space near moon, reentered at 11,000 mi per sec, softlanded by parachute in predetermined area, and was recovered by Soviet recovery ship—becoming first circumlunar spacecraft recovered on earth. “During the flight the station’s systems and aggregates for maneuvering on the trajectory and for returning to the Earth were tested. Flight control systems of the station and the radio-engineering means for measuring the parameters of its trajectory ensured the successful execution of the programme. “The successful flight of the ‘Zond—5’ automatic station over the Earth-Moon-Earth route, and its return to the predetermined area are an outstanding achievement of Soviet science and engineering. Another scientific-engineering problem has been solved, and broad prospects have been opened up for further research of outer space and planets of the solar system by automatic space stations which bring back research data to the Earth.” Tass announcement that atmosphere and pressure “remained within the limits of their present range” supported earlier speculation that Zond V carried prototype passenger cabin with atmosphere of artificial helium mixture which would be used by cosmonauts on future flights. Later Tass report quoted Soviet Prof. Leonid I. Sedov as saying spacecraft had special heat shield and was slowed down during reentry by “air resistance” and, “at a comparatively small height,” by parachute. Zond V was fifth spacecraft in Zond series and first Soviet spacecraft to land in water. Zond I (launched April 2, 1964) had failed in attempt to reach Venus and Zond II (launched Nov. 30, 1964) had suffered communications failure enroute to Mars. Zond III (launched July 18, 1965) had obtained photos of far side of moon; Zond IV (launched March 2, 1968) apparently had reached apogee comparable to lunar altitude and had burned in earth’s atmosphere on reentry, (gsfc SSR, 9/15/68; 9/30/68; W Post, 9/16/68, A17; 9/19/68, A25; 9/23/68, Al; NYT, 9/16/68, 29; 9/21-23/68, 1; Moscow News, 10/5-12/68, 3)
NASA’s Apollo 5 (AS—204) unmanned earth orbital mission, delayed for nearly four hours because of ground equipment malfunctions, was successfully launched from ksc Complex 37 at 5:48 pm est in fourth flight of Saturn IB and first flight of 31,700-lb lunar module (LM—1), designed to land two astronauts on the moon. Primary mission objectives were to verify operation of LM ascent propulsion system (aps), descent propulsion system (dps)—including restart—and spacecraft structures; evaluate LM staging; and evaluate 2nd-stage (S—IVB) and instrument-unit (iu) orbital performance. Launch phase occurred as planned; S—IVB ignited to insert spacecraft into orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 101-mi (163-km) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 31.63° inclination; nose cone jettisoned; spacecraft coasted for 43 min 52 sec; and LM separated from spacecraft LM adapter. LM entered orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 104-mi (167km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 31.63° inclination. Initial 39-sec dps burn, designed to simulate deceleration for descent to lunar surface, was automatically shut down after only 4 sec because of overly conservative computer programming. Ground controllers switched to minimum requirement sequence, an alternate flight plan with shorter total dps firing time and no provision for lunar landing simulation. Second dps engine firing occurred successfully, with 26-sec burn at 10% thrust level and 7 sec at maximum thrust. Third DPS engine firing 32 sec later consisted of 26-sec bum at 10% thrust, 2 sec at maximum thrust, and ascent stage fire-in-the-hole (fith) burn during which the two stages separated and aps engine was ignited simultaneously while dps was being shut down, simulating abort during landing phase. Duration of initial aps burn during abort staging was 60 sec, aps engine fired second time for 6 min 23 sec until fuel was depleted. At end of 11-hr 10min test period, both stages of the lm were left in orbit eventually to reenter and disintegrate. Apollo 5 mission, adjudged successful by NASA in spite of premature dps engine shutdown, proved out structural integrity of lm; verified in-space operation of dps and APS; and proved value of contingency planning, lm was last major piece of Apollo hardware to have its first test in space. Command module (cm) had been tested during AS—203 mission (July 5, 1966) and with service module (sm) on AS—202 (Aug. 25, 1966) and Apollo 4 (AS-501) (Nov. 9, 1967). Final decision on whether Apollo 5 results justified omitting second unmanned test and scheduling next mission to be manned would be deferred until March, pending final mission review, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—6K, 68—19; msc Release 68-4; AP, Strothman, W Post, 1/23/68, 1; Fahnestock, W Star, 1/23/68, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/24/68, 20)
Denver Post editorial: “With the goal of the project—landing of men on the moon by 1970—so close at hand, it would be sad indeed if NASA lost some key people now because of budget and morale problems. . . . There are future manned flights and space experiments to consider, and these will surely be crippled at infancy if NASA’s budget is cut back too severely.” {Denver Post, 6/24/68) In keynote address Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, noted no other program had given such impetus to technological and economic growth as national space program. “Those who oppose adequate spending on space technology are deliberately or inadvertently campaigning for a lower standard of living for our people, a declining Gross National Product for our Nation, and a secondary position in strength to that of the Soviet Union.” U.S. investment in space to date, he said, “has mostly been an investment in the future, the returns of which can be lost in large measure if we lack the vision and the vigor and the desire to keep this country great by maintaining a vigorous space effort. “Every major power and every nation eager to raise its standard of living and world influence strives to participate in space technology and space exploration. It certainly would be ironic if the United States, as the world’s leader in international cooperation and the world’s leader in standard of living, were to abandon or even neglect the source of such strength. I believe it might be labeled the worst mistake in history.” (Text; CR, 6/24/68, E5775—6; SBD, 6/25/68, 267; Aero Daily, 6/25/68) Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, said bioastronautics problems and provisions could have serious impact on mission performance, space station design, cost, and operations. Principal problems included those of crew rotation, crew size, compartment volume per crew member, radiation exposure, versatility of astronauts, station atmosphere, and prolonged weightlessness. In one study, savings from doubling crew rotation intervals from 30 to 60 days ranged from $220 million to $470 million per year, depending on altitude. Savings from increasing from 60 to 90 days were another $100 million a year. For same cost, slightly longer interval could support two more astronauts. Crew rotation intervals of two or more months should he goal. “If a future station can be expected to be useful over a period of many years and its cost can be amortized accordingly . . . efforts to achieve long crew rotation intervals have a very large potential payoff.” (Text; Aero Daily, 6/28/68) Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, described 100-man orbital workshop that could be operational by late 1970s. Proposed 615-ft-long, 1-million-lb vehicle, carrying 10,000 lb of experiments, would be launched in three separate parts by three Saturn V boosters and assembled in space. Baton-shaped station would revolve around hub in center which would serve as spaceport and zero-gravity laboratory. Crew would live and perform some work in 240-ft arm on one side of hub. On other side, 375-ft arm would house engine which would spin entire station at 3.5 rpm, creating centrifugal force to serve as artificial gravity. (Maloney, H Post, 6/26/68; AP, W Star, 6/26/68; CSM, 6/28/68) Arthur C. Clark, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, suggested that most earth inhabitants could not be very objective about possibility of extraterrestrial life because they were too “geocentrically minded,” still considering earth the center of the universe. “The whole history of astronomy teaches us to be cautious of any theory purporting to show that there is something special about the earth. In their various ways, the other planets may have orders of complexity as great as ours. Even the moon—which looked a promising candidate for geophysical simplicity less than a decade ago—has already begun to unleash an avalanche of surprises. “The discovery that Jupiter is quite warm and has precisely the type of atmosphere in which life is believed to have arisen on earth may be the prelude to the most significant biological findings of this century.” If we discover no trace of extraterrestrial life, he said, “even such a negative finding would give us much sounder understanding of the conditions in which living creatures are likely to evolve—and this in turn would clarify our views on the distribution of life in the universe as a whole.” (Leavitt, AF/SD, 8/68, 59-62)
American Nuclear Society held panel session in Washington, D.C., on “The U.S. Space Program: Achievements and Objectives.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, declared: “We must step up the rate at which we tap the vast potential of nuclear energy for the space activities of tomorrow. . . . if we do not make greater use of nuclear energy, we will neglect our mission of learning rapidly more and more about the solar system in which we live and about the planet where we reside. In the field of propulsion, chemical rockets, both liquid and solid, can be vastly improved when combined with the products of nuclear technology.” Combining nuclear stage with Saturn V “will greatly increase that rocket’s power of achievement. . . . Not only will we have the vast power of the atom at our command, but it will be compact, self-contained, long lived, highly maneuverable, and virtually independent of its surrounding environment. . . . Atomic energy will enable the space effort to reach for the infinite.” (Text) NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology James M. Beggs discussed “Research and Technology for the Future”: “The difference between success and failure of [nasa] missions . . . lies in our knowledge of the flight sciences and our skill for applying this knowledge to the development and operation of space vehicles. ... A natural characteristic of technology is its multiapplicability; an improvement in guidance or communication equipment, for example, may find many uses in space missions as well as non-aerospace applications. A key to making this process productive ... is a continuing research program . . . that has a good balance between the effort in the scientific and engineering disciplines and in the technologies needed to explore the unknown.” (Text) Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said: “The first practical application of space electric power systems, which have been under development over the past 10 years, may well be found in our second generation orbital space station program. Consistent with our present estimates of station initial power requirements, and allowing for growth, a zirconium hydride reactor coupled with a thermoelectric conversion system is being studied for application on such a space station.” (Text; Reuters, B Sun, 11/14/68, A10)
Baltimore Sun said Indiana Univ. had announced plans for experiments with nasa to determine problems in making future lunar colonies selfsupporting. Studies to start in August would probe feasibility of growing earth plants in lunar soil to provide food for manned space stations and possibly fodder for animals transported to moon colonies in 20 to 30 yrs. “Moon grow” experiment would use lunar soil retrieved by lunar missions and would expand as more material became available. Experiments would be conducted by astrobotanist Dr. Paul Mahlberg and team at msc laboratory and later at university. (Perkinson, B Sun,
In telephone interview, ucla astronomer Dr. Samuel Herrick, Jr., said planetoid Geographos, due to pass earth at 5.6-million-mi distance Aug. 27, would be best site of all asteroids for eventual space station beyond moon and good spot for manned or unmanned spacecraft landing. Its farthest point from sun in given orbit was least distant from sun and from earth of all minor planets. But astronauts landing on it would have to “dig in and tie themselves down” since its estimated g was so slight “even a sneeze directed at the surface would propel a man off into space.” (AP, B Sun, 8/23/69, A3)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
Creation of U.N. Space Institute was urged by Columbia Univ. law professor Richard N. Gardner in New York Times. It would be “center for the cooperative planning of space exploration in which all U.N. members would be invited to take part.” U.S. and U.S.S.R. could divide responsibilities for instrumented landings on different planets. There should be “United Nations Space Station” in outer space manned by astronauts from all U.N. nations and trained at U.N. Space Institute. It would gather information about solar system and universe and be used for practical earth applications. {NYT, 7/26/69, 24)
At ksc briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget for community leaders, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, said: “It is clear that we will continue the present pace of launch operations in the Apollo program until the first lunar landing has been accomplished. . . . The continuation of space effort, however, must somehow take into account the same constraints on Government spending which now affect the entire federal budget. . . . The total ksc budget is being revised from $455 million for all purposes to $410 million. I am taking action to accomplish this reduction without crippling the essential launch team capability or drastically impacting the local economy.” Savings would be effected by: gradual cutback in efforts of contractors supporting design engineering; phasing down of Boeing technical integration effort; deceleration of Apollo/Saturn V launch rate to three manned vehicles annually, reducing employment; and greater use of five-day week and two-shift schedule, permitting stabilization of employment level at 18,500 by June 30, 1970, instead of current 23,500. ksc strength would remain at 80% of current level, with reduction in support and stage contractors. Civil service cadre would drop from 2,920 to 2,880 by June 30, 1970. Employment already had been frozen at current level. Saturn IB Apollo Applications missions would require increased employment at Launch Complexes 34 and 37 in 1971, with estimated increase in contract jobs of 2,600 to handle nearly simultaneous or dual launches, ksc also would participate in earth orbital space station studies. (Transcript)
MSFC announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to receive 11-mo, $2,899,986 contract for preliminary design and planning for 12-man earth-orbital space station for possible mid-1970 launch. Station— initial element of large space base and means of investigating effects of long-duration space flight on man—would have 10-yr lifetime, subject to expendables resupply and crew rotation. Parallel effort' was being conducted by Msc and North American Rockwell Corp. (msfc Release 69-204)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President, Prof. Mstislav V. Keldysh, said in Stockholm, “We no longer have any time plan for manned moon trips. Right now we are concentrating on constructing big satellite space stations.” He predicted expanded scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. with possibility of cosmonauts and astronauts aboard same spacecraft in future. In Sweden for Swedish Academy of Engineering’s 50th anniversary, Prof. Keldysh implied U.S.S.R. planned to assemble spacecraft in orbiting stations and launch them from there. He indicated existence of conflicting views in U.S.S.R. as to space research funding. “My personal view is that, when man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (upi, W Post, 10/25/69, A3)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight voted to add $230.5 million to $2.212-billion authorization requested by NASA for manned space flight in FY 1970. Of raise, $168 million was earmarked for development of scientific payloads for six manned lunar landings between 1970 and 1973 and $66 million for space flight operations to cover flying men in earth orbit for month at a time, in 1970 onward. Flights were to be forerunners of orbiting space stations. (CR, 3/26/69, D233; Committee member)
John N. Wilford said in New York Times: “Even though the Soyuz flights accomplished less than American observers had expected, they served notice that the Soviet Union may have forged ahead in space-station development while the United States was concentrating on the Apollo moon flight preparations.” But if U.S.S.R. had meant missions as beginning of first space station, “they fell far short.” There were “no link-ups of vehicles, no transfers of crews between ships and no test of the effects of long-duration weightlessness. None of the three ships was placed in an orbit high enough for the prolonged flights being considered for space stations.” Mission accomplishments could prove useful for construction of future space stations. “They proved that they were able to launch three manned spacecraft in three consecutive days, which the United States has not done. Such precision launchings are necessary for space station deployment.” Missions also had demonstrated first welding in space. “It will probably be necessary to weld together sections of a space station, rather than rely solely on the mechanical clamps used for present docking operations, and to make repairs by welding during flight.” (NYT, 10/19/69, E9)	..
nasa issued RFPs for design and planning studies of 12-man, earth-orbital space station for 1975 with 10-yr operational life, subject to resupply of expendables and crew rotation with logistics vehicles. Work also would include conceptual design of 50-man space base of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s and comparable to scientific and technical research, development, and operations center on earth. Modified Apollo and Gemini spacecraft would be considered as initial logistics systems if space shuttle did not become available in early phase of space station operations. Data from studies would be available for final design of future space station if program were approved for development. Proposals were due June 9. (nasa Release 69—65)
Joseph P. Loftus, Jr., Manager of MSC Program Engineering Office, described plans for future Apollo lunar exploration at MSC press conference. Technological objectives were to increase scientific payload to lunar orbit and to lunar surface, permit high flexibility in landing site selection, increase lunar orbit and lunar surface stay time, increase lunar surface mobility with self-propelled lunar roving vehicle, develop and demonstrate advanced techniques and hardware for expanded manned space mission capabilities, develop techniques for achieving point landings, and demonstrate closed-loop onboard navigation capability as applicable to advanced missions. Scientific objectives were to investigate major classes of lunar surface features, surface processes, and regional problems; collect samples at each site for analyses on earth; establish network of surface instrumentation to measure seismic activity, heat flow, and disturbance in moon’s axis of rotation; survey and measure lunar surface from lunar orbit with high-resolution photography and remote sensing; investigate near-moon environment and interaction of moon with solar wind; map lunar gravitational field and internally produced magnetic field; and detect atmospheric components resulting from neutralized solar wind and micrometeoroid impacts. Achievement of scientific objectives would be facilitated by addition of scientific instrument module (sim) under service module sector door, sim would consist of scientific instruments mounted on shelves behind door, which would be deployed pyrotechnically after crew left lunar surface. Spacecraft would also use new modular equipment storage assembly (mesa) . “Unlike the existing mesa it is modular and people, instead of having to take many things out of compartments and stick them into a bag .' . . here you simply take hold of a handle . . . and lift out an entire shelf. On that shelf are all the things required for the next eva period. So, it is one movement instead of a dozen.” One tank of hydrogen and one tank of oxygen would be added to extend mission capability to I6V2 days. Since each eva period would increase up to 5 hrs and total lunar stay time would increase up to 200 hrs, lithium hydroxide would be increased for portable life-support system and for spacecraft, and insulation would £e increased on top of spacecraft around docking tunnel. Minor changes would be made to interior garments so crew would have more suitable environment and crew would remove spacesuits and sleep in hammocks during rest periods on lunar surface. (Transcript)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
MSFC announced engineer Chester B. May would be member of oceanologist Dr. Jacques Piccard’s six-man crew on Gulf Stream Drift Mission, scientific undersea journey aboard submersible vessel Ben Franklin (PX—15). Vessel would drift with Gulf Stream current from Miami, Fla., to Halifax, Nova Scotia, from four to six weeks beginning in June. May would study vessel’s operation and evaluate analogies between it and future NASA space station. Mission, covering 1,450 nm, would be conducted at 1,000-ft average depth, with periodic excursions to 300 ft and 2,000 ft. PX—15, designed by Dr. Piccard, would remain submerged throughout journey. Crew would experience space station characteristics: isolation, confinement, and stressful environment. (msfc Release 69—100; Marshall Star, 4/9/69, 1)
NASA noted new level of maturity in conduct of Apollo 8 mission, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. ■Homer E. Newell, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C. “We got the feeling that the people . . . handling the operations had now a new tool that fit the hand.” Maturing of total space capability was seen in use of Pioneers and earth orbiting satellites during Apollo 8 “to keep track of what the sun was doing so that the directors of the Apollo operation could know what radiation conditions in space were relative to . . . crew safety.” Mission also used weather satellites and communication satellites, “not only to transmit pictures . . . but also as an integral part of the operation, to transmit data. . . .” Asked NASA’s priority on space station versus lunar exploration in view of increase in funding request for lunar landing program, Dr. Newell said: “Now you have touched uppn what I think is going to be the most difficult question for the country to resolve in the months ahead.” There was general agreement that manned space flight should continue. Debate would be over whether it would be done by continued lunar exploration, earth orbital operations, or both. “Our own feeling is that the country ought to do both. Certainly after having put all the investment into landing a man on the moon and developing the capability to do so we must continue to explore the moou. And we cannot foresee any reasonable or rational national program in which we do not continue that exploration. At the same time ... we haven’t finished developing the manned space flight capability. We have got to . . . get that permanent foothold in space and that is where the space station comes in.” (Transcript)
Underwater test program begun at msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator several years earlier was providing information essential for design of first U.S. space station, NASA reported. Technicians, design engineers, and professional divers in spacesuits and scuba gear were conducting tasks similar to those necessary to activate space orbiting workshop, in 1.4-million-gal water tank containing mockups of aap cluster elements (Saturn I Workshop, lunar module ascent stage, Apollo Telescope Mount solar observatory, and airlock and multiple docking adapter), simulating weightlessness of space. Weightlessness was impossible to duplicate on earth for longer than fraction of minute. Conclusions from tests would be reflected in workshop’s final design, with decision expected in May 1969. (nasa Release 69—4)
NASA would require $5- to $5.6-billion annual budget “within three years” for simultaneous development of orbiting space station and lunar exploration in 1970 and onward, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, said in Washington Post interview. (Cohn, W Post, 4/17/69, A3)
Bill added $258 million to R&D funds for new total of $3,264 billion, including increase of $75.7 million for Apollo program, to total $1,767 billion. Of this increase, $32.1 million was for Saturn V improvements and $4.6 million for lunar exploration. Within new total of $354.8-million noa for manned space flight operations, bill restored $57 million cut from Apollo Applications by budget amendment and added $66 million for space station and shuttle and $6.2 million for Saturn V production. In space science and applications, bill reduced funds for supporting research and technology by $12 million and deferred funding for four proposed Explorer satellites and for Mariner-Mercury 1973 mission, but restored biosatellite program to originally requested $18 million plus $1.6 million restored for Delta launch vehicle for Biosatellite-F. Earth Resources Technology Satellite funds were increased by $10 million, with transfer of funds to other projects prohibited. Advanced research and technology funds were increased by $31.5 million, including $13.5-million increase for nuclear rocket program, $5.25 million for chemical propulsion, and restoration of $1.20 million for aeronautics. Research and program management total was cut by $7.15 million, to $643.75 million. Construction of facilities total remained unchanged. (Text; CR, 5/15/69; House Rpt 91—255)
International team of scientists might man first U.S. permanent space laboratory, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at London news conference. Work on project would begin about 1975 and additional sections would be added each year for decade, eventually producing laboratory for about 50 scientists. Dr. Paine, on his way to Paris Air Show, said it was too early to say if there would be permanent U.S. lunar space station or to predict if man would land on Mars. He had no information to support rumors of imminent Soviet moon landing. (Reuters, W Post, 6/5/69, E5)
NASA announced establishment of task group on manned space station under Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and of task group on space shuttle under Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Reporting to Dr. Mueller would be LeRoy E. Day, former Director of Apollo Test. His group would develop NASA material for report on space shuttles to President’s Space Task Group by June 15. Frank Borman, former Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc and Apollo 8 commander, would report to Mathews as Field Director for Space Station effort. (NASA Release 69—70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
New York Times published interview in which Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. President Llewellyn J. Evans expressed concern over possibility of failure in future space missions. “It has been one big gamble up to this point. This country must come up with rescue hardware. It would be shocking if someone got stuck in orbit someplace.” He saw need for four space facilities: space station in earth or lunar orbit, shuttle for travel between earth and space laboratory, space “tug” to go between nonatmospheric orbits, and rescue vehicle. (Kampel, NYT, 8/3/69, F7)
Washington Post editorial said: “The fact that the Russians may be able to complete a floating [space] station substantially before the United States is ready to attempt it should be of no great concern. Although the psychological impact of knowing that men are up there looking down on us constantly is bound to be great, this should be more than offset by the successes of the Apollo program. The important things are for the American space effort to proceed in a logical fashion designed to reap the largest possible scientific benefits and to remain largely under civilian control.” (W Post, 1/22/69, A26)
msfc announced award of two contracts. Eight-month, $400,000 contract had been given to General Dynamics Corp. to study experiment modules for proposed manned space station. Study, which would complement space station investigations being conducted by McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp., would examine variety of experiments suitable for manned space station, analyze scientific and engineering community’s need for experiment modules, and develop concepts for least number of modules needed to meet these requirements. Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded $1,170,000 contract to fabricate, test, and deliver 15 Saturn V workshop rate gyro processors and 1 module test set and to retrofit 22 Apollo Telescope Mount rategyro processors for Apollo Applications program. Work, expected to take 18 mos, would be done in Orlando, Fla. (msfc Releases 69—172, 69-173)
MSFC announced it had awarded $173,000, 11-mo contract to Boeing Co. for study of cost-reduction methods in future space vehicle logistics systems, including expendable and reusable systems. Major emphasis of study would be on space station logistics missions in 100- to 300-mi orbits, with 5,000- to 50,000-lb payloads, and capable of holding 12 passengers and 3,000- to 12,500-lb cargo, (msfc Release 69-26)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and other top NASA officials testified on future space programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Introducing programs, Dr. Paine said: “The decade of the 1970’s and 1980’s should have a program as bold in concept and as productive as we have had in the decade of the 1960’s. ... we need to have clear objectives to focus our work and a commitment, subject ... to annual review, as to what these achievements will be. Our general goal area should be the continued exploration of the solar system while deriving the maximum scientific and practical benefits here on earth from the space program. There is no question that, at some future time, we will have the capability for manned planetary exploration and we need to face now some of the decisions that will not bear fruition for more than a decade. Although I do not believe that we will see manned exploration of the planets in the 1970’s in the United States ... I do think this could come in the 1980’s. It is by no means clear that for the Soviet Union the decision may not be made to mount a crash program and bring this in before the end of the decade of the 1970’s.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, described possible 1981— 1982, 12-man, 2-ship expedition to Mars [see Aug. 1]. Each spacecraft would weigh 1.6 million lbs at departure from earth orbit and would be 270 ft long, “smaller than what we are flying already to the moon.” nasa was using “concept of reusability” in planning, to improve and reduce cost of operating in space, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Committee. Reusability could be achieved “through the reuse of launch and space vehicles and . . . through the reuse of a mission module such as a space station” put into orbit and used over 10-yr or even 20-yr period. Space shuttles would be designed to run 100 or more flights. Modules and vehicles would be designed for multiple applications in earth, lunar, and synchronous orbits. Space tug would permit travel from space station to other spacecraft and back again—“general purpose . . . equipment.” In earth orbital operations, “it permits us to fly off from the space station over to ... an oao, orbiting astronomical observatory, either to repair or check the oao, or to bring it back to a space station where it can then be loaded on the space shuttle for return to earth and then brought back into orbit after repairs.” (Transcript)
Electrostatic zero-gravity workbench experiment by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud Assembly Facility might provide substitute for gravity in small space-station area, NASA reported. If successful, experimental equipment—three-foot-square workbench with coated metal top, high voltage and variable power supply, and ion source with interconnected cabling—would enable astronaut to manipulate loose objects like tools in weightlessness of orbiting space station. Ion source and high-voltage power supply, directed downward, would create force field to hold tools to bench top. Ground experiments would be completed in six months. (NASA Release 69—58)
Space shuttle was “first step or keystone to the success and growth of future space flight developments for the exploration and exploitation of space,” LeRoy E. Day and B. G. Noblitt of Space Shuttle Task Group, NASA OMSF, said in paper presented at IEEE EASCON Session on Earth Orbiting Manned Space Station in Washington, D.C. “Large experiment modules and unmanned satellites can be placed into low earth orbit and retrieved as desired. Propulsive stages and payloads . . . destined for higher energy orbits can be placed into low earth orbits.” On-orbit reusable shuttles like space tugs and nuclear stages “become economically advantageous once propellants can be inexpensively delivered to earth orbit. . . . On-orbit maintenance services can be provided for malfunctioning or inoperative satellites. . . . short duration special purpose orbital missions can be conducted by the space shuttle itself to augment or complement space station activities. The design and operational characteristics of the space shuttle will also provide a potential capability to conduct space rescue missions—a capability that is not practical with conventional expendable launch systems,” (Text)
Eureka, Calif., high school senior Ronald Titus had identified sketch of future space station released by Tass Oct. 11 as identical to drawing in Sperry Gyroscope Co. advertisement in February 1962 Scientific American, New York Times reported. Original Soviet caption had said it was “Soviet sketch of a future space station.” Sketch had appeared in Eureka Times-Standard and New York Times as concept of Soviet space station. (NYT, 10/26/69, 11)
In interview published by This Week, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said many things could be learned from moon: “One ... I hope will be international cooperation, such as now exists in Antarctica. Even though the moon struck me as a very desolate, forbidding expanse, it will be very beneficial for men to work together to unlock its many mysteries and secrets. I hope that both the moon and the large permanent space stations from earth will be citadels for international cooperation and that the people who visit them will really be internationalists in the truest sense.” (This Week, 4/6/69)
aec—nasa Nuclear Rocket Development Station in Jackass Flats, Nev., was “scaling down operations, laying off workers, husbanding the facilities it already has—and waiting,” New York Times reported. Like many U.S. space research and test centers, “their futures uncertain amid an increasing emphasis on defense and domestic matters at the expense of space,” station’s scientists and engineers were “waiting for President Nixon to decide on the direction and pace of the national space effort in the next decade.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/4/69, 20)
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
Nixon Administration was responding to nasa requests for $200 million supplemental r&d funds by “emphatically ordering future reductions” in FY 1970 budget, said William J. Normyle in Aviation Week & Space Technology, bob had told NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to plan on $140-million loss despite conclusions of House subcommittees that NASA’s R&d should be increased $234.4 million. Until Nixon decisions on U.S. space future, cut would “wipe out” work on space stations, shuttle/logistics vehicles, and manned lunar exploration. Feasible future programs were being studied by President’s ad hoc committee which would report in September. (Av Wk, 4/14/69, 27-8)
Economist said of Soviet Soyuz “fiasco” U.S.S.R. had tried “highly ambitious link-up of the components of a permanent, orbiting space station, something the Americans will be in no shape to do for perhaps five years. The fact that the Russians apparently failed must have been humiliating to them, and gratifying to the Americans, but it is unlikely to be more than a temporary check to a programme that has rolled with considerable success since the Russians put the world’s first satellite in orbit more than a decade ago. The slow progress reflects the state of Soviet industry, but is steady progress with few loose ends. The American programme, trimmed and squeezed by political pressure and public opinion, is trailing appreciably more loose ends; despite the victory on the moon Nasa will have to set about tidying them up. And it is then that the Russians will have the last laugh.” (Economist, 10/25/69, 20)
msfc announced it had issued rfps for experiment modules to be used with proposed manned space station to orbit earth in 1970s. Study, under eight-month contract, would analyze scientific and engineering need for experiment modules and develop concepts for least number of modules needed. Study tasks included further defining candidate experiment groupings, developing preliminary module concepts, defining minimum number of concepts, developing preliminary design and cost analysis for each module concept, and making proposed plan schedule. Proposals were due May-22. (msfc Release 69—125)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator-designate, discussed possibility of integrated European space program alongside that of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in Thomas A. Edison Memorial Lecture at Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. “The space-age challenge to Europe in my view is to find new ways of organizing and managing the great wealth of that continent to overtake, if you like, major American and Soviet space and other programs. This is the space-age challenge to Europe: not the ‘technology gap’ but the ‘management gap.’ ” Dr. Paine also said, if 1969, 1971, and 1973 space probes should find “very exciting things about Mars, it is possible that we or the Russians might want to move a manned interplanetary expedition to a higher order of national priority. At the present time, the best guess is that this would not take place until the mid 1980’s but new priorities might lengthen or shorten this period.” In reply to question on man-in-space justification, he said: “For almost any simple specific experiment ... an automated probe can be developed to do it at lower cost. The basic question here is the difference between short-range research projects to achieve simple specific objectives, and complex research aimed at developing general exploratory capability and broad technological positions which will let you do things in the future which you can’t yet fully foresee. For the latter you will need men.” Dr. Paine expected U.S.S.R. “very likely” would put space station into orbit before U.S. In lunar exploration, he expected U.S. to stay ahead a while. In planetary probes, he expected U.S.S.R. to stay ahead. In earth applications, he expected U.S. to stay ahead. (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on Apollo program, space flight operations, and advanced manned missions before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. He explained importance of lunar exploration and outlined plans for new space station.	■ President’s Science Advisory Committee had said answers to questions about moon “may profoundly affect our views of the evolution of the solar system and its place, as well as man’s in the larger scheme of things.” Fact that earth’s moon was largest in relation to its planet, Dr. Mueller said, “implies that the two bodies may have been formed in the same manner at the same time. If true, the moon may be a book containing the secret of the earth’s first billion years of life. This record is lost on the earth which is subjected to . . . erosion by atmosphere and water. ... By comparing similarities and contrasting differences, man may be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth; for example, the mechanisms that cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and the processes responsible for concentrating ore deposits. The orbits of Apollo 8 and the Lunar Orbiters were disturbed by mass concentrations beneath the circular lunar seas. These may be huge meteors that struck the moon with such force that they melted and sank into the interior, or they may be iron deposits. “Another objective of lunar exploration is to learn about man as a space explorer—his capabilities and limitations. Some day man will move on to other planets; the moon is a training ground. . . . We don’t have the basic information which early lunar landings will furnish and we can only speculate today about the feasibility of the moon as a base for an observatory or a permanent science station—about exploiting its environment of low gravity and high vacuum—about its potential for natural resources. ... A long-range goal like the lunar base would direct technological advances, stimulate public interest, and attain subsidiary objectives with earth application such as food synthesis, environmental control, and recovery of useful elements from rock.” Within new program category, Space Flight Operations, nasa was bypassing intermediate space station, launch vehicles, and logistic craft and proposing to move directly to new, semipermanent space station and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system. Space station “should be in being by the mid-1970s.” With FY 1969 funds, contractor definition efforts were being initiated. FY 1970 funds would continue definition, preliminary design, and supporting work. Dr. Mueller described space complex 200 to 300 mi above earth planned for 10 yrs’ continuous operation and adaptable for crew size, additional laboratory facilities, or other special-purpose equipment through selection, design, and arrangement of component modules. Crew would rotate at three- to six-month intervals, ferried between station and earth by reusable shuttles. Station’s electric power would come from solar panels or small nuclear generator. (Testimony; NASA Release 69-49)
San Francisco Board of Supervisors had voted to negotiate with Texas millionaire Lamar Hunt on lease of 22-acre Alcatraz Island, United Press International reported. Hunt planned underground museum in tribute to Apollo 11, while restoring island’s historic buildings. (W Star, 10/20/69, B4) weather satellite itos that would be launched in prototype by NASA later in 1969 and in operational form by ESSA in early 1970. “It combines in one spacecraft both the stored-data and direct readout cameras of the present two-satellite [tiros] arrangement. Fewer launches will be required to keep the system in operation. The design allows for growth and the capacity to accommodate a variety of instruments to meet new and developing needs.” System would contain high-resolution infrared radiometer for “nighttime observations approaching daytime pictures in resolution and quality” thus providing 24-hr weather satellite coverage. “This step will enable us to meet fully the first national program objective—providing twice-daily observations of the entire earth, both by stored and direct readout systems, day and night.” (Text) Fifty years of transatlantic flight—from usn NC—4 flying boat’s Lisbon arrival May 27, 1919, to June 3, 1969, maiden Atlantic crossing of Boeing 747—was traced in paper by Dr. Richard K. Smith, Ramsey Fellow at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. During “the Heroic Years on the North Atlantic between 27 May 1919 and 27 May 1939, there were 175 flights across the Atlantic; 142 were by airplanes, 33 by airships. ... It is confidently believed that all the persons who flew the Atlantic by airplane during that period could be accommodated aboard a 747, perhaps with some seats to spare. However, at least three more 747s would be required to lift those persons who flew by airship during 1919—1937!” (Text) msc Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said Apollo program might be extended to 1973 to allow NASA to fly three space station training missions in 1972. “It’s going to be some time before we settle it. But it’s going to be difficult to handle both Apollo and Apollo Applications from an operational point of view as well as a people point of view in 1972.” Revised launch schedule set Apollo 19 landing back to November 1972 and Apollo 20 to May 1973. Between Apollo 18 launch Feb. 11, 1972, and Apollo 19 were three orbital flights preparatory for establishment of first U.S. permanent space station in 1975. These flights could come just after Apollo 18, in May 1972 and in September 1972. Further reason for Apollo landings delay was possibility they would be made in remote lunar areas like crater Tycho, almost 1,000 mi below moon’s equator and rated among top-priority landing sites. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/23/69, A21) Dr. Arthur D. Code, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer, reported discovery that relatively young stars in constellations Orion and Scorpius were generating heats of 45,000°F—5,000° hotter than had been thought. Finding, from data obtained by NASA’s Oao II satellite (launched Dec. 7, 1968), suggested young stars might be more massive and maturing faster than originally believed and supported theories of thermonuclear processes in stars’ interiors that generated such heats. Oao II data also showed younger stars had more complex chemical composition than stars formed near universe’s beginning. They contained fairly large amounts of carbon, silicon, magnesium, and heavier elements, as well as predominant hydrogen and helium. Other Oao II data indicated particles in interstellar space were variety of complex matter, much of which might be debris ejected from stars. (Wilford, NYT, 10/21/69, C19) msc Director of Engineering Development Maxime A. Faget outlined concept of space vehicle with two reusable stages—booster rocket and orbiter craft—both with fixed wings, long fuselages, and rear rocket engines. Vehicle would be 225 ft high and weigh 2.5 million lbs at launch. Orbiter vehicle, capable of carrying 25,000 lbs of cargo and passengers, would be attached pickaback to booster stage’s upper half. Booster, burning liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, would elevate orbiter to fringe of space, separate, drop away, and cruise to landing like jet airliner. Booster probably would be piloted by two astronauts. Orbiter would ignite rocket engine to continue upward to space station orbiting at 300-mi altitude. After link-up with space station, transfer of cargo or 12 passengers, and pickup of new load, orbiter would be steered by pilot into atmosphere and controlled glide to landing on 10,000-ft runways used by aircraft. Key to reentry would be orbiter’s “angle of attack” when hitting atmosphere. Faget proposed 60° angle with nose up, so flattened bottom would catch airflow to slow descent. Small jet engines would be fired to help control final descent phases of both orbiter and booster. Outer surface of vehicles would be made of metal alloys that could sustain temperatures to 2,700°F. (Wilford, NYT, 10/24/69, 43) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed dod space activities: “In communications, meteorology and surveillance . . . we are actively pursuing increased capability. . . . Tactical communications using satellite relays are presently being intensely tested and show great promise in improving control of field units and increasing . . . cooperation between land, sea and air forces. In surveillance, our efforts have produced results. Of first importance is a new satellite early warning system that will do a great deal to further insure our ability to deter nuclear attack.” Savings in space travel costs “must be linked to the recovery and reuse of space vehicles. . . . Since major improvement in our ability to use space environment would be of direct assistance to both NASA and the military, we are jointly planning our research and development towards this objective.” (Text) Major aiaa awards presented included Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to George M. Low, former Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, currently on special assignment to msc Director, for “his leadership role in bringing the Apollo Program to fulfillment, and to the thousands of engineers who dedicated their careers, without public recognition, to the conquest of space.” Daniel Guggenheim Medal for 1969 was presented to retired arc Director H. Julian Allen for “personal contributions to outstanding research and development leading to vastly improved re-entry bodies, missiles, satellites, and spacecraft, and for leadership in directing and inspiring a large group of research men at Ames Laboratory.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given Edgar C. Lineberry, Jr., Chief of Orbital Mission Analysis Branch, msc, for “significant advancement in the field of rendezvous mechanics through his development of the space maneuver logic and associated control techniques, and his formulation of the mission plans which contributed decisively to the success of all rendezvous operations conducted during United States manned space flights.” De Florez Training Award was given to Gifford Bull, Principal Engineer and Engineering Pilot at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, for “establishing the use of variable stability airplanes as flight dynamics training vehicles for engineering test pilots.” New aiaa Award for Spacecraft Design was awarded Otto E. Bartoe, Jr., Vice President, Aerospace Div., Ball Brothers Research Corp., for “concept and preliminary design of the Orbiting Solar Observatory spacecraft configuration and control systems, the first embodiment of the spin-despin design.” Aerospace Communications Award was awarded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency and former JPL Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, for “development of phase lock systems for space communications, guidance and control, and for contributions to the design, development and operation of NASA’s Deep Space Network.” (msc Release; aiaa Releases; aiaa Booster, 10/20/69) Honored as new Honorary Fellows at Honors and Award Banquet Oct. 23 were Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Among 29 new Fellows were: Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, Deputy Director, Flight Crew Operations Directorate, msc; former gsfc Director, Dr. Harry J. Goett, Chief Engineer, Space and Re-Entry Systems Div., Philco-Ford Corp.; Najeeb E. Halaby, President, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Samuel L. Higginbottom, Vice President, Operations Group, Eastern Airlines, Inc.; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director; John G. Borger, Chief Engineer, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Walter Haeussermann, Director, Astrionics Laboratory, MSFC; Dr. John C. Houbolt, Vice President and Senior Consultant, Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, (aiaa Release) During third aiaa President’s Forum, Under Secretary of Interior Russell E. Train said, “Photographs of Earth, taken by our astronauts from the vicinity of the Moon, bring home more forcefully than the words of all scientists of all times the fact that we live on a finite planet with finite but poorly known resources.” (A&A, 2/70) October 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIV into orbit with 760-km (472.2-mi) apogee, 742-km (461.1-mi) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69)
NASA unloaded eight-ton airlock at MSFC for ground testing to qualify it as part of orbiting space station. Part of Apollo Applications program cluster to be launched in mid-1970s, 65-in-dia, 17-ft cylindrical unit was flown from McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s St. Louis plant to be joined to multiple-docking adapter. It would provide interconnecting passageway between S—IVB rocket stage and multiple-docking adapter in flight, condition environmental gases, and provide instrumentation, data management, intercommunication, and other services, (msfc Release 69—124)
Special Task Force report submitted to President Nixon Jan. 8 but not released by White House called for NASA revamping and shift in space priorities, John Lannan said in Washington Sunday Star. Panel, chaired by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Charles H. Townes, included Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, then NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. James A. Van Allen of Univ. of Iowa; Dr. Harry H. Hess, chairman of nas—NRC Space Science Board; and Dr. Walter Orr Roberts of National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report recommended continuation of $6-billion space effort, with $2 billion for dod and rest for NASA; disapproved of any commitment to large orbiting space station; and urged commitment to unmanned planetary probes. It considered NASA’s present structure inappropriate for post-Apollo program and urged bringing “an outstanding scientist into its top administrative ranks.” It was desirable to avoid manned versus unmanned operations argument and to focus on search for most appropriate role for human being in entire system. NASA organization was not “adapted to this approach.” nasc should be chaired by President rather than Vice President. Panel advocated lunar exploration and gave high priority to use of space for commercial and civil benefits. It urged space spending at Vl% to 1% of gnp and proposed U.S. intensify efforts toward international cooperation in space, Lannan reported. (W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified in FY 1970 authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that he believed “the greatest significance” of President Nixon’s decision to include in budget amendment amounts for continued lunar exploration after first Apollo landings and for continued Saturn V production was “that it recognizes the fundamental fact that the United States should not and does not plan to stop its further development and use of manned space flight.” Early manned lunar landing would allow additional savings of perhaps as much as $39 million in amended Apollo budget. Budget included funds for improved scientific equipment for more advanced missions to moon and for limited Apollo Applications program. Fund cuts would mean some program reorientation as well as delay in Workshop, previously scheduled for mid-1971. Amended budget supported continuation of plans for 1971 and 1973 Mars missions and first mission to Mercury in 1973, with Venus swing-by. In space applications, “where we are placing special emphasis,” Earth Resources Technology Satellite program would enable NASA, with other agencies, to test practical use of space to gather information on water levels, crops, forests, and other resources. “Despite the sizable overall reduction ... we have not reduced the earth resources project.” Budget included funds to proceed with nerva development and continued to give “high priority to our work in aeronautics.” New construction would include Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory at LaRC, “unique national facility for studying the fundamentals of noise generation and reduction.” U.S.S.R. was continuing vigorous program in both aeronautics and space. “The Soviet commitment represents . . . the application of resources at about the same rate as that we have averaged in recent years,” with “significantly higher percentage of the gross national product.” Soviets were “proceeding in manned space flight programs directed both at sending men to the moon and at substantially enlarged and extended manned operations in earth orbit. . . . Automatic rendezvous and docking flights with Cosmos 186—188 and 212—213 and the manned Soyuz 4—5 mission in January, with manned docking and crew transfer, demonstrated the increasing Soviet capability. . . . They appear to be pointed to a future capability for assembly in earth orbit of large space stations and of manned spacecraft to send to the moon and beyond.” U.S.S.R. had “made attempts to launch one or more spacecraft to the planets at almost every opportunity—three or four times the number of attempts we have been able to make.” (Testimony)
Space Task Group presented report The Post-Apollo Space Program: Directions for the Future to President Nixon at White House. It recommended basic goal of balanced manned and unmanned space program conducted for all mankind, with emphasis on increased utilization of space capabilities for services to man through expanded space applications program; enhancement of U.S. defense posture for world peace and security through exploitation of space techniques for military missions; continuing strong program of lunar and planetary exploration, astronomy, physics, and earth and life sciences; development of new systems and technology for space operations, emphasizing commonality, reusability, and economy through development of new space transportation capability and space station modules; and promotion of world community through program of broad international participation and cooperation. As focus for development of new capability, Task Group recommended U.S. accept long-range goal of manned planetary exploration with manned Mars mission before end of century. Activities leading to goal should include initial concentration on exploiting existing capability and developing new one while maintaining program balance within available resources; operational phase using new systems and capabilities in earth-moon space, with men living and working in that environment for extended periods; and manned exploration missions out of earth-moon space, using experience of earlier two phases. Schedule and budgetary implications of phases were subject to Presidential choice, with detailed program to be determined in normal annual budget and program review. Report outlined three possible NASA programs for manned Mars landing before century’s end. Option I would launch manned mission in mid-1980s and would establish orbiting lunar station, 50-man earthorbiting space base, and lunar surface base. Funding would rise from current $4-billion level to $8- to $10-billion level in 1980. Decision to proceed with development of space station, earth-to-orbit shuttle, and space tug would be required in FY 1971. Option II would include Mars mission launch in 1986, allowing for evaluation of unmanned Mars mission results before final designation of landing date and require about $8-billion maximum annual expenditure in early 1980s. Option III would include initial development of space station and reusable shuttles, as in Options I and II, but would defer decision on manned Mars landing date while maintaining goal of after 1980 but before close of century. Concurrent development of space transportation system and modular space stations would require rise in 1976 annual expenditures to $5.7 billion, while their development in series would entail $4- to $5-billion funding level. Recommended DOD options were: (A) program of full military space capability in case of overt threat to national security, (B) development of efforts to counter known and accepted projections of security threat and increase in development activities if threat increased, and (C) program of lower level system deployment with technology and support effort necessary for contingency planning on assumption that lessening of world tensions would reduce emphasis on national defense. At White House briefing following presentation, press secretary Ronald L. Ziegler said President Nixon had concurred in Task Group’s rejection of two other, extreme space programs, one to land men on Mars as soon as possible, regardless of cost, and one to eliminate manned flight program after completion of Apollo. He did not know when President would make decision on course to follow, but budgetary considerations would be major factor. (Text; PD, 9/22/69, 1291; NYT, 9/16/69, 1)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: “During the entire spectrum of our second and third decades in space, manned space flight has not merely been emphasized, but has literally cannibalized any hope for major scientific planetary, interplanetary, communications, meteorological, oceanographic (in cooperation with satellites), earth resources satellite programs, etc.! I must conclude . . . that the only valid justification for early development of the [space] shuttle is to supply the newborn 50—100 crew manned space stations and the manned exploration of Mars.” From 1958 to 1969 U.S. had launched approximately 750 spacecraft, Karth said: usaf, 380; NASA, 241; usn, 91; and joint usaf—USN, 37. (Text)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp.’s Space Div. to conduct parallel $2.9-million, 11-mo design and planning studies of 12-man earth orbital space station which could be developed by 1975 and have 10-yr lifetime. Companies would also include conceptual design of 50-man space base composed of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s to serve as centralized scientific and technical facility in orbit. Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., and Hughes Aircraft Co. had been selected for final competitive negotiation of contract to develop advanced optical communications experiment. Companies would compete for one $5-million contract to develop wideband laser communications system to be placed on board Applications Technology Satellite ATS—F, scheduled for launch in 1972, for communications between satellite and transportable ground station. (NASA Releases 69—108, 69-109)
Two alternative plans for future Apollo lunar exploration were being developed by omsf for nasa Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and NAS-NRC Space Science Board evaluation, NASA announced. First plan was to fly remaining six Apollo missions as planned; second was to delete two missions, thus freeing two Saturn Vs and spacecraft for possible future use such as in space station mission. (NASA Release 70-1 35)~
NASA held Hq. briefing on space station and shuttle programs for representatives of 17 nations, eldo, esc, and esro. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said foreign participation was step in NASA’s continuing efforts to inform other nations of post-Apollo program planning so that they might determine extent to which they wished to participate in it. (NASA Release 70-41)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II-13) was successfully captive-fired for 367 secs at MTF. Stage would be used to launch Skylab space station in late 1972. (msfc Release 70-85)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
msfc engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 520 496 for Serpentuator—snake-like instrument to move men and tools under weightless conditions around space station. Series of metal tubes with motors at joints to control angles could be regulated from control panel inside or outside space station. (Jones, NYT, 7/18/70, 29; Patent Off)
NASA delegation to U.S.-U.S.S.R. space talks—headed by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director—arrived in Moscow for Oct. 26-27 meetings to discuss cooperation in developing manned space stations and linking spacecraft in orbit. (Clarity, NYT, 10/25/70, 24)
msfc announced award of $21 029 756 modification to Boeing Co. contract for work on Saturn V 1st stages and extension of contract performance period through March 31,1973. MSFC also issued rfp on preliminary design of Research and Applications Module (ram) that could be used with space station and space shuttle. Proposals were due Jan. 8, 1971. (MSFC releases 70250,70-251)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on NASA FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Manned space expenditures for FY 1971 would be about 25% less than in FY 1970 and about half FY 1966 peak. “We are able to make these rapid changes . . . as the result of two fundamental policies .... One of these policies is that the great bulk of the NASA program is carried out under contracts with industry, university laboratories and other institutions in the private sector of our economy. The other ... is that NASA must maintain a civil service staff sufficient in quality and numbers to properly supervise the work performed under contract .... Essentially all the reductions being implemented in the manned space flight programs in Fiscal Year 1971 are in those efforts carried out urtder contract.” In FY 1971 NASA proposed to complete definition of space shuttle and space station and continue studies of systems, missions, and payloads for further economies in future years. In Apollo program, Myers pointed out, scheduled stretchout of manned lunar landings would “add to operational costs of the lunar exploration program, although not to our costs this year.” In Skylab program, design, development, and ground testing of subsystems and assemblies of Saturn Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and atm were well advanced. Fabrication had begun on first flight articles, with delivery scheduled for late 1971. In space shuttle program, shuttle would be “designed so that it can be maintained in a state of launch readiness for lengthy periods and yet be launched within two hours notice into an orbit of any inclination. In the event of an emergency in space, it would be able to carry engineering or repair specialists to overcome the problem or rescue an endangered crew.” (Testimony)
Washington Post editorial on Luna XVI: “. . .the flight of Luna 16 is a major achievement for the Soviet Union. Its scientists have concentrated in recent years on a system of landing and retrieving unmanned spacecraft, an activity that the United States had not emphasized, and Luna 16 shows that the system works.” In long-term space exploitation “it seems to us that the manned approach will be most useful. Men will be out there some day, following the trail marked by the Apollo craft, and in the meantime the American effort can properly be devoted to finding a way to get them out of the earth’s atmosphere more cheaply and to making the best possible uses of earth-orbiting space stations and laboratories.” (WPost, 9/29/70, A18)
NASA announced it was inviting 450 scientific and technical leaders to Space Station Utilization Conference to be held at ARC Sept. 9-11. Invitees would participate in planning of manned earth orbital space station scheduled for 1976-1978 launch. Laboratory was to be operated in space for 10 yrs. At conference, panels would be formed to screen potential space station uses and panel recommendations would provide material for related study in summer 1971. (NASA Release 70-137) E.	Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Among those honored were Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders; Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chafee, and Edward H. White II, killed in Apollo fire; Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and wife Valentina V. Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Gherman S. Titov, Aleksey A. Leonov, Vladimir A. Shatalov, and Konstantin P. Feoktistov; and late Cosmonauts Vladimir M. Komarov and Pavel I. Belyayev. Others honored included Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, former NASA Deputy Administrator; N. E. Golovin, White Sands rocket scientist; Willy Ley, rocket scientist and author; Dr. W. R. Lovelace, former nasa Director of Space Medicine for Manned Space Flight; Theodore T. von Karman, aerodynamics expert; Joseph A. Walker, NASA X-15 test pilot; and Alan T. Waterman, NASA consultant and first NSF Director. Names had been selected by Working Group on Lunar Nomenclature and were approved by IAU officials. Other names approved included those of medieval Persian poet-astronomer Omar Khayyam, U.S. physicist Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, U.S. scientist George Washington Carver, mythological figures Icarus and Daedalus, and apocryphal Chinese rocket inventor Wan Hu. (McElheny, W Post, 8/15/70, Al; AP, W Star, 8/22/70, A2; SAOPIO; Sky and Telescope, 11/70,262-6) Communications with Skynet B were lost suddenly during apogee motor firing Aug. 22. Search for spacecraft was being conducted by NORAD. Skynet B was second of two U.K. military comsats launched in IDCSP-A program under dod-U.K. agreement. USAF managed project for DOD and would reimburse NASA for launch services. U.K. would reimburse USAF. Skynet A, launched Nov. 21, 1969, was operating satisfactorily over Indian Ocean. (NASA Proj Off; B Sun, 8/20/70, A3) August /9.-U.S.S.R.. launched Cosmos CCCLVIIinto orbit with 466km (289.6-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 24. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/ 70; 11/30/70)
U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX (launched June 2) set new manned flight endurance record at 6:35 pm Baykonur time, when it surpassed 13-day 8-hr 35-min record set by NASA’s Gemini VII(Dec. 4-18, 1965). Apollo Astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., sent congratulatory telegram to SoyuzIXcrew: “Your accomplishments are adding new evidence supporting the capability of men to live and work in extended periods in space. We wish you continued success in this important mission and a safe return to earth.” Lovell told press in Houston that mission suggested U.S.S.R. would develop permanent earth-orbiting space station: “Soyuz now seems to be purely an aeromedical flight, pushing men to their limits to see how weightlessness and the pure oxygen environment affects their work in space. It all fits very naturally with the space station concept.” (Astrachan, WPost, 6/16/70, Al; SBD, 6/16/70,211)
MSFC announced award of $320 000 contract to NR Space Div. for lunar base synthesis study to define and analyze lunar exploration missions, establish requirements, and develop conceptual descriptions of semipermanent lunar surface bases. Study would appraise mobile systems for long traverses of lunar surface, examine different surface drills and other tools and equipment, and relate capabilities of flying and surface roving vehicles to mission needs. Study also would examine operation of semipermanent lunar base without lunar orbit space station, operation of base while space base was in lunar orbit, missions that could be performed from base, and surface missions that could be performed from either lunar orbit or surface base, (msfc Release 70-119)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
NASA announced award of $1.5-million contract extensions to McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Div. to continue parallel space station program-definition studies through Feb. 1, 1971. (NASA Release 70-136)
Short circuit in oxygen tank No. 2 caused combustion within tank. “This in turn caused the pressure and a temperature within the tank to increase. The tank then ruptured. This rupture. .. caused the pressure in the compartment in which the tank is located to increase which then caused. .. the big covering panel in the Service Module to blow off.” Panel hit high-gain antenna and knocked it out, causing brief loss of data. Preflight events of possible significance included change of motors of fans inside tank at Beech Aircraft Co. plant early in manufacture. “Later on the tank, itself, was.. .moved from one spacecraft and installed in spacecraft 109 and during the removal from spacecraft.. .106, it was jarred or dropped an inch or two [5-10 cm].... Finally, during the loading and unloading of the tank during the countdown demonstration tests at the Cape there was an anomaly which made it very difficult to get the oxygen out of the tank. This was several weeks before the flight and a new procedure not previously tried was used in the detanking”—gaseous oxygen “was pumped into the tank and released again, the heaters were turned off and on....” Board was investigating connection between events and accident and would submit final report to Dr. Low and Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, about June 1. (Transcript)
Convair engineers presented results of “Phase A” experiment module concepts study during meeting at MSFC of NASA representatives and Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. Meeting was also attended by French representatives of ESRO. Module would be extension of space station that could be outfitted on ground and transported into space by shuttle vehicle. Program technical director Max E. Nein said module was attractive to European scientific commmunity because country desiring to participate could either build module complete with experiment package or build experiment package for integration into U.S. module. (MSFC Release 70196)
Lend-lease of quarters and equipment aboard U.S. earth-orbiting space station of 1970s to help foreign scientists study terrain of underdeveloped countries was advocated by Dr. Kraft A. Ehricke, Chief Scientific Adviser for Advanced Programs at North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div., before press in Los Angeles. (Miles, LA Times. 2/19/70)
MSFC engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 534 926 for machine to manufacture materials and articles in space. Cylindrical tank would be used in space station to produce new metal alloys and glasses, metal membranes, metal foam, high-precision ball bearings of hollow steel, and optical components in zero-g condition, where heavy materials did not settle out because of lack of buoyancy. Astronaut outside tank would control admission of liquid metal, gases, and other materials, and regulate heat, ventilation pressure, spinning, and agitation. (Jones, NYT, 10/23/70,43)
In LaRC test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft, four crewmen were sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Div. of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in Huntington Beach, Calif. During 90-day experiment, part of NASA oart program, crew would drink reclaimed water and breathe regenerated oxygen. Information obtained would be applied to operation of three-man Skylab workshop scheduled for 1971 launch and to design of 12-man space station for later in 1970s. (Langley Researcher, 6/26/70,1)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed Fourteenth General IAEA Conference in Vienna: “The industrial and technological advances being made in the world are creating increasing demands for electric power that is cheap, abundant, safe, reliable and clean. In my country, the estimated total electrical generating capacity for 1970 is about 300 000 megawatts. I believe that a realistic estimate of the projected growth of our electrical generating capacity by the year 2000 is about 2 100 000 megawatts, which will require adding the equivalent of a total of 1 800 power plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each.” On global scale, “some 5000 new electric generating plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each would be needed over the next 30 years.” (Text) Predominant theme of conference, was that reusable shuttles would substantially lessen cost of practical uses of space. There was little talk of manned space stations or exploration of other planets. Discussions centered on use of satellites for communications, air traffic control, and weather forecasting. European public had become “cool to manned space flight,” New York Times said. ESRO head, Dr. Herman Bondi, said at conference, “We have grown up with the impression that everything in space is devilishly expensive.” Belgian aerospace executive Maurice Desirant said European efforts at joint space programs had been handicapped by pressures to perform national feats. Now, however, European countries had become “more and more aware of the dangers.” They had seen money wasted on duplicated efforts which had achieved limited results. Lefevre said that, to be effective, European contribution to major space effort must be under leadership strong enough to override any differences arising from “divergent technical points of view, reasons of industrial competition, economic whims for national politics or finances.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers outlined shuttle plans. Payload of 22 680 kg (50 0OO lb) had been halved. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/23-24/70; NYT, 9/26/70, 11) September 23: Roy P. Jackson, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div., was named NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective Nov. 2. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, also announced appointment of Oran W. Nicks, who had been Acting Associate Administrator of OART, as Deputy Director of Langley Research Center, effective Nov. 2. Vincent L. Johnson was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective immediately. (NASA Release 70-155)
Four crewmen sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. [see June 12] successfully completed first 30 days of scheduled 90-day confinement. (Langley Researcher, 7/24/70, 1)
Space applications of plutonium 238 were discussed by Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, at Fourth International Conference on Plutonium and Other Actinides in Santa Fe, N. Mex. Most noteworthy use of plutonium-238-powered, radioisotope thermoelectric generator (rtg) had been as SNAP-27, power source for Apollo 12 experimental package left on moon, rtg’s were “of particular interest as space electric power sources for missions requiring a long life and high reliability, where there are long periods of darkness or great distance from the sun, or where orientation or other problems tend to reduce the effectiveness of solar cells as an energy source.” Significant number of future space missions might require plutonium 238 power source. Element “finds another extremely important use in space as the power source for waste disposal.” Heat from plutonium 238 decay would both produce bactena-free drinking water from waste products and incinerate waste itself. After Apollo, exploration of moon might continue with robot vehicles. “The maintenance and servicing of space stations and nerva engines in space may be done more easily and safely by robots than by man.... Nuclear power would be an obvious candidate power system.” (Text)
Four-man LaRC team emerged from space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, Calif., after successful completion of 90-day test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft [see June 13]. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong greeted crewmen John H. Hall, Terry Donlon, Stephen G. Dennis, and Wilson Wong. Project chief engineer Karl Houghton said test could have continued beyond scheduled 90 days. (AP, NYT, 9/12/70, 8; Langley Researcher, 9118/70, 1)
Office of Science and Technology sent to Congress The Next Decade in Space, report of Space Science and Technology Panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee: National program for next decade in space should focus on using “space capabilities for the welfare, security, and enlightenment of all people.” Recommended goals were to contribute to Nation’s economic strength and security and expand earth-oriented research and applications of space science and technology; explore solar system with phased program of lunar exploration, search for extraterrestrial life, and diversified planetary exploration; and use space platforms to expand knowledge of universe and basic physical laws. Panel urged that U.S. develop technology to expand capability for automated equipment controlled by man in remote location for space exploration and civil applications, reduce cost of space operations by cost reduction for expendable vehicles and payload development, strengthen biomedical basis for possible long-duration manned space flights, and encourage international cooperative programs. Panel recommended NASA and dod continue joint study of reusable space transportation system “in the expectation that a decision can be made for a FY 1972 budget decision on an STS development program.” Design target should be replacement “of the largest possible part of the national launch vehicle stable,” including Saturn V. “We urge the deferral of a development decision on space stations more elaborate than the aap space station.. .concept until the prior availability of the STS can be'confidently anticipated.” It was “likely that some form of multiply reusable space transportation system will indeed become the most attractive major new technology development for the decade.” Other recommendations were basic biomedical research program supplemented by 12- to 18-mo Apollo Applications flight program, to provide human factors information for more ambitious space station; possible second-generation space station to utilize sts; and earth-orbital manned space flight activity with systems using sts. (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine addressed Economic Club of Detroit in last public appearance as NASA Administrator. He summarized NASA projections of potential space advances to year 2000-advances U.S., U.S.S.R., Western Europe, and Japan, alone or in concert, would have industrial and economic resources to realize. For both America and other countries, response to challenge would “determine their futures.” _ New space transportation system—with reusable space shuttle to make return trips to orbit with passengers and cargo, permanent orbiting space station, and automated and manned space tugs for emplacing and recovering satellites and for transportation between orbits—was “bridge to our future in space.” Space shuttle would be “nasa’s major single effort during the next ten years.” New approach to large payloads based on shuttle booster stage would offset termination of Saturn V after completion of Apollo lunar landings by 1972. Skylab program scheduled to start during 1973 would provide basis for final design of space station. Integrated lunar exploration in early 1980s could use station in lunar orbit as platform for descent to any portion of moon’s surface for up to 14 days. Broad, vigorous, unmanned program to explore planets in 1970s would be start of orderly program to visit every planet in solar system, blazing trail for manned trips to Mars and Venus before end of century. “The space in orbit two hundred miles [320 km] above the earth can be thought of as a vast new continent, equal in area to the surface of the entire globe.” Discovered only a dozen years ago, new continent would “become increasingly important as the leading world source of global information and communication services and then, inevitably, as a new home of men from earth.” Beyond solar system, automated and manned astronomical probes would “extend our understanding of the universe through more intensive investigations in optical and radio astronomy and space physics.” Before century’s end, man might find answers to “the overwhelming questions of man’s origin, his destiny, and of his uniqueness as the bearer of intelligence in the universe.” Man “may indeed be unique— but the odds against it approach a thousand billion billion to one. ... Every experiment so far has been negative, but the search will continue. ... We do not know what may exist, but we are upon the verge of knowing.” Of Apollo program Dr. Paine said, “History may record that the substitution of major international technical competition, in place of war, was the great and unprecedented peacekeeping breakthrough of our era.” Benefit on international social and technical change was “evident to all.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
Proposal for space station to be assembled in orbit one module at a time was being studied at msfc and MSC, NASA announced. Station, to provide centralized facility for research, applications, and operations for 6 to 12 men over 10 yrs, would be composed of cylindrical modules 4.3 m (14 ft) in diameter and 17.7 m (58 ft) long, joined to form variety of shapes. Individual modules would be carried into orbit on reusable shuttle vehicle. Station could be assembled within months in circular orbit 320-480 km (200-300 mi) high with 55° inclination. (NASA Release 70-192)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
msfc announced NR had been awarded two modifications to contract for Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II): $1 768 228 for changes to original contract awarded in 1962 for manufacture and test of 15 S-II flight versions and $2 429 005 to identify S-II’s capabilities for launching space stations and determine what production impacts would result from msfc space station studies, (msfc Release 70-172)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight released Manned Space Flight: Present and Future. Staff study concluded that growth of national space program in decade had “provided major national technological and scientific resource of personnel and facilities.” Decline in resource could increase risk in accomplishing current programs and was causing “dislocations in affected communities throughout the United States.” With termination of Apollo fabrication, 8 Saturn Vs and 6 Saturn IBs, 12 cms and sms, and 1 or 2 lms would be available for manned flight. After 1974, U.S. would have no capability for lifting manned payloads over 27 200 kg (60 000 lbs) into space and would have only three vehicles that could lift 27 200-kg payloads unless Saturn V production was resumed or substitute was developed. Launch rate of less than two manned vehicles per year could materially increase risk of manned launch and spaceflight operations; production rate of two or more Apollo spacecraft and launch vehicles per year would minimize annual cost without inordinate increases in total vehicle cost over current costs, while maintaining critical skills of major subcontractors. U.S. would have no long-duration manned earth-orbital capability after 1973 without extension of orbital workshop program or initiation of development of space station. Early development of low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system appeared to offer greatest opportunity for reducing space flight costs while increasing flexibility and variety of missions in near-earth orbit. For increased flexibility in low-cost earth-to-orbit recoverable transportation system, development of chemical space tug was advised. Report noted that nasa maintained the only U.S. manned space flight capability and advised major decisions on manned space flight program to prolong capability beyond 1974. (Text)
AEC announced selection of Gulf General Atomic to receive $2 000 000, one-year contract to begin development of technology for thermionic-reactor power system for use in space. Reactor could be used in manned orbiting space station, lunar base, manned or unmanned electric-propulsion probe to explore solar system, and advanced communications satellites. Program was expected to take 8 to 10 yrs. (aec Release N-155)
At NASA Hq. industry briefing on space program for 1970s and beyond, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “I think that when we talk about reducing the overall aerospace program by 12 percent, we have to look at the other side of the point too.. .we will still be spending $3.3 billion in the 71 budget, and I think by any possible measure that puts the space program very, very high in the nation’s priorities.” Major reduction would be in manned spaceflight “from a little over $2 billion in FY 70 to $1,474,000,000 in 71.” With “the manned lunar landing behind us, with almost all the initial buy of 15 vehicles now completed, we are able to take a major reduction in the Apollo account as that program reaches a logical termination. We had hoped to continue the Saturn V at limited production of several a year. The decision was made under these austere conditions that we would terminate that production and take the savings.” Peak NASA expenditure of $6 billion in 1965 included outlay for buildup of total NASA base. Fact “that we are now down between the three and four billion mark by no means means that we will be operating at a substantially lower space activity than we had at the peak. It reflects more the fact that the base is now completed; we can put a much higher percentage of our expenditures into program.” However, FY 1971 budget would delay Apollo Applications flight until end of 1972; stretch Apollo lunar flights to two a year, with Apollo 16 occurring before aa program launch in 1972-1973 and Apollo 17 and 18 after aa program missions; delay ATS-F and ats-G by one year, and Viking-Mars lander from 1973 to 1975; and reduce NASA operational base by shutting down erc and possibly mothballing Mississippi Test Facility. Dr. Paine said NASA aeronautics effort would increase. “We feel that much of the work that will be going forward in the shuttle program will probably have some spin-off into the aeronautics area.” Emphasis would be placed on v/STOL and quiet engines. Orbiting Solar Observatory launch recommended by Space Task Group for 1975 would be delayed to 1976. Interplanetary Monitoring Probes originally scheduled for 1971 and 1972 would be launched in 1972 and 1973 and ISIS would be moved from 1970 and 1972 to 1971 and 1973. Synchronous Meteorological Satellites each would slip one year, to 1972 and 1973, and Applications Technology Satellites, one year, to 1973 and 1975. lunar roving vehicle would be carried on Apollo 16,17, 18, and 19. Decision on whether to fund two or three space shuttle definition studies would be made after proposals were received. In space station area experimental requirements would be emphasized. Two Phase-B definition studies were under way. Summer study of utilization of space stations would be international conference “with, we hope, strong participation from the European space research organization.” nerva studies would continue. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told conference that “with the technology we already have in hand” antipollution program could be initiated “to produce a space reflector—maybe it will have to be a mile [1.6 km] in diameter—that can direct the sun’s energy to create holes over our cities which would act as chimneys to evacuate smog.” (Transcript)
arc biochemists were developing process to convert principal body wastes—carbon dioxide and water—into palatable food for long-duration space missions, arc announced. Methods to turn carbon dioxide and water vapor exhaled and water recovered from urine into sugars and glycerol in series of chemical reactions might also be applied to solve food problems on earth. Work was under way by arc, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and two industrial contractors to develop system to produce chemical foods under space conditions, including weightlessness, and reduce food deliveries to orbiting space station, (arc Release 70-3)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
MSC announced award of $100 000 NASA contract to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for study of station operating techniques during space station mission to define crew command structure necessary to ensure successful operations, (msc Release 70-68)
Senate passed, by vote of 69 to 15, H.R. 16516, $3.316-billion NASA FY 1971 authorization, after rejecting amendment by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to delete $110 million for definition and design of space shuttle and space station. Senate requested conference with House. (CR, 5/6/70, S6768-817)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
NASA FY 1971 interim operating plan news conference was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said principal decision was “how best to carry out the Apollo and other existing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future. ... In our discussions, it became clear that the vitality of our national space program depends on a determined and vigorous continuation of plans for a reusable space shuttle followed by a space station in the manned flight program”; early development of erts, ATS, and HE AO; Grand Tour unmanned flights to distant planets; unmanned Viking Mars landers; Pioneer flights to Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter; and ‘a healthy aeronautical research program.” “With all of these considerations in mind. . .actions have been taken that will effectively reduce NASA’s FY 1971 budget request of $3,333 billion to an interim operating plan of $3.2687 billion.. .and to minimize NASA’s budgetary requirements for future years.” Budget request for Apollo was being reduced by $42.1 million to $914.4 million by canceling Apollo 15 and 19 lunar missions and by phasing down manpower levels at major Apollo facilities more rapidly. Although Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and nas-nrc Space Science Board had strongly recommended, after special review, that NASA carry out all six remaining lunar landing missions, NASA had “most reluctantly concluded that a reduction. . .should be made.” Remaining Apollo missions would be redesignated 14 through 17 and would be flown before start of Skylab operations in November 1972. Schedule would allow additional flexibility by providing Apollo hardware for possible use in Skylab, space station, or other programs where manned operations or heavy boost capability would be required. Advanced mission studies would be reduced by $1 million. Tracking and data acquisition network operations would be reduced $8 million by reducing number of manned flights and by more rapid phasedown in operating levels. Construction of facilities would be reduced to $25 million by deferring Polymer Research Laboratory at arc, Calibration Laboratory at MSC, and Multispectral Photo Laboratory at msfc and by rehabilitation and modification effort and facility planning and design. Research and program management minimum operating budget would be established at $678.7 million, amount included in previous appropriations bill and $13.6 million below NASA’s FY 1971 request. Dr. Paine said NASA had concluded “that it is prudent and realistic. . .to make these decisions now.. .to avoid more drastic and disruptive actions which would result if the decisions were postponed until later in the fiscal year. We also no longer have the capability to prepare in parallel two Apollo spacecraft, as would be required to maintain an option to reach a later decision on the number of Apollo missions.” Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers explained Apollo schedule changes: Apollo 14 would be launched as planned Jan. 31, 1971, followed at six-month intervals by Apollo 16 (renamed Apollo 15) with advanced capability for greater exploitation of lunar exploration, Apollo 17 (renamed Apollo 16), and Apollo 18 (renamed 17), last launch in series. Beginning with Apollo 15 launch in July, eva would be increased from two periods to three and man-hours per mission, from 18 hrs to 40 hrs. Weight of landed scientific payload would be doubled, from 227 kg to 454 kg (500 lbs to 1000 lbs); SM experiment package would be added; and range and efficiency of surface operations would be increased by improved suit mobility, improved life support system, and addition of lunar roving vehicle. Crew for new Apollo 15 would be same as previously planned—Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin. Skylab core module would be launched by Saturn V in November 1972, as scheduled, and would be revisited by Saturn IBs and csms up through June 1973. Beyond that, activities would be “at a standstill as far as orbital operations are concerned until the shuttle comes on line, hopefully in the 1976-77 time period.” (Text; Transcript)
msc announced selection of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to receive 18-mo, $1075 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for large space station solar-array technology-evaluation program. Program objectives were to conduct technical evaluation of current state of the art of solar systems and design analysis and test evaluation of components. Work would be conducted under MSC direction, (msc Release 70-48)
Explorer I. first U.S. satellite (launched Jan. 31. 1958), reentered the atmosphere over the South Pacific after completing 58 408 revolutions and traveling 2.67 billion kilometers (1.66 billion miles) during its 13-year lifetime. To celebrate the launch. Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Jet Propulsion Laboratory Feb. 17. 1958. Examining the spacecraft model with him (left to right above) were Dr. Clark B. Millikan. Director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Cal Tech: Dr. Lee A. Du Bridge, President of CalTech: Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPl; Dr. Jack E. Froehlich. Explorer Project Director at JPL; V, C. Larsen, Jr., Laboratory Administrator at ipl: and Robert J. Parks, Chief of JPl. Guidance Control Division. ty Associate Administrator for Planning, Dr, Wernher von Braun held press conference on NASA planning procedures: Skylab program would consist of four flights. First would be an unmanned flight boosted by two-stage Saturn V—only first and second stage, with third stage replaced by orbital workshop, now called Skylab. “It will be this country’s first orbital space station. Attached to this Skylab is an airlock module, and a multiple docking adapter, to which arriving command and service modules can dock for crew exchange. And ajso attached to it is the ATM.. .a manned solar observatory that will be serviced by the people living in the Skylab. One day after this Skylab has been launched into orbit and has deployed its solar panels, both on the ATM and the Skylab itself, it will be visited by a Saturn IB-launched command and service module, bringing the first crew complement of three. The command module will dock to the multiple docking adapter, the crew will slip through the docking adapter and the airlock, into the workshop. . . . And the men will stay up there for 28 days.” Crew would then “crawl back into their command module, detach.. .use the service module to deboost themselves, and the command module will reenter the ocean and make a normal Apollo landing. “About three months after the first flight, another flight will go up, and this time the crew stay.. .will be extended to 56 days. ... And finally, there will be a third revisit, again of 56 days, after which the third crew will descend. The Skylab will then go into storage and can potentially be reactivated any time thereafter if more revisits are planned.” Even without budget restraints, it would be “something like 1977 before we could have a [space] shuttle flying.” NASA was “in continuous touch with the Air Force” in space shuttle and space station field. “The armed forces. . .have the duty to look into everything that may have a defense aspect; and so it is entirely proper that they want to understand the ramifications of space.” (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, discussed future ofU.S. space program on abc program “Issues and Answers.” Dr. Paine said he did not anticipate further cutbacks in NASA personnel and facilities. “In my opinion we have slimmed down the NASA base to the point where we now have something which I would expect to see extended throughout the seventies and eighties.” He was “quite optimistic about the future of the space agency.” Dr. von Braun said “in the long haul” U.S. could not compete with U.S.S.R. at $3.333-billion budget level. It was obvious “that we are ahead in some areas,” but U.S.S.R. was probably ahead in space station field. (NASA Special Ann, 3/11/70; SBD, 3/17/70, 76)
Stages in development of Soviet space stations were described by Boris Petrov in Soviet Academy of Sciences journal Vestnik Akade-mii Nauk SSSR: “First.. .small stations. . .with three to twelve men, with a period of existence of from one month to a year or slightly longer, will be put into circumterrestrial orbit. ... Well elaborated and tested compartments of space vehicles and individual stages of carrier rockets will be used as the main units of those stations.” Orbital stations could be orbited in assembled state by carrier rockets or in parts, with one or two dockings. Station crew could be delivered by transport space vehicle and crews exchanged. One of main tasks of stations would be medical and biological experiments. Orbital stations would be created “of block design, assembled in circumterrestrial orbit in parts,” with maximum 10-yr life and 12- to 20-member crew. Petrov saw advisability “of very large multipurpose orbital base stations” for crews of 50 to 70 and, ultimately 100 to 120. U.S.S.R. had in view not simply space station but system of space stations. (AF Mag, 6/71,54-9) November I: Nixon Administration was “moving to make the hydraheaded Federal science and technology apparatus more responsive to the nation’s needs,” New York Times reported. New effort, to be tested in early 1971, would identify priorities in science and technology and weigh them to determine “where they will rank in the struggle for Federal dollars.” oSTand nsf officials had said in interviews that they were determined to bring better order into system of Federal research agencies. Reorganization efforts would focus on $14-billion-a-year r&d programs to translate scientific knowledge into better housing, mass transportation, cleaner air, and “healthier people.” Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, had emphasized that pure and basic research, currently allotted $2 billion per year, would be specifically exempted from reorganization. Current r&d budget was lowest in five fiscal years and smallest in decade in terms of constant dollars. (Lyons, NYT, 11/1/70, 1)
NASA manned earth-orbital experiment program for next decade was discussed during meeting of more than 150 Government and industry scientists and engineers at msfc. Purpose of conference was to discuss changes to planning document Reference Earth Orbital Research and Applications Investigations. NASA used book as primary source of experiment program data for continuing space station studies, research and applications module studies, and other manned space flight planning activities. General Dynamics Corp. had NASA contract to update book. (MSFC Release 70-252)
Budget limits had caused cancellation of one lunar landing and stretchout of remaining seven Apollo missions into 1974, Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in interview following LSI dedication in Houston, Tex. Eighth lunar landing had been dropped to permit use of Saturn V rocket to launch first U.S. space station in July 1972. (UPI, NYT, 1/5/70, 1)
North American Rockwell Corp. had begun testing world’s largest known rotational machine under NASA contract to evaluate human performance in rotating environment, New York Times reported. Four-man crew would live in machine for one week and perform mechanical chores and decision-reaction tests in LaRC study, to approximate conditions in space stations of late 1970s. Bulletshaped crew module 12 m (40 ft) long rotated at 4 rpm, which was best approximation of space station obtainable, according to NR Program Manager, Dr. James A. Green. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/70)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Four major research directorates were established at LaRC: Aeronautics, directed by Laurence K. Loftin, Jr.; Space, directed by Clifford H. Nelson; Electronics, directed by George B. Groves, Jr.; and Structures, directed by Dr. George W. Brooks. Supporting Centerwide directorates were established in Systems Engineering and Operation, directed by Percy J. Crain; Administration, directed by T. Melvin Butler; and Center Development, directed by Eugene C. Draley. Reorganization was to implement goals outlined in staff meeting by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright: expanded aeronautics program with increased emphasis on civil aircraft, new era of manned space flight with permanent space stations supplied by reusable space shuttles, planetary exploration, and maintenance of NASA’s basic research skills. (Langley Researcher, 10/2/70,1)
Thomas O’Toole reported in Washington Post that NASA was considering canceling three of six remaining Apollo lunar landing missions so it could use Saturn V boosters to orbit Skylab space station. Although firm decision had not yet been made, NASA had “undertaken a top priority study to see if it might be feasible to cancel . . .the landings to divert funds into. . .an ‘intermediate’ space station that could be launched in 1976.” (W Post, 7/9/70, A12)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine’s resignation as NASA Administrator became effective. He was honored at Bolling afb reception and testimonial dinner given by Dr. George M. Low, who would be Acting Administrator until appointment of successor. Dr. Paine told guests he believed requirements of U.S. space program “are not understood at the highest level of our official life” and said he was confident NASA budget would be approved despite President’s Aug. 11 veto of Independent Offices and HUD appropriations bill. U.S., he said, “must be the first nation to put in the first skylab and space stations. We must look to the post-dog-sled era of lunar exploration and develop a more permanent type of lunar exploration.” Dr. Paine warned that NASA must “face the reality that in the 70s the Soviet Union will attempt to overtake us. ... We will be tested against a strong and vigorous Soviet program.” U.S. had “held out the olive branch.. .but if the cold war is extended into space, then NASA will be ready to meet any threat that may develop in space.” According to Washington Evening Star, it was first time Dr. Paine had publicly cited threat of Soviet military supremacy in space. Later, in interview following dinner, Dr. Paine said he meant NASA’s charge was to keep U.S. in forefront of space technology and to be ready to hand that technology to dod if required. He believed defense against icbm might yet be space-based. If so, NASA should be in technologically superior position because of space station, shuttle, and other concepts. (W Star, 9/16/ 70, B8, C7)
msfc Advanced Systems Analysis Office was investigating possible uses of space tug, multipurpose vehicle to be developed simultaneously with larger space shuttle, msfc announced. Only space vehicle that would work with and connect all existing and future vehicles and systems, tug would first be used as link between space shuttle and space station to taxi cargo and passengers in earth orbit. Both msfc and msc were working to develop space tug plans, (msfc Release 70-102)
U.S. manned space flight program would continue on schedule despite Soyuz 11 tragedy, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, told press in Houston. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, said cosmonauts could have been killed by a toxic gas that accidently escaped, either by a chemical reaction or by a substance being heated inadvertently. He said odds were 1000 to 1 against one cosmonaut dying from effects of 24 days of weightlessness and it was almost impossible for all three to die simultaneously from weightlessness. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told press cosmonauts’ deaths might have been caused by failure of spacecraft’s oxygen-supply system or by physical rupture of spacecraft. Deaths, he said, were “a terrible tragedy. They were pioneers in their achievements in space—in establishing the first manned space station. Our hearts go out to their families and to their colleagues. The cause of their death is not yet known to us. But I would speculate that the fault was with the spacecraft and not with the men. In all of our experience man has readily adapted to new conditions, while machines have sometimes failed.” Dr. Low said he did not expect changes in nasa’s Skylab program because of cosmonauts’ deaths: “All of our experience in 24 manned flights suggests we can and should move ahead.” (upx, W Star, 7/1/71, A3; NASA Activities, 7/15/71, 107)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
Boris Petrov, chairman of Soviet Intercosmos Scientific Council on Space, said in Pravda that deaths of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts would not halt U.S.S.R.’s manned orbital space station: “New flights into space, the building of new manned orbital stations of the Salyut type, lie ahead. Undoubtedly, larger and more complex multipurpose and specialized manned space stations will be built. One can say with confidence that the 1970s will become an epoch of the development and broad use of long-term manned orbital stations with changing crews which will make it possible to switch from occasional experiments in space to a regular vigil by scientists and experts in space laboratories.” (upi, NY News, 7/5/71, 7)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced retirement of Director of Program Management Lee B. James, effective May 31. James, who would return to academic community, would be replaced in acting capacity by James T. Shepherd, Deputy Director (Technical), Program Management. (msfc Release 71—77) During April: nasa issued Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific and Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1970—1972: Annual Report to The National Science Foundation. In FY 1972 budget, NASA was seeking authorization of $3,271 billion. Effect on programs would be: Funds for basic research would remain at FY 1970 level in FY 1971 and rise in FY 1972, reflecting increased funding for Viking and initiation of outer planets Grand Tour project. In applied research, estimates for FY 1971 reflected 10% increase over 1970 and slight increase in FY 1972, primarily for earth resources surveys and space station. Budget authority for development activities would decline in 1971 and 1972, primarily as result of completion of Apollo program and reduction in nasa—aec nerva program effort, r&d funds were requested in FY 1972 for space shuttle technology and engine development facilities. (Text)
First detailed Soviet analysis of U.S. plan for Grand Tour of outer planets was reported by New York Times. In Vestnik, principal publication of Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet space expert Timur M. Eneyev had suggested that four missions covering two planets each might be more successful than the two missions to three planets contemplated by NASA. He indicated Soviet scientists favored approach of delivering automatic space stations to outer planets and suspending them by balloons in planetary atmosphere. He said technique, “for all its exotic aspects and difficulties of realization, is probably the most promising because it would yield far more data about the nature of the giant planets than could be obtained from fly-by trajectories.” (Shabad, NYT, 5/9/71)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of gsfc Institute for Space Studies, was quoted as saying in London that people often forgot intelligence factor in debate over manned versus unmanned space missions. Dr. Jastrow had pointed out that by time unmanned space exploration technology reached level of achievement already exhibited in manned exploration, lunar exploration—or even Martian exploration—might have advanced to stage of extended expeditions or space station. Then human performance would again have jumped ahead of machines. (Cowen, CSM, 2/11/71)
U.S.S.R. was “clearly a big jump ahead” of U.S. in “post-moon race operations,” Detroit News editorial said. “Credit must be given the Russians for having the shrewdness to go all out for orbital space stations when they realized, as they must have done before Armstrong and Aldrin landed on the moon . . . that they were sure to lose the moon race. We shall have to watch for a few years because the decision has been made to slash the space budget.” (Detroit News, 4/25/71, 4M)
nasa announced it was requesting proposals from potential U.S. and foreign experimenters for investigations of data to be acquired from earth resources experiment package (erep) to fly on manned Skylab spacecraft in late 1972. Data would be used to appraise value and direct applications of space observations in agriculture, geography, forestry, geology, hydrology, oceanography, and cartography. Objectives of erep were to extend use of sensors; use man to observe, discriminate, and select study areas; and provide early source of unique research data for analysis. Three-man experimental space station would be manned by three different crews for total five months during eight-month mission in circular orbit of 435 km (270 mi) with 50° inclination. Astronauts would investigate solar astronomy, space medicine, space physics, bioscience, and material processing in addition to operating erep sensors, including six high-precision, 70-mm cameras, infrared spectrometer, multispectral scanner, microwave radiometer/ scatterometer and altimeter, and passive radiometer, (nasa Release 71-5)
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
Milwaukee Journal editorial on Apollo 14 commented: “The real return on Apollo lies in the future—beyond the more difficult missions of flights 15, 16 and 17. It is in Skylab, reusable space shuttles and sophisticated space stations to come. It is in the complex monitoring of the earth and its resources from space. It is in the co-operation and internationalization of space programs that appear to be developing—hopefully to replace competition. Here is the payoff. To this Apollo 14 and its crew have made their extraordinary contribution.” (MJ, 2/10/71)
Office of Management and Budget had released $98.1 million in FY 1972 funds voted for science education and institutional support, while impounding $30 million, Aviation Week & Space Technology noted. “The 25% holdback of funding at the basic science level is considered by some in Congress as highly destructive because it will tend to reduce the number of future scientists.” It was viewed as “direct contradiction of the pro-science policy they have been led to anticipate.” (Av Wk, 9/20/71, 15) Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott told opening session that analysis of 2.7-m (9-ft) Apollo 15 lunar core sample had disclosed 58 distinct layers that represented 58 “chapters in the history of the sun.” Number of “pages in each chapter” awaited further analysis. Later Scott said in interview that Dr. Liaquat Husain, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientist who had analyzed Apollo 15 “Genesis” rock, was concerned that alteration of rock by shock when it impacted with site at which it was found might have partly invalidated determination of rock’s age at 4.15 billion yrs. arc engineer John C. Arvesen described development of method for monitoring biological productivity from air by detecting signs of chlorophyll. Monitoring device, when tested over California lakes and offshore areas, had produced results that conformed closely to readings obtained by arduous direct sampling of waters. Ultimate goal was to develop satellite-borne system that could monitor global productivity of oceans. Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said newly completed studies of medical data from Apollo 14 had shown radiation exposure to crew that was more than twice that of previous Apollo missions. Primary reason for higher exposure was passage of Apollo 14 spacecraft close to Van Allen radiation belts. Dr. Berry said radiation dose was “of no hazard or biological significance.” Soviet scientists said later that cosmonauts carried special antiradiation drug on all space flights but had never used it. Dr. Berry said Apollo 14 Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had lost 27% of fluid within his body cells during mission. His total body water had dropped 18% and red cells in his bloodstream had decreased 9%. Losses had been far less for other Apollo 14 astronauts and no such dramatic losses had been recorded for Apollo 15 astronauts, indicating that individual responses to space varied widely. Heavy loss of “exchangeable” potassium had been noted in astronauts during extended missions. On Apollo 15, loss had been as great as 15%. Potassium was deemed exchangeable because it could move readily in and out of tissues and thus could be purged from body. E. G. Johnson, Equipment and Facilities Branch Chief in NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office, described program for development of teleoperator systems in which remote-controlled devices could perform tasks in situations dangerous to health or safety of humans. In space, teleoperator could enter high radiation environment of space station’s nuclear power plant to change fuel elements or make repairs. Johnson said optical or radioastronomy observatory on moon’s far side could be run for 40 to 50 yrs using computer-controlled teleoperators whose control could be assumed from earth when necessary. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium was held during iaf congress. Sessions discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries in regard to earth resources research. iaa Fifth History of Astronautics Symposium on Sept. 23 was chaired by JPL Historian R. Cargill Hall. Soviet Cochairman V. N. Sokolsky did not attend for unexplained reason. Papers read included “From the History of the Development of Powder Rockets in the U.S.S.R.,” by Soviet Academician Yu A. Pobedonostsev, which traced work on Soviet solid propellants leading to Katyusha rocket in current use; “Comparative Analysis of Projects for Jet Planes Constructed up to the 1940’s,” by V. N, Sokolsky; “Evolution of Spacecraft Attitude Control Concepts before 1951,” by R. E. Robertson of Univ. of California at San Diego; and “Memoir: The Evolution of Aerospace Guidance Technology at M.I.T., 1935-1951,” by Dr. C. Stark Draper. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium, held during Congress, discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award was presented to Professor Luigi Broglio of Univ. of Rome for achievements in experiments with floating platforms to launch satellites into equatorial orbits. Only cosmonaut attending IAF Congress was Boris B. Yegorov, only physician to travel in space (launched in Voskhod 1 Oct. 12, 1964). (iaa Annual Rpt 1971; Sullivan, NYT, 9/21/71, 9/23/71, 9/27/71; Proceedings)
Three aerospace teams, including seven European firms interested in support roles, submitted proposals to msfc on preliminary design of research and applications module (ram) proposed for space shuttle and space station. Proposals were submitted by McDonnell Douglas Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and General Electric Co. Team headed by General Dynamics would include matra of France, erno of Germany, SAAB of Sweden, Hawker Siddeley of U.K., and Fiat of Italy. General Electric team would include Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm of Germany and Thompson-CSF of France, (msfc Release 71—10)
Newsweek commented on “shrinking space shuttle.” U.S. space program had been “hit with another budgetary broadside.” Space shuttle to service planned space station “will get no more than a third of the money its designers insist they need to build it.” Original request for $300 million had been cut by NASA to $225 million. “Now White House budgeteers have shrunk it to $105 million—and it has yet to face the anti-technology faction in Congress.” (Newsweek, 1/25/71)
TRW Inc. would develop conceptual designs for manned research laboratory to support communications and navigation experiments under 10-mo, $288 000 contract, msfc announced. Study assumed laboratory would be launched in 1980s and could be flown as research and applications module or as segment of orbiting space station, (msfc Release 71-108)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) on Senate floor questioned need for space shuttle and space station: “I have written to NASA on a number of occasions to ask whether . . . there is a need for the space shuttle-space station. All nasa has told me in reply is that first, the shuttle would enable us to continue to have an active space program, and second, it would reduce the costs of the space program. But why do we actually need it? What would it help us to accomplish that we could not otherwise accomplish? NASA seemingly has no answer to these questions.” (CR, 5/26/71, S7811—2)
Electrical power development for space was summarized by aiaa Electric Power Systems Committee in Astronautics & Aeronautics article: “Batteries have continued to be employed beyond Explorer I for either primary power or as an element of power subsystem. Silver-zinc batteries provided 13.5 kilowatt-hours (Kwh) of electrical energy for the Mercury spacecraft, up to 63 Kwh for the early Geminis, and 65 Kwh for the Apollo Lunar Module. Specific energies have advanced to 90 watt-hours per pound (wh/lb) [198 wh per kg] in unmanned Agena vehicles. The continuing flight dependence on batteries was dramatically illustrated by the rescue phase of the Apollo-13 mission, which used the lm batteries for power after the failure of the cryogenic supply of the Service Module fuel cell system. Undoubtedly, batteries will remain a vital independent power source in manned missions and perhaps unmanned missions for many years.” Committee recommended that “competitiveness of the isotope and reactor systems for powers in the tens of kilowatts be encouraged rather than inhibited and that the technology programs for both be kept viable,” felt “that achieving acceptance of a reactor power system for manned Earth-orbiting missions presents a major challenge to the power community in the 1970s,” and criticized lack of resources “to pursue effectively all of the advanced reactor power-system options that have been carried along most of the 1960s.” (A&A, 8/71, 22-30)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had selected msfc to integrate two proposed earth orbital projects, space station and research and applications modules (ram), by supervising definition, design, and verification of design concepts, msfc announced. Development of space station would follow development of space shuttle, ram was family of space payload carrier modules to be delivered to earth orbit by shuttle, (msfc Release 71—118)
U.S.S.R. was “showing signs of an accelerated effort” in space “stretching far beyond the implications of last month’s start on an orbiting space station,” Aviation Week & Space Technology said. “Latest analysis of orbital changes achieved by Cosmos 382, launched by a Proton booster . . . last fall . . . shows that the large unmanned satellite was moved once at an acceleration corresponding precisely to that required for lunar orbit insertion and once at exactly the velocity change needed for trans-earth injection.” (Av Wk, 5/3/71, 13)
Major Soviet space station project included “powerful new launch vehicle in the class of America’s Saturn 5,” Kenneth Gatland said in New Scientist and Science Journal article. Prototype had been destroyed by fire in 1969 while undergoing static test on launch pad at Baykonur, he reported. (New Sci & Sci J, 4/29/71, 256-7)
New York Times editorial commented on Soyuz-Salyut mission: “The latest Soviet spade spectacular follows a long series of indications by Kremlin leaders that their present priority in manned space flight is establishment of a long-lasting station in space. This latest experiment seems an important—as well as expensive—step on the road toward that objective.” But there was no guarantee that space stations would be restricted to benign purposes. “Logically, there should be no national space stations in space. All such facilities should be operated by the United Nations employing crews from many nations and they should all be open to appropriate international inspection.” Principle had been recognized in Antarctic “where the presence of Soviet scientists in American bases and American scientists in Soviet bases has a long, useful and honorable history. With the latest Soyuz and Salyut vehicles in orbit, the sensitive issues raised by space stations must be faced in the nearest future.” (NYT, 4/24/71)
Future space shuttle missions were described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in speech before South Carolina Lions Clubs in Greenville, S.C.: “These payloads cover the areas of space physics, astronomy, space applications, life sciences, unmanned planetary exploration, and earth resources, military and commercial.” Payloads ranged from 113-kg (250-lb) Explorer and Space Physics Satellites to 9100-kg (20 000-lb) astronomy mission “requiring annual revisits by the shuttle for servicing maintenance and updating of instrumentation.” Sortie flights conducted solely by shuttle could be made within its seven-day orbit capability. Scientist could “conduct his own experiment in the orbiting shuttle and return with the data as well as his own observations. When the space station becomes operational, crew rescue missions could also be flown.” (Text)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, described future benefit of space program spinoff in Parade article on applications of space technology to social problems. “On the 1973 flights in the Skylab experimental space station, a medical doctor will go into space with the astronauts. He will carry out a comprehensive program of experiments ... to establish how well men live and work in weightless conditions in an enclosed space as big as a three-bedroom house.” With data obtained, space benefits could be achieved in a few years and made available to people everywhere. (Parade, 12/5/71, 8, 12)
NASA announced assignment of Robert 0. Aller, Manager of Space Station Operations, Space Station Task Force for omsf, to Skylab Program Office as Director of Operations. Aller would be responsible for coordination and development of operationally related program and mission planning activities, (nasa Hq WB )
Univ. of Toronto had announced discovery by astronomer Dr. Sidney Van Den Bergh of three galaxies composed of thousands of stars, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 11/12/71, A36) First photos were obscured by dust storm but before end of month Mariner 9 had shown that Mars bulged at equator, was “rougher gravitationally” than expected, and probably had wide variety of rock compositions; instruments had detected small amounts of water vapor at south pole and warmer air pockets above pole [see Nov. 16-23]. Spacecraft also made man’s first close photo of potato-shaped Martian moon Deimos [see Nov. 26—27] and photos of moon Phobos [see Nov. 29-30]. First Mariner photos from orbit were broadcast live by national TV network, but detail was limited by dust storms that had raged on surface since September. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, jpl project scientist, said “We’re hopeful that as the storm dies down we can get some good pictures of the dust settling to the surface. This is an unprecedented chance to watch changes in the Martian weather.” He said that if cameras worked properly pictures would be 1000 times better than any earthbound telescopes had taken. On Nov. 14 spacecraft transmitted three sequences of TV pictures. Of more than 60 photos returned, only seven revealed surface features. Dust storm continued and atmospheric experts could see no sign of abatement. Dust obscuring planet was apparently very fine sand which high winds pushed to height of as much as 16 km (10 mi) above surface. On fourth orbit spacecraft successfully completed orbit trim maneuver at 9:44 pm est Nov. 15. Maneuver changed orbital period of spacecraft to make it synchronous with Mars viewing period of Deep Space Station antenna at Goldstone, Calif. New orbital parameters were 1394-km (866.2-mi) periapsis altitude, 11-hr 57-min 12-sec period, and 64.34° inclination. Data from remote-sensing instruments confirmed earlier observations that carbon dioxide was major constituent of Martian atmosphere and also suggested possibility of “hot spots” on planet. Dr. Ellis D. Miner of JPL said sensor detected average temperature rise of 6.7 K (12°F) in area 24 km (15 mi) square below Mars equator. Temperature rise might indicate hole in cloud cover exposing mountain peak or plateau reflecting residual heat or evidence of internal source of heat on Mars, uv spectrometer data indicated dust storm was made up of fairly coarse-grained, sandlike particles, (nasa Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, ll/14r-16/71; O’Toole, W Post, ll/14r-15/71; W Star, 11/16/71, A4)
nasa press conference at msc summarized June 21-25 U.S — U.S.S.R. discussions on joint space docking. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director and head of NASA delegation to discussions, said talks had been friendly throughout. “It was a period of hard work covering very difficult technical areas.” Meetings had been successful “in reaching conclusions, in principle, on all these subjects that we discussed, and in some detail in several of the subjects.” Need had been felt by both sides for “possibility of flight studies to test the technical requirements for docking and rendezvous, . . . one that would use the actual kind of compatible . . . equipment” that would make possible space rescue from spacecraft of either side that might be in trouble. U.S. and Soviet CMS and space stations with mixed crews could orbit earth within four years. Soviet crews and U.S. crews “would no doubt, if they docked, . . . want to open the hatches and visit with one another.” Dr. Gilruth said flight test might take place in mid-70s. (Transcript)
John C. Lindsay Memorial Award for 1971 was presented to Harry E. Peters of gsfc Laser Data Systems Branch during gsfc Scientific Colloquium. Award, given annually to gsfc employee who had made outstanding contribution to science or technology, was presented for individual contributions to the advancement of hydrogen maser frequency standards resulting in most stable frequency standards known and making possible dramatic improvement in space tracking and system precision. (Goddard News, 6/14/71, 1) Orbital parameters for Soyuz 11 were apogee, 237 km (147.3 mi); perigee, 163 km (101.3 mi); period, 88.4 min; and inclination, 51.5°. Spacecraft docked with Salyut 1 at 10:45 am Moscow time (3:45 am edt) June 7. Tass announcement said: “In accordance with the Soviet programme of creating long-term orbital stations, the ‘Salyut’ orbital scientific station has started to function as the first piloted scientific station. . . . After successfully docking the Soyuz-11 transport spaceship with the scientific station . . . the crew of Soyuz-11 entered the scientific station. Solved for the first time was the engineering and technical task of delivering a crew to an orbiting scientific station by a transport ship.” Tass said Salyut-Soyuz space system was 20 m (66 ft) long, weighed more than 25 tons, and consisted of compartments containing equipment for scientific and technical experiments, for spacecraft control, and for crew work and rest. Cosmonauts would check out spacecraft subsystems; test orientation and navigation equipment; study geological-geographical objects on earth’s surface, atmospheric formations, and snow and ice cover; study physical characteristics, processes, and phenomena in atmosphere and outer space; and study medico-biological influence of space flight factors on human organism. Cosmonauts checked out systems, conducted experiments, and sent messages of thanks to scientists, engineers, and workers who took part in creation of space station system. TV transmissions showed crew performing duties in spacecraft. After one week in orbit, crew was in good health and had completed first phase of experiments with all systems functioning normally. Crew was allowed one-day rest before continuing experiments. By 1:00 pm Moscow time (6:00 am edt) June 13 Salyut-Soyuz station had completed 100 orbits of earth. Cosmonauts continued to follow preplanned program of work, rest, and two hours of exercise per day and reported they were in good health. Experiments included communications with ground via orbiting Molniya I comsat, astronomical observations, medical experiments, observation of cyclone in Pacific near Japan, and experiments with plants in hothouse on board. They reared tadpoles into frogs and grew cabbages and onions. By 12:00 noon Moscow time (5:00 am edt) June 22 station had completed 245 orbits of earth. Station completed 18th day in orbit June 24, surpassing 17-day 17-hr endurance record set by Soyuz 9 June 2—19,1970. On June 29 cosmonauts completed flight program and prepared for reentry. Crew transferred equipment to Soyuz 11 and undocked from Salyut 1 at 9:28 pm Moscow time (2:28 pm edt). Crew reported successful undocking and said all systems were functioning normally. At 1:35 am Moscow time June 30 (6:35 pm edt June 29) spacecraft’s braking engine was fired for prescheduled period. At end of engine firing communication with Soyuz 11 crew ceased. Tass said: “According to the program, after aerodynamic braking in the atmosphere the parachute system was put into action and before landing—the soft-landing engines were fired. The flight of the descending apparatus ended in a smooth landing in the pre-set area. Landing simultaneously with the ship, a helicopter-borne recovery group, upon opening .the hatch, found the crew ... in their seats, without any signs of life. The causes of the crew’s death are being investigated.” (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71; fbis-Sov-71-109-126, 6/7-30/71; Newsweek, 7/12/71)
Saturn IB stage for Skylab 2 arrived at Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Orion. Saturn IB would launch command and service module to join orbiting Skylab Workshop day after Workshop launch as Skylab 1 in 1973. Stage would Be processed in Vehicle Assembly Building and would be erected on Mobile Launcher Aug. 31 at ksc. Arrival of stage marked first time in nearly four years that a Saturn IB had been in processing at ksc and first time vehicle would undergo flight preparation in Vab. Last mission for a Saturn IB was Apollo 7 earth-orbital mission Oct. 11, 1968. (ksc Release 246-72)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
Dismantling of Saturn Launch Complexes 34 and 37, sites of Saturn I and IB launches at start of Apollo program, was begun at Kennedy Space Center by Southern Contractors Service. Firm had hid $15 051 for structures built at cost of $147 990 581. Dismantling would he completed within seven months. NASA spokesman had said total of $53 856 403 had been saved in equipment and structures from complexes, “one of the highest returns ever” for such a program. NASA Centers would receive salvaged equipment for active programs. Equipment valued at $5 891 866 would he given to Atomic Energy Commission; Depts. of Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; and universities with Government research grants. Launch control rooms in Launch Complex 34 and 37 blockhouses would be retained in launch configuration for historical and public information purposes. Historical marker outside would inform visitors of past events. Seven Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Complex 34 culminating in Apollo 7, first manned command and service module launch, Oct. 11, 1968. Complex also had been scene of tragic Jan. 27, 1967, fire that took lives of three astronauts. Eight Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Pad 37B, terminating with Apollo 5, first Apollo lunar module launch, Jan. 22, 1968. (M Her, 4/29/72; ksc Release 88-72; ksc Hist Off; ksc memo to NASA Hist Off)
New York Times editorial commented on data returned by Soviet Venus 8 probe, which had landed capsule on Venus July 22: “Since the first Sputnik went into orbit a decade and a half ago, the world has seen so many major accomplishments in space by both the Soviet Union and the United States that the original sense of wonder has been largely lost. Yet even in today’s jaded atmosphere, it must be recognized that what the Soviet scientists accomplished with Venus 8 was one of the great technological accomplishments of the age. The scientists and technicians responsible for this great feat deserve the world’s congratulations. It is self-evident that this work needs to be continued with respect to other planets . . . and that it can be done by international cooperation.” (NYT, 9/13/72, 42) September 13—15:	First national conference on remotely manned systems was held at- Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Stanley Deutsch of NASA Office of Life Sciences said in keynote address that usefulness of remotely controlled machines was “virtually limitless” both in space and on earth. “Using a remote system to scout Mars in advance of manned missions will enhance the safety of the man when we do send him to Mars.” Remotely controlled systems also could be used in future to rescue and return an incapacitated astronaut and provide a method for capturing unstable satellites. Remotely controlled systems technology developed for space was also being applied to nonspace applications such as Navy undersea manipulators, Air Force and Army remotely piloted aircraft, handling material in radiation laboratories, industrial safety, mining, medicine and hospitals, police work, and fire fighting. Dr. Ewald Heer of Jpl’s Advanced Technical Studies Div. said “intelligence” of automated systems would have to be increased greatly to ensure success of future earth orbital and planetary satellites. “Remotely manned systems are man-machine system® that augment and extend man’s sensory, manipulative and intellectual capabilities to remote places. However while machines may have superior strength and endurance and resistance to hostile environments, they still depend on human intelligence for decision-making in the performance of complicated tasks. Advanced engineering automation is essential in space station and shuttle operations and scientific data gathering must be microminiaturized for sustained interplanetary operations of two or more years.” (jpl Releases 625, 626; Swain, Pasadena Star-News, 9/14/72) September 14:	Senate approved U.S.-U.S.S.R. Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic Arms by vote of 88 to 2. Agreement was passed after adoption of amendment proposed by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) that urged President Nixon to seek future treaty which would not limit U.S. to levels of intercontinental strategic forces inferior to limits provided to U.S.S.R. (CR, 9/14/72, S14859, S14868-14913)
NASA had spent $800 000 on North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. study and design of system to permit rendezvous and docking of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in orbit, Associated Press reported. Study envisioned 14-day mission with Apollo command and service module linking special docking module with Salyut orbiting laboratory and Soyuz command spacecraft. NR had received $300 000 for method study and $500 000 for hardware design. No contract had been issued for hardware. (CSM, 2/19/72) February 20:	Tenth anniversary of Friendship 7 mission, first U.S. manned orbital space flight. Piloted by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., Friendship 7 had circled earth three times during 4-hr 55-min mission. Since Glenn’s flight—which was third U.S. manned space flight and sixth flight in Project Mercury—30 U.S. astronauts had flown in space total of 7700 hrs, 51 min—nearly 46 wks. Anniversary was observed at Kennedy Space Center Feb. 22, with 3000 guests and dignitaries invited to attend ceremony at Launch Complex 14, where commemorative plaque was unveiled. Glenn said space flight was “not a pleasure cruise for an individual. It’s research at the highest level and it is difficult to tell where it will go from here.” (ksc Release 37—72; B Sun, 2/23/72)
Skylab crew press conference, with prime and backup crewmen, was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said preparations were on schedule for April 1973 launch. Contractor checkouts and tests of hardware were expected to be completed for delivery to Kennedy Space Center in July. Skylab would carry some 20 000 pieces of stowage equipment on board to provide life support for nine men for 140 days. “So it all goes up at one time, and we’ve got a great deal of work to do, not only to learn how to operate this vehicle but also all the experiments in it. It became apparent that we could not be 100 percent cross-trained as we had been in Apollo, so we’ve . . . defined some areas for each guy to become expert in ... . That allowed us to balance out the training hours. Right now ... we have some 2000 training hours per man defined. We’ve been working on the basic training for the past year.” Training hardware would be available about February 1. Commander would have overall responsibility for mission and would be command and service module expert. Science pilot would be expert in all medical equipment and in Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) and its associated hardware. Pilot would be expert in Orbital Workshop systems and electrical systems. Remaining experiments would be divided among crewmembers according to availability and choice. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said photographic data returned from Skylab would be “far superior” to previous data because actual film would be returned to earth. To return film, crews would conduct two extravehicular activities (eyas) on first mission, three on second, and two on third. “We’re going to be moving . . . 240 pounds [109 kg] worth of film, in canisters, magazines, in and out of the cameras. We’ll have to remove the used exposed film and replace it with new film. It’s going to take about 3 hours.” Experiments were described by Astronaut Gerald P. Carr. They included EREP earth resources experiment containing five sensors to calibrate earth’s atmosphere, corollary experiments submitted by high school students, engineering experiments to study effects of zero g on metal alloys and flammability of certain items, habitability experiments to study noise levels and atmospheric composition, and scientific experiments. Scientific experiments would include studies of effect of zero g on single human cells, studies of circadian rhythm of pocket mice and vinegar gnats, ultraviolet stellar astronomy and x-ray astronomy. Technological experiments would include crew vehicle disturbances, manual navigation sightings, and “a study of the little contamination cloud that we carry around with us . . . kind of like Pigpen in Peanuts.” In response to question on illness during missions, Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin said NASA would provide equipment and training on board to take care of most illnesses and injuries that could be handled in a doctor’s office. Science pilot would be able to provide emergency care for illnesses “up to and including quite severe. We have quite a package of drugs on board, administrable by all routes; we have tracheotomy equipment and equipment for maintaining an airway for stopping bleeding. We are attempting to develop in time for the flight intravenous fluids. We feel that, almost regardless of the severity of the injury, we will at least be able to stabilize the patient.” (Transcript)
NASA and National Science Teachers Assn, (nsta) announced approval of experiments proposed by 19 high school students from 16 states for Skylab space station. Experimenters were from 25 finalists selected from 3409 proposals submitted to NASA by U.S. secondary school students as part of Skylab Student Project. Six other finalists could not be accommodated because of Skylab performance requirements and schedule constraints. Medallions would he awarded to finalists, sponsors, and schools during Skylab Educational Conference at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time, (nasa Release 72—146)
Col. H. J. Odenthal (usaf, Ret.), pioneer airman who once assisted in rescue of Orville Wright after his aircraft had crashed, died at age 84. Col. Odenthal had helped organize Signal Corps air photographic and mapping division and had been awarded Croix de Guerre for his mapping flights in France during World War I. (Barker, W Post, 1/23/72, B16) January 22—25:	Intelsat-IV F—4 comsat was launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat) . Launched from Eastern Test Range at 7:12 pm est by Atlas-Centaur booster, satellite entered elliptical transfer orbit with 36 523-km (22 694.3-mi) apogee, 5984-km (3718.3-mi) perigee, and 28.2° inclination. Primary objective was to place satellite in transfer orbit accurate enough for onboard propulsion systems to transfer it to planned synchronous orbit for commercial communications over Pacific. Apogee-kick motor was fired at 7:32 pm est Jan. 24 and Intelsat-IV F—4 entered circular orbit with 35 787-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 25 625km (22 136.4-mi) perigee, 23-hr 52-min period, and 0.7° inclination over Pacific at 165° east longitude. It would drift 1.1° per day to reach station at 174° east longitude in early February. Satellite’s first major mission would be coverage of President Nixon’s visit to People’s Republic of China in February.	, Intelsat-IV F-4 was third comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1402 kg (3090 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000—9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F-3 had been launched Dec. 19, 1971, and was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; nasa Release 72-16) January 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA plans for continuing fruitful space program in interview published by Christian Science Monitor: “For the next few years, we may have fewer of the more spectacular explorational missions .... We will focus more on . . . communications satellites, weather satellites, earth resources survey satellites.” Next Applications Technology Satellite (ats) would demonstrate direct TV broadcasting in region of Rockies and Alaska, using large satellite with big antenna that could beam programs directly to augmented receivers in individual homes. Demonstration—-in cooperation with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare—would work through educational network rather than directly to homes, however. Comsats were “not quite so exciting an aspect of space technology” in U.S. but, “worldwide, there has been more interest in this than in almost any other aspect of our program.” Interest equaled that of ERT satellite. “Countries with vigorous mineral exploitation and agricultural development are interested in ERT satellites .... Countries with underdeveloped communications and education, such as India, are keenly interested in the broadcasting satellites.” In weather satellite field, new sophisticated instruments “give hope that we can get a really world weather observing network going.” Infrared sensors, microwave sensors, and high-resolution optics that obtained temperature profiles throughout atmosphere by looking “through holes in cloud systems” should help “to get points all over the globe where we now get only pieces of the picture.” NASA would try processing materials in zero g during Skylab program. “If it works with men doing it, there are cheaper ways we could do it without men. It may be one of those things that will be worth doing when we can get routine access to space with the shuttle.” In response to question, Dr. Fletcher said second Skylab would be “a very good thing for the country. But I’m not sure the budget needed for both a Skylab and the shuttle would be salable. The shuttle is more important in the long run. Not to do more of the Skylab sort of thing will be bad for prestige. The Russians will be doing much more than we will. I’m sure there will be criticism from Congress and the public.” But with shuttle and current budget level, “we could do virtually all those things we have talked about doing in this century. We could go back to the moon and establish crude bases .... We could establish a permanent space station. We just might be able to send men to Mars and get them safely home.” Apollo industrial base had already been destroyed, Dr. Fletcher said. “We could assemble a nucleus of people who know these things within NASA. But that’s about all.” As NASA turned toward space shuttle, “We hope and expect that many of the people who worked on Apollo will be in that program, so we won’t lose all the basic space flight know-how.” In international cooperation, France had asked to participate in Skylab mission and U.S.-U.S.S.R. meetings to establish compatible space docking system had progressed. “It looks as though we can do it technically. With existing hardware, we could do a docking in something like 1974 to 1975.” Scientific community was “still debating whether it would prefer an intensive Jupiter and Saturn explorational program or some form of grand tour to other planets as well,” Dr. Fletcher said. There was “no slackening of interest in Grand Tour” on NASA’s part. (CSM, 1/22/72)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
NASA announced signing of $64-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee award-fee contract with North American Rockwell Corp. for design, development, and test of docking module, docking system, and modification of Apollo command and service module (csm) for Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Hardware would be used in joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for summer of 1975. (nasa Release 72-218)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying American Science and Engineering, Inc., x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) April 2:	Interview of Roris N. Petrov, Chairman of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, on U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint space mission was published in New York Times. Interview, described as “first full public discussion of the negotiations from the Soviet point of view,” had been obtained in Moscow by Times science writer John N. Wilford. Petrov had emphasized that “tangible progress” had been achieved and he was “optimistic” about prospects of joint space flight, technically feasible in “the middle of the nineteen-seventies.” Government approval would “depend much” on April meetings in Moscow between NASA and Soviet Academy officials and May meeting in Moscow of Working Groups on rendezvous and docking. Petrov said compatible docking system would allow “docking of spaceships of our countries with the humane aim of rendering help to crews of spaceships and space stations in distress. These systems would also allow joint experiments during the flights in space.” Petrov said negotiations had occurred in “atmosphere of mutual understanding and businesslike discussion” that “gives us the hope that all the difficulties connected with . . . such a sophisticated scientific and technological undertaking could be overcome.” (NYT, 4/2/72)
nasa announced organizational changes within Office of Manned Space Flight to fit post-Apollo/Skylab activities. New Mission and Payload Integration Office had been established, Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force, Advanced Missions Office was redesignated Advanced Programs Office, and Apollo Program Office became Apollo/astp Program Office. Functions of Engineering and Operations Directorate in omsf had been reassigned to Advanced Programs Office. Mission and Payload Integration Office would plan and coordinate requirements between payload sponsors and shuttle and sortie lab organizations. Sorties Lab Task Force would manage NASA planning and definition activities to produce manned module for research and applications activities with space shuttle. Current project emphasis was on technical definition and planning for hardware development phase. Parallel definition studies were being made by NASA and European Space Research Organization. If Europe undertook development of sortie lab, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said, NASA Task Force would coordinate NASA and esro activities. Philip E. Culbertson was Director of Mission and Payload Integration Office and Acting Director of Advanced Programs Office. Douglas R. Lord was Director of Sortie Lab Task Force, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone was Director of Apollo/ASTP Project for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. (nasa Release 72-232)
Wall Street Journal article criticized “strange aspects to NASA’s push for the shuttle.” Economic estimates of cost were “troublesome.” Some critics had charged that development costs might be “two to four times the $6 billion estimate of NASA. And the operating cost may not be as cheap as NASA says.” “Strangest” aspect of NASA argument was “agency’s almost total silence on the one space project for which the shuttle makes real sense—the permanent orbiting space station.” It had been assumed space station would be “keystone of any long-range space effort involving men” from beginning of space program. Project had been “shoved aside” in favor of manned lunar landing but “the moment that race was won . . . NASA pulled the space station plans back out.” It was easier to sell public $6-billion research and development program for “useful” space shuttle than $40-billion program for space station. But NASA’s “selling spiel” was “somewhat misleading.” Once $6-billion development program was finished shuttle would go into routine operation. “Plans call for 30 to 40 flights a year for 10 years. At $10.5 million a flight this comes to $30 billion to $40 billion— about the same in time and money as proposed for the space station.” Paper later acknowledged its arithmetical miscalculation and corrected total to “$3 billion to $4 billion,” but said corrected figure also was “misleading.” NASA estimate had projected $35 billion for shuttle program through 1990, including $12 billion for shuttle and $23 billion for payloads. (WSJ, 6/16/72, 10; 6/20/72)
Cuban Premier Fidel Castro and Soviet Communist Party Leader Leonid I.	Brezhnev visited Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center near Moscow during state visit of Castro to U.S.S.R. Castro placed flowers on monument to Gagarin, first man in space (April 12, 1961). Visitors were shown automatic linking of model spacecraft, Salyut space station, and spacecraft that had returned from space. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/30/72, Gl)
Univ. of Washington architectural student R. Danning Roberts had won $3000 first prize in competition for interior design of orbiting space station sponsored by NASA and California Council of American Institute of Architects, San Diego Union reported. (SD Union, 6/25/72)	_	_
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
Delegation from Federation of American Scientists (fas), nongovernment organization, left for People’s Republic of China to explore means of improving contacts between Chinese and American scientists. (Science, 5/19/72, 783) May 14:	Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp said in Washington Post article that NASA followed “cart-before-the-horse” or “rocket-before-payload policy” in figuring shuttle costs. Question to be debated was not shuttle transportation “but the basic purpose and worth of payloads.” NASA was “sorely perplexed as a federal agency whose basic mission was accomplished when men landed on the moon.” Skylab mission in 1973, “when a temporary, makeshift station is placed in orbit,” would end NASA manned space flight “unless the shuttle project goes ahead. In a sense, it’s a shuttle to nowhere unless a permanent space station is also approved. This project, last costed at $10 billion, was once the basic rationale of the shuttle, but its price tag scared off congressmen. Now NASA downplays the space station, but the Jan. 31, 1972, Mathe-matica study includes 62 shuttle trips to space stations in one scenario.” (W Post, 5/14/72, B3)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent detailed medical examination and began technical debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Willard Hawkins of msc said astronauts looked good, were “in good physical shape,” and had normal responses. (AP, B Sun, 5/1/72, A3) During April: Soviet Space Program, 1971 was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as supplement to Senate Document 92-51 [see Jan. 6 and 22], Report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—said 1971 had been peak year in Soviet space activity, with 83 successful launches against 31 for U.S. Soviet successes had included “remarkable performance of the roving lunar vehicle, Lunokhod 1, the versatile manned space station Salyut in which a manned world duration record was set, the arrival in Mars orbit of two very heavy payloads, Mars 2 and 3, and the placing in lunar orbit of the heavy automated laboratory Luna 19.” On negative side had been inability to develop large G booster, death of Soyuz cosmonauts, crash of Luna 18 on moon, failure of first Mars probe, and failure of Mars 2 and 3 landers to carry out planned experiments. U.S.S.R. in 1971 had flown manned-precursor spacecraft “with greater maneuverability than' the present ones, quite possibly testing the advanced propulsion needed for manned lunar flight.” Soviet spokesmen had reiterated commitment to manned space stations, applications satellites, and unmanned planetary exploration throughout solar system. Manned lunar and planetary flights “continued to get mention as a later goal.” U.S.S.R. was expected to launch another Salyut to be visited by Soyuz 12 and 13 for long stay. Thus far U.S.S.R. had given space program “continued verbal support” and had demonstrated “commitment of hardware which has been rising for the 15 years flights have been undertaken.” (Committee Print)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
President Nixon issued statement on U.S. space program following splashdown of Apollo 17 command module: “The safe return of the command module America marks the end of one of the most significant chapters in the history of human endeavor. In October 1958, this Nation set about sending men into a hostile, unknown environment. We had little idea what lay before us, but there was new knowledge to be gained and there was a heritage of meeting historical challenge— the challenge of greatness—to be sustained. Project Mercury, begun in 1958, taught us that man could survive and work in space. In 1961, President Kennedy voiced the determination of the United States to place a mem on the moon. We gained the understanding and the technology to embark on this great mission through Project Gemini and we accomplished it with the Apollo lunar exploration series. In 1969, for the first time, men from the planet Earth set foot on the moon. “Since the beginning of Apollo, nine manned flights have been made to the moon. Three circled that nearest neighbor in the universe, six landed and explored its surface. We have barely begun to evaluate the vast treasure store of extraterrestrial data and material from these voyages, but we have already learned much and we know that we are probing our very origins. We are taking another long step in man’s ancient search for his own beginnings, pressing beyond knowledge of the means of human existence to find, perhaps, the meaning of human existence. “Nor is this great work ending with the return of Gene Cernan, Jack Schmitt, and Ron Evans from the moon today. Rather it has barely begun. As Sir Isaac Newton attributed his accomplishments to the fact that he stood ‘upon the shoulders of Giants,’ so Newton himself is one of the giants upon whose shoulders we now stand as we reach for the stars. The great mathematician once wrote: ‘I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.’ I believe we have finally moved into the great ocean and we are trying now to understand what surrounds us. “The making of space history will continue, and this Nation means to play a major role in its making. Next spring, the Sky lab will be put into orbit. It will be aimed not at advancing exploration of deep space, but at gaining in space new knowledge for the improvement of life here on earth. It will help develop new methods of learning about the earth’s environment and the earth’s resources, and new methods of evaluating programs aimed at preserving and enhancing the resources of all the world. It will seek new knowledge about our own star, the sun, and about its tremendous influence on our environment. Scientists aboard the Skylab will perform medical experiments aimed at a better knowledge of man’s own physiology. Also, they will perform experiments aimed at developing new industrial processes utilizing the unique capabilities found in space. Skylab will be our first manned space station. It will be in use for the better part of a year, permitting the economy of extended usage, and laying the groundwork for further space stations. “Economy in space will be further served by the Space Shuttle .... It will enable us to ferry space research hardware into orbit without requiring the full expenditure of a launch vehicle as is necessary today. It will permit us to place that hardware in space accurately, and to serve or retrieve it when necessary instead of simply writing it off in the event it malfunctions or fails. In addition, the Shuttle will provide such routine access to space that for the first time personnel other than trained astronauts will be able to participate and contribute in space as will nations once excluded for economic reasons. “The near future will see joint space efforts by this Nation and the Soviet Union in an affirmation of our common belief that the hopes and the needs that unite our people and all people are of greater consequence than the differences in philosophy that divide us. “Finally, we will continue to draw knowledge from the universe through the use of unmanned satellites and probes. “We cannot help but pause today and remember and pay homage to those many men and women—including those who made the ultimate sacrifice—whose hopes, whose energies, skill, and courage enabled the first man to reach the moon and who now have seen with us perhaps the last men in this century leave the moon. But the more we look back the more we are reminded that our thrust has been forward and that our place is among the heavens where our dreams precede us, and where, in time, we shall surely follow. “Though our ancestors would have called the deeds of Apollo miraculous, we do not see our age as an age of miracles. Rather, we deal in facts, we deal in scientific realities, we deal in industrial capacity, and technological expertise, and in the belief that men can do whatever they turn their hands to. For all this, however, can we look at the record of 24 men sent to circle the moon or to stand upon it, and 24 men returned to earth alive and well, and not see God’s hand in it? “Perhaps, in spite of ourselves, we do still live in an Age of Miracles. So if there is self-congratulation, let it be tempered with awe, and our pride with prayer, and as we enter this special time of spiritual significance, let us reserve a moment to wonder at what human beings have done in space and to be grateful.” {PD, 12/25/72, 1788-9)
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
Grumman Corp. and American Aviation Corp. had agreed in principle to merge American Aviation with Grumman’s commercial aircraft programs, Wall Street Journal reported. American manufactured sport, utility, and training aircraft. Grumman manufactured, sold, and serviced Gulfstream II corporate jet, and Ag-Cat agricultural aircraft. (WSJ, 9/6/72) September 7:	Skylab Orbital Workshop was delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. President Walter F. Burke in Huntington Beach, Calif., ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Workshop would be moved to U.S. Naval Facility at Seal Beach Sept. 8 for transfer to U.S.S. Point Barrow and 14-day voyage to Cape Kennedy. Workshop, weighing 25 000 kg (55 000 lb), was largest section of Skylab experimental space station scheduled for 1973 launch. (nasa Off Admin; Miles, LA Times, 9/8/72)
Astronauts’ image was discussed in New York Times Magazine article. Of 73 pilots and scientists selected for astronauts corps only 39 remained active, and corps faced future cuts. Three astronauts had died in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire; five others in aircraft and auto accidents. Of 25 who had left corps, “many have followed the conventional paths of glory into business and Government.” But “in the behavior of others there is more than a touch of the eccentric, and a large dose of trouble, almost a mythological element: the wandering hero back among his tribe, after stealing the sacred fire and grappling with terrifying demons, condemned to ask tough questions.” World might regard some astronauts as “Byrds and Lindberghs of our time.” As space program emphasis shifted, “they may be an endangered species. For the hotshot pilot seems destined to he replaced in the space stations of the near-future with scientists given training of shorter duration for their flight duties.” Astronauts had been “wandering heroes who tried to unite us with their vision of earth as a small ball floating in an oceanic universe, with all men as passengers. But they weren’t really poets, and they flew at a time of bitter earthly quarrels, with many resentful of the price tag on their odyssey.” Like most heroes, “they were magnified versions of all of us, men of great daring and courage whose competitiveness was no doubt fierce, whose outlook was often corporate and even corny, whose ingenuousness was at times profound. But their image as a comforting symbol to Middle America did them an injustice.” (Muson, NYT Magazine, 12/3/72, 37, 142)
First Skylab command and service module (CSM—116), which would transport astronauts to and from Skylab orbital workshop in 1973, was shipped by aircraft from North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant to Cape Kennedy, Fla., for start of prelaunch operations. Other Skylab segments—including Orbital Workshop, multiple docking adapter, airlock module, and Apollo Telescope Mount —were undergoing final checkout at contractor plants and at Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-144)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, joined nasa as a consultant to the Administrator. (nasa Ann, 9/10/73) August 14:	An Apollo command module atop its Saturn IB launch vehicle was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center. Vehicle readiness had been ordered by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider for a possible rescue mission of Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28) when two of the four quadrants of the service module’s reaction control system, used for maneuvering the command and service module, failed and raised doubts about the ability of the CM to return safely to earth. If a rescue system were not ordered, the vehicle would carry Skylab 4 astronauts—Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—to a Nov. 9 rendezvous with the Skylab Orbital Workshop. (Marshall Star, 8/15/73, 1; Thomas, Today, 8/14/73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 553 from Plesetsk into orbit with a486-km (302.0-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 70.9° inclination—on the 12th anniversary of Vostok 1, the first manned orbital space flight. The satellite reentered Nov. 11. National Cosmonaut Day honored the April 12, 1961, mission flown by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin, the first man in space. Some observers had expected the announcement of a new manned Soviet mission, but in an interview published by Pravda Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov indicated there was sufficient time left for a crew to be placed aboard the Salyut 2 space station, launched April 3. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73, 11/30/73; SBD, 4/16/73, 253; LA Times, 4/13/73; A&A 1972)
Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. director of cosmonaut training, denied Western press reports of recent Soviet space failures and said there would be manned Soviet launches before the 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission, during a Moscow interview with U.S. correspondents. Of Soyuz 2 (launched April 3 and reported to have disintegrated in space) he said, “This craft this time was not intended for manned flight. The experiment was successfully completed and we are satisfied with the results.” Salyut 2 had had a “much more narrow purpose” than Salyut 1 (launched April 19, 1971, as a space station). Salyut 2 was “intended to finalize some design peculiarities. As soon as it fulfilled its task, it finished its existence.” Several manned space flights were planned as part of the Soviet space program and to test design changes in the Soyuz spacecraft for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp). The U.S.S.R. was considering admitting Western journalists to their space facilities for the first time and the establishment of a press center at Baykonur Cosmodrome, but newsmen would not be permitted beyond 7 km (4.3 mi) of the launch site, (upi, Inti Herald Tribune, 6/27/73; B Sun, 6/27/73, A2)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Johnson Space Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., died in Houston at age 43. He had contracted a fatal illness in 1971. Dr. Gast had been on leave from Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and, since 1970, had directed the lunar science team studying lunar samples at JSC. He had received the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service in 1970 and the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1972. He had been awarded the first Victor Goldschmidt Award of the Geochemical Society in 1972 and had been named to receive the James Furman Kemp Medal of Columbia Univ. in 1973 for directing the lunar rock study. (NYT, 5/18/73, 34; SF, 10/73, 389) May 18:	Newspapers commented on the Skylab 1 mission as engineers at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center prepared sunshades to cool down the overheated space station: New York Times: The “partial recovery from earlier disaster has set the stage for an unprecedented improvisation in space. Present plans are for the Skylab crew to blast off a week from today and install a sunshade or awning to replace the missing thermal shield. If that can be done, the temperature problem will be solved and the astronauts will be able to begin living in the space station and to carry out at least some of the projected experiments. All these plans transcend past space feats, and if successful, will mark a major advance in the nation’s space capabilities. But the task will not be easy and a happy ending is by no means guaranteed.” (NYT, 5/18/73, 32) Chicago Daily News: “The space station experiments not only look outward toward the sun and stars, but also down at the Earth. From 270 miles [435 kilometers] up, men can learn much about the planet, its resources and its weather that they can’t see on the ground. Much of the knowledge gained from Skylab can be expected to have practical application toward improving the quality of life on Earth.” (C Daily News, 5/18/73)
Objectives of Skylab’s scientific and engineering experiments were outlined in a Kennedy Space Center press briefing. The 57 major experiment components aboard the space station scheduled for May 14 launch would provide data for 270 investigations in earth resources, solar astronomy, and materials science by 702 investigators and associates— 200 of them foreign. Dr. Edward J. McLaughlin, NASA Director for Space Medicine, said 20 life sciences experiments would provide “a comprehensive picture of the interactions of man with his environment and of various body systems that are influenced ... by the space environment.” They would deal primarily with the metabolic and cardiovascular systems, exercise capacity, and nutrition. Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, NASA Chief of Solar Physics, said the objective of Skylab astronomy was “the study of the stars, including the sun, and other objects in space such as planets,| comets, objects and libration points near the moon, and x-ray objects in the sky.” Emphasis would be placed on the study of solar activity known to influence general weather patterns and on solar flares, responsible for radio communication blackouts and interference. Skylab was unique in that it would be manned. The astronaut would be able to align the instruments and select targets of interest, taking advantage of phenomena as it occurred. Dr. Robert A. Parker, astronaut and Skylab program scientist, said that corollary experiments would study gas and particles surrounding the Skylab and their effect on sensitive instruments, collect micrometeoroids, study man-made disturbances in Skylab and their effect on instrument alignment, and study flammable materials and manufacturing techniques in the zero-g environment. (Transcript)
Life in weightlessness in the Skylab Workshop, orbited May 14, was described by a Wall Street Journal article as the Skylab 2 crew began its 15th day on board the space station. Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., had reported, after attempting to eat canned tomatoes, that he was “flinging tomatoes all over the place.” He had warned, “You’ve got to eat the whole tomato.” Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had told Mission Control: “I don’t use the salt much. It tends to bounce off the food a lot.” Later he had reported a minor kitchen disaster with a bag of dehydrated corn. “The bag failed at its seam. . . . We’ve got corn powder all over everything.” Kerwin said taking a shower was pleasant, but the water didn’t “fly through the air, it sticks to whatever is there, mostly you and partly the walls. It takes forever to dry both one’s self and the walls . . . even using that inadequate little vacuum cleaner that we’ve got.” The crew recommended allotting an hour for taking a shower on future missions. The astronauts were being awakened by the noise of the suction fan when the toilet was used at night. They found themselves growing hoarse from shouting at each other across the roomy Workshop during the day. Kerwin had found himself unable to whistle in zero g, but Astronaut Paul J. Weitz had assured him he could learn after a few days’ practice. “You’ve got to hold your lips a little farther apart.” (Bishop, WSJ, 6/8/73, 1)
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)
A need “to shift gears and return to the main line of development in space flight” was underlined by Michael A. G. Michaud in a Spaceflight article: The purposes of space flight “go far beyond our lifetime. Ultimately, our journey away from Earth will determine the future of the human race; this millennial, evolutionary effort must not founder now for lack of a satisfying rationale.” The basic purpose of space flight was “to expand the realm of Man.” Reasons were to challenge human abilities, learn more about the universe we live in, search for extraterrestrial intelligence and prepare for contact with it, develop and test technologies for earth use, stimulate and employ advanced sectors of the economy, improve orbital applications of space technology with immediate benefits, develop and test military technology, and encourage international cooperation. Michaud proposed a medium-term program to the year 2000 to assemble a manned space station in earth orbit, build a base on the moon, land human beings on Mars by 2000, prepare for interstellar flight, search for planets in other systems, and begin the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. A long-term program beyond 2000 would plan to send unmanned probes to the most promising nearby stars, create a permanent colony on Mars, experiment in planetary engineering—possibly on Venus, “where orbiting space vehicles could introduce materials into the atmosphere that might change its composition” —launch the first manned interstellar flights, and communicate with extraterrestrial intelligence. [SF, 10/73, 362-5)
Former nasa scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Hampshire College astronomer, criticized manned space flight spending in a New York Times article: “The spectacular problems of the $2.5-billion Skylab mission and the failure of the first three Soviet Salyut space stations may have dealt a death blow to manned space flight. The enormous expense, the high risk, the much-ballyhooed and grossly exaggerated claims about the pertinence of manned earth orbital flights to the quality of life on earth are creating an ever-widening credibility gap between the public interest and a vested interest inherited from the space of the nineteen-sixties. The result is the squandering of public funds.” He suggested “indefinite postponement of the space shuttle program, a reduction in excessive NASA management costs and the establishment of a moderate unmanned space program emphasizing space science and applications” on a less than $2-billion budget. (NYT, 6/5/73, 39)
“We hope that through astute improvisations much of the Skylab I mission can be salvaged. Yet if it has to be scrubbed, then NASA should be encouraged to go ahead with backup plans to send a second space laboratory into earth orbit next year.” NASA could find the money “if it is prepared to cut back or postpone other activities, including the controversial $14 billion space shuttle program. . . . While space shuttles can operate independently, they will approach their full potential only when they can rendezvous with orbital space stations or laboratories.” (B Sun, S/YI/1Z, A18)
The U.K. Trades Union Congress announced that it was asking its 9.5 million members to boycott French products for a week in protest against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific. (W Post, 6/28/73, B19) June 27-28:	Pioneer 11, launched by NASA April 5 toward a December 1974 rendezvous with the planet Jupiter, became the second spacecraft to cross the orbit of Mars. By June 28 the probe was 76 781 000 km (47 711 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at 108 000 km (67 110 mi) per hr. The earth had passed between the spacecraft and the sun, permitting scientists to look for the earth’s magnetic tail, the extension of the magnetic field blown away from the earth by the solar wind. Data had suggested a malfunction in the spacecraft radio transmitter but were insufficient to identify the problem. The backup traveling-wave tube was being used. Flight controllers had fired the thrusters on Pioneer 10—twin probe launched March 2, 1972, toward December 1973 meeting with Jupiter— on June 21 to trim its course slightly and ensure passage behind Jupiter’s 1 moon Io. Pioneer 10, traveling at 43 470 km (27 000 mi) per hr, was 533 540 000 km (331 542 000 mi) from the earth. It had crossed the orbit of Mars in 1972 and finished crossing the Asteroid Belt in February, (nasa Release 72-122) June 28:	NASA held three Skylab 1-2 postflight reviews at Johnson Space At a summary review of the May 14-June 22 mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that Skylab 1—2 had accomplished the intent of its 48 experiments—6 earth resources, 15 medical, 5 astronomical, 17 scientific and technological, and 5 student-proposed. Space station operation experience had been gained and there were no constraints on continuing the Skylab program as originally planned. More data had been handled in real time than ever before and gave “no reason to believe that all of the things that we had previously said we accomplished in flight are not going to give us creditable scientific data for analysis by scientists.” Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, earth resources experiment package project scientist, said during an erep review that the erep experiments had gathered good data for 145 principal investigators on 13 km (8 mi) of magnetic tape. Data were collected over six foreign countries—Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Venezuela. There were 186 individual task sites covered, including the Puerto Rican trench, the Gulf of Mexico, the Wabash River area, and the Amazon River basin. During a review of the Skylab 2 crew health, Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said medical experiments on the Workshop had yielded very interesting results. All three crew members had stayed within their preflight baseline levels on the bicycle ergometer study. In the motion-sensitivity study—with two crew members participating—the preflight threshold level (the point at which motion sickness symptoms would begin) of science pilot Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin was 121/2 rpm in the rotating chair, at which speed he could perform 50 head movements. Pilot Paul J. Weitz had a preflight threshold of 15 rpm and 40 to 50 head movements. Both men could do 150 head movements in flight at preflight speeds without symptoms. During tests immediately following splashdown both men had experienced vestibular disturbances with even the slightest head movement. The symptoms had disappeared within two days and both crewmen had performed at preflight speeds on the third day following recovery, completing 150 head movements without symptoms. (Transcripts)
The U.S.S.R. had canceled the launch of two cosmonauts because an unmanned Salyut spacecraft with which they would have docked had failed in orbit, Western observers believed. The Salyut, identified as Cosmos 557, was launched May 11 into an orbit similar to that of the crippled Salyut 2 space station, launched April 3. Observers believed the satellite would be a docking target for a manned Soyuz but its maneuvering engine apparently failed; it made an early reentry May 22. The tracking ships that had steamed to stations off Newfoundland and the Gulf of Guinea were returning to their home port in the Black Sea. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/19/73, A12; SF, 1/74, 39-40; Lyons, NYT, 9/26/73, 33)
Science & Government Report quoted the response of an unidentified alumnus of the President’s Office of Science and Technology when asked if OST had participated in the Watergate episode: “No, they didn’t trust us enough for anything as important as that. If we had been involved, do you think they’d have been using stone age electronics?” (referring to eavesdropping devices found in Democratic Party headquarters). (Sci & Gov Rpt, 5/1/73, 1) May 2:	The Skylab manned space laboratory to be launched May 14 would fly over 89% of the world’s population and 65% of the earth’s land areas and would be visible to the naked eye, NASA announced. Information would be distributed to enable people in most of the populated areas of the world to see Skylab in orbit. Skylab would be visible only in clear skies during the two hours before and after dusk when the viewer would be in the earth’s shadow and the space station in the sunlight. It would appear like the brightest star but would move fast enough to be distinguishable from stars. (NASA Release 73-90)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
The possibility that three Soviet cosmonauts had died in training accidents early in the Soviet space program was discussed by James E. Oberg of the Dept, of Defense Computer Institute in a speech before the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C. Oberg, a Soviet space program observer, said photos and training films showed four cosmonauts— identified only as Ivan, Vasily, Grigori, and Valentin—in 1960 and 1961, before the April 12, 1961, Vostok 1 first manned orbital space flight. None of these cosmonauts had been seen or heard of since. Oberg said they might still be training for a Salyut space station or a lunar landing mission or they could have been killed in accidents before making their intended flights. Oberg said there was no apparent truth to stories that as many as 18 cosmonauts had died secretly. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/13/73, A3) April 13:	Preparations for the first Skylab mission, launch of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop scheduled for May 14, continued with only minor discrepancies, NASA announced. Onboard experiments and major spacecraft elements that had not flown before required extensive first-time testing. Lower than desired voltage had been detected in one cell in each of two important flight batteries. The batteries would be replaced and tested. Stowage of crew equipment and consumables in the Orbital Workshop had been completed. Testing of the Saturn IR and the command and service modules continued without major problems, (nasa Release 73-74)
All outstanding options on the Concorde supersonic transport had been dropped, The Washington Post reported. British Aircraft Corp-Aerospatiale combined British-French manufacturers, would take only direct orders. The action had followed the cancellation of 20 options by U.S. commercial airline companies and would end marketing “brinkmanship.” (Egan, W Post, 3/29/73, Cll) March 30:	Preparations for twin launches of the Skylab space station and its first three-man crew continued with few significant problems, NASA announced. Major elements of the space station had completed integrated mission simulation and flight-readiness testing. Seventy percent of stowed items had been placed in the Workshop section. Simulated loading of propellant into the Saturn IB launch vehicle had been completed. A leaking valve in the service module had caused replacement of a 244- by 91-cm (96- by 36-in) panel containing propellant tanks, plumbing, and engines. Excessive leakage in the oxidizer tank bladder was also being investigated, (nasa Release 73-61)
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Naval Research Laboratory payload to a 245.3-km (152.4-mi) altitude to evaluate instrumentation for the calibration rocket (calroc) series to be launched in support of the manned Sky-lab missions [see Jan. 22]. The rocket performed satisfactorily but minimum data were acquired from the instrumentation, (gsfc proj off) April 4:	Launching of Skylab, the Nation’s first space station, was set for
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin galactic astronomy experiment. The second, launched two hours later, carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 3—13:	NASA’s Mariner 10 (Mariner-J) Venus-Mercury probe was launched into a parking orbit from Eastern Test Range at 12:45 am est by an Atlas-Centaur Dl-A launch vehicle. After a 25-min coast, a 130-sec burn of the Centaur engines injected the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would allow Mariner 10 to pass within 5300 km (3300 mi) of Venus Feb. 5, 1974. Using the gravitational field of Venus to change the speed and flight path of the spacecraft, Mariner 10 would travel toward a March 29 encounter with Mercury, approaching the sun more closely than any other planetary mission. Mariner 10 would be the first spacecraft to use gravity assist in a dual-planet mission and the first to explore Mercury. The primary objective was to measure Mercury’s environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity-assist mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED! The seven experiments aboard the octagonal 503-kg (1108-lb) spacecraft included a TV camera and an infrared radiometer to investigate the planet’s surface; plasma science experiment, charged particle telescope, and magnetometer to investigate the environment around the planet and the interplanetary medium; dual-frequency-radio science experiment and ultraviolet spectrometer to measure characteristics of the Mercury neutral atmosphere and ionosphere if they existed; and celestial mechanics experiments to measure planetary mass characteristics and test the theory of relativity. All experiments had been designed and selected for their Mercury scientific objectives but also would obtain important data at Venus and during the cruise phases. The Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station was unable to maintain command lock with the spacecraft following spacecraft injection. Acquisition of the star Vega by the spacecraft Canopus tracker also was delayed, but two-way communications were established within an hour and, after repeated commands, Vega was acquired. Solar panels, high-gain and low-gain antennas, and plasma science and magnetometer booms were deployed. On Nov. 4-5 four moon and three earth TV picture mosaics were completed. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft was 1 394 000 km (866 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at a speed of 4.32 km (2.68 mi) per sec. All science experiments except the infrared radiometer and electrostatic analyzer had been turned on. The scanning electron spectrometer portion of the plasma science experiment was not operating properly and the problem was being analyzed. Four trajectory correction maneuvers were scheduled during the mission. The first, Nov. 13, successfully adjusted the flight path for closest approach to Venus on Feb. 5, 1974, as planned. A second would be made Jan. 18, 1974. On Feb. 9 and March 1, 1974, after the Venus encounter, maneuvers would target the Mariner 10 to pass Mercury at 1000-km (620-mi) altitude. The Mariner program, including mission operations and tracking and data systems, was managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., was responsible for the launch vehicle. Previous missions had been made to Mars, including Mariner 4, 6, 7, and 9 (launched Nov. 28, 1964; Feb. 24, 1969; March 27, 1969; and May 30, 1971). Mariner 9 had been the first spacecraft to orbit a planet other than the earth. All others had been flyby missions. (nasa prog off; jpl Release 673) November 3—January 9, 1974:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 interplanetary probe (launched March 2, 1972) became the first spacecraft to reach Jupiter during a two-month encounter, returning new findings about the giant planet and continuing toward Uranus and eventual exit from the solar system. November 3—December 3:	Encounter operations were begun Nov. 3 by Ames Research Center controllers and scientists and on Nov. 4 Pioneer 10 began sending photopolarimeter images of Jupiter to the earth three to eight hours a day. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft, 25 000 000 km (15 500 000 mi) from Jupiter, had begun measuring the placet’s atmosphere above Jupiter’s orange-and-blue-striped cloud tops and the characteristics of particles making up the dense clouds. On Nov. 8 the spacecraft crossed the orbits of Hades and Poseidon, the first two of Jupiter’s outer moons, and on Nov. 9 and 11 it crossed the orbits of Pan and Andrastea. At a Nov. 19 press briefing at arc Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, said that low temperature in that area of the solar system slowed evolution and scientists hoped to find objects not very different from what they were at their formation. “The passage of Pioneer 10 past Jupiter also marks the gateway to the exploration of the outer solar system. This is an exploration which is critical if we truly want to understand the formation and evolution of our solar system.” Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said that Pioneer 10 had encountered 100 times more space dust than expected during the journey between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter. He expected that 30 times more particles would be detected as the spacecraft neared Jupiter. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s moons Demeter, Hera, and Hestia Nov. 22 and was 11400 600 km (7 084 000 mi) from Jupiter. By Nov. 25 a charged particle detector aboard the spacecraft had begun to show traces of particle radiation. Preliminary indications were that the probe was beginning to cross into Jupiter’s magnetosphere, estimated to be 20 times stronger than the earth’s. The planet’s radiation belts contained particle concentrations up to 1 million times higher than the earth’s Van Allen Belt and were considered by some scientists to be extremely dangerous to the spacecraft’s electronics. At a distance of 8 336 400 km (5180 000 mi) from Jupiter, spacecraft instruments began returning pictures of Jupiter’s great red spot. The final spacecraft-attitude change before encounter was made Nov. 26 and a 24-hour day of imaging and polarimetry began. At 3:30 pm EST Nov. 26 Pioneer 10 successfully crossed Jupiter’s bow shock wave at a distance of 7 709 000 km (4 790 000 mi)—with great turbulence when the solar wind hit Jupiter’s magnetic field. The spacecraft was unaffected by the turbulence hut data from 6 of its 11 instruments changed dramatically. Solar wind speed abruptly decreased to half the normal velocity and solar wind temperatures rose sharply. On Nov. 27, at a distance of 6 760 000 km (4 200 000 mi) from Jupiter, the spacecraft crossed into the planet’s true magnetic envelope, the region of interplanetary space into which the solar wind could not penetrate. Pioneer 10 crossed the magnetopause, entering the magnetic field for the first time at 3:30 pm est. At a Nov. 29 press briefing arc scientists said new data had shown the reach of Jupiter’s magnetic field to be greater than predicted. It stretched more than 13 000 000 km (8 000 000 mi) in diameter and its strength was 40 times that of the earth’s ma'gnetic field. Its direction was south, rather than north as predicted. The strength of the magnetism at 6 400 000 km (4 000 000 mi) from the planet seemed to rise and fall in a regular 10-hour phase, possibly because of the planet’s rotation. Jupiter’s mass was also found to be greater than estimated and the spacecraft was being drawn toward Jupiter faster than planned; it would arrive at its closest approach two minutes earlier than predicted. On Nov. 30 Pioneer 10 recorded a sharp drop in magnetic and radiation measurements, indicating disappearance of the magnetic field. Eleven hours later the spacecraft again crossed the magnetopause, which had apparently been driven toward the planet by a disturbance in the solar wind. At 1 427 500 km (887 000 mi) from the planet, the spacecraft entered Jupiter’s dipole magnetic field. Preliminary data indicated that the outer portions of Jupiter’s magnetic field did not rotate with the planet and were more flattened than the earth’s field. Also, the magnetic dipole center was appreciably offset, both radially and toward the north from the center of the planet. The magnetic axis was tilted from the spin axis. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s innermost moons—Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, and Io—Dec. 2-3. As it came within 446 000 km (277 000 mi) of Ganymede, the infrared radiometer indicated the moon’s surface temperature was 125 K (—235°F). Six hours before its closest approach to Jupiter the probe entered the dangerous region of intense radiation and, soon after, the imaging system ceased returning picture data. Radio commands switched the system back to normal operation within 30 minutes, however. The press later reported that NASA attributed the mishap to an unidentified flight control room guest who had inadvertently pressed against a cathode ray display, pushing a button that cut out eight instruments. December 3—11:	As the gold and silver spacecraft approached Jupiter and radiation intensity increased 10-fold every two hours, reaching 65 million ev 90 min before periapsis, tense scientists paced the floor of arc’s Mission Control with fingers crossed. At 9:25 pm est Dec. 3, after a flight of 641 days and 826 000 000 km (513 000 000 mi), Pioneer 10 sped past Jupiter at an altitude of 130 000 km (81 000 mi), traveling 155 140 km per hour (96 400 mph), the fastest speed ever achieved by a man-made object. The spacecraft’s 11 instruments sent back readings and pictures that came in loud and clear, taking 46 minutes to reach a jubilant team on earth. “Needless to say, we’re elated,” Dr. John Wolfe, Pioneer Project Scientist, told cheering newsmen. The Washington Post later described the scene at arc: “So deluged were Pioneer scientists with transmissions of the spacecraft’s instruments, they were literally changing their minds about Jupiter’s physics and chemistry every hour.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “Some of us have been looking through telescopes at Jupiter since our early teens. This is more than we ever dreamed of.” The spacecraft suffered no apparent failures and continued to function as planned. However, preliminary estimates of radiation belt parameters and observed effects on the spacecraft and instrumentation indicated that the margin of survival had been small. As Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter, the spacecraft was accelerated and slung by the planet’s gravity into a new trajectory that would take it past the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and, traveling at a constant 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph), out of the solar system toward the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 10 would be the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. By 7:00 pm EST Dec. 4, it had traveled nearly 1600 000 km (1000 000 mi) beyond Jupiter. December 11—January 9:	arc Mission Control ended Jupiter picturetaking Dec. 11 and returned to routine interplanetary operations. The spacecraft recrossed the bow shock wave Dec. 12 and continued into interplanetary space. By Dec. 14 the spacecraft was 10 881000 km (6 761 000 mi) from Jupiter, traveling at 83 525 km per hr (51 900 mph) toward the edge of the solar system. Preliminary findings from the encounter included the discovery of an ionosphere (implying a tenuous atmosphere) surrounding Jupiter’s moon Io, detection of helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere, new density measurements of the entire Jovian system that would affect current theories on the formation of the universe, and new temperature measurements of Jupiter that indicated little difference between average daytime and nighttime temperatures. Pioneer 10 was expected to continue collecting and returning data until it reached the orbit of Uranus in 1980, almost 3 200 000 000 km (2 000 000 000 mi) from the earth. Data returned would determine whether the second Jupiter probe, Pioneer 11 (launched April 5 and crossing the Asteroid Belt since August), could safely be retargeted closer to the planet. The Pioneer 10 mission was officially adjudged a success Jan. 9, 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by arc. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1969, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays, (nasa prog off; arc Release, 11/6/73; nasa Releases 73-243K, 73-256, 73-279; Wilford, NYT, 11/25/73; 11/30/73, 1; 12/4/73, 1; 12/5/73, 13; O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/73, Al; AP, W Star-News, 11/28-29/73; AP, B Sun, 12/3-4/73; Miles, LA Times, 12/4/73; 12/6/73) November 3:	The Skylab 4 launch crew successfully completed a simulated launch of the Saturn IB booster at Kennedy Space Center. The booster was scheduled to lift the Apollo command and service module and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue into orbit Nov. 10 to dock with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) and begin NASA’s third manned Skylab mission. Following the perfectly timed simulation, the fuel was drained from the launch vehicle and preparations for the final countdown were begun. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/73, A7)
Langley Research Center engineers and technicians were cooperating with investigators from West Virginia Univ. in a summer study to improve rural West Virginia housing with space age technology. The preliminary study was to lead to eventual construction and demonstration of a self-contained house or small community, “Space Station West Virginia,” incorporating modern technology to supply energy, water and sewage, fire control, and systems analysis. (NASA Release 73—132) July 18—27:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics sponsored an aeronautical technology display at the Soviet Exhibition of Economic Achievement in Moscow, aiaa also cosponsored, with the U.S.S.R. Committee for Science and Technology, a joint Symposium on Aeronautical Technology at the exhibition July 23 to 27. Advanced equipment to modernize civil air traffic control systems was displayed or depicted by 27 U.S. companies and reviewed by an estimated 25 000 aviation specialists from the U.S.S.R. and its East European allies. The joint symposium—opened by Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield and the Soviet Minister of Civil Aviation, Gen. Boris P. Bugaev—covered air traffic control, airport and air system facilities, and new aircraft technology. Among participants were members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space, (aiaa Release 7/20/73; Program; Shabad, NYT, 7/22/73, 43) July 19:	NASA’s X-24B lifting body [see July 5-6], flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed its first captive flight from Flight Research Center, attached to a B—52 aircraft. Erratic B-52 power resulted in unintelligible telemetry traces and forced a switch to X—24B internal power. The telemetry cleared and excellent traces were returned. X-24B performance was adjudged satisfactory but the scheduled glider flight was postponed until July 24 to allow for battery recharge. The X-24B had been built around the existing basic structure and subsystems of the X-24A, which, like other lifting bodies, had been designed for reentry from space flight. But the X—24B had a new doubledelta shape with small blended wings and three vertical tails—parts of a configuration representing a forerunner of future aircraft capable of hypersonic (above mach 5) flight. Like its lifting-body predecessors, the X-24B would be air-launched by a B-52 aircraft from 12 000-m (40 000-ft). Subsequent flights would use the XLR—11 rocket engine to increase speed and altitude performance in the joint NASA—usaf program at Flight Research Center, (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-130)
Newspapers commented on the Skylab missions as Skylab 2 astronauts activated the Apollo Telescope Mount aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop, following repairs to the damaged spacecraft they had joined May 25 [see May 14-June 23]. Miami News editorial: “To us, the conquest of the moon, and now the building of a space station, demonstrated that this nation can accomplish just about anything it sets its mind on. The secret lies in the magic word, commitment. With the kind of commitment we pledged to the space program, we could indeed surmount the housing crisis, the crime crisis, the energy crisis, or any other crisis.” (M News, 5/29/73) Wall Street Journal article: Skylab Vs successful in-orbit repair had wide implications for the U.S. space program’s future. “When the three Skylab astronauts erected a heat shield over their damaged space station, they both saved their mission and paved the way for future launching of two other missions in the $2.5 billion space-station program.” They also had provided NASA with “a powerful argument for new manned-flight projects.” NASA could contend that “the value of man in orbit has been proven in practice as well as in theory.” While budget shortages would preclude any attempt to capitalize on Skylab’s success before the space shuttle evolved, it had armed NASA against congressional critics of manned space flight. (Spivak, WSJ, 5/29/73) New York Times columnist Russell Baker: “The space program until now has seemed less malevolent than most new ventures in technology, but to people watching those incessant countdowns at Cape Kennedy it has also seemed pointless.” Lunar exploration had been “wonderful” but “it didn’t really open any horizons for most of us, and it was certainly hard to see how it was going to improve man’s lot.” Skylab, by contrast, was wonderful. “There they are way up there—270 miles [435 kilometers] in the sky. They are attached to 100 tons [90 700 kilograms] of machinery which stretches out through space a distance of 118 feet [36 meters], about the length of an exciting pass play in the National Football League. And what are they doing? Repair work. They are fixing some of the machinery which doesn’t work right.” This was space with a purpose. “We ought to be asking why NASA didn’t make this approach from the beginning instead of going after moon dust. The repair industry in this country could very well be rejuvenated by this trip, and not be a moment too soon, either.” (NYT, 5/29/73, 31)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
The prototype of a miniature medical diagnostic system developed for NASA’s use aboard manned space stations by the Atomic Energy Commission’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory might have clinical uses, NASA announced. The analyzer, being tested at Johnson Space Center, provided fast, automated blood analysis by using one fiftieth the amount of blood required by existing analyzers. It could help a doctor perform rapid analysis in his office, with results within minutes, (nasa Release 73-71)
U.S. space observers believed an accident to the Soviet Salyut 2 space station launched April 3 had prevented the U.S.S.R. from carrying out a maximum one-month mission manned by a Soyuz crew, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. Their assessment was that Salyut 2 had begun tumbling in orbit when a maneuvering engine fired and then kept firing out of control. The firing had forced Salyut 2 into cartwheel motion through space. Its solar panels had been torn loose, cutting the station off from almost all its electric power. The only electricity supplied to Salyut 2 after the accident had come from batteries that might now be burned out. A few U.S. observers thought the Soviet tracking ship that instructed the station to make the fatal maneuver had received details of the accident by radio from Salyut 2 before communications ceased. The ship had left its station off Newfoundland and had joined a sister ship in Curasao, Dutch West Indies, where both had been refueled and refitted. The ships were now in Cuba, which had led some space observers to think they might put to sea again to await a further Soviet attempt to launch a Salyut station. (W Post, 5/2/73, A20)
Dr. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on manned space systems in development, before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 payloads were projected for the 12-yr period beginning in 1980, with one third each for applications, science, and the Dept, of Defense. Duplication of the accomplishments expected from the space shuttle sortie (Spacelab) program would require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned space station, and a system for manned transport. The shuttle, with effective integration of payloads and the ability to service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a potential savings of $14 billion over expendable systems from 1980 to 1991. Studies had shown that 725 flights were required to fly the projected 986 payloads, an average of 60 flights a year. At a 10% rate of discount and a 10% rate of return, the space transportation system would break even if the shuttle were flown only 25 times a year. (Transcript) industry unwillingness to risk capital on advanced communications research and development. Private industry could meet short-term commercial needs but “continued NASA activity is essential to identify and meet long term national needs.” The investment level in advanced communications r&d would increase from $1.0 million in FY 1974 to $1.4 million in FY 1975. R&d included investigations into advanced antenna techniques to define radiation pattern contours to fit geographical boundaries and eliminate unwanted spillover; technology to open near-and far-infrared wavelengths for communications; new techniques in solid-state, high-power devices to replace traveling wave tubes; and use of millimeter-wave regions to expand the spectrum for satellite communications. The ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite scheduled for 1974 launch would conduct health and education telecommunications and radio beacon experiments and measure charged particles and magnetic fields over the U.S. for one year. The satellite would then be moved over India to beam educational TV to 4000 villages, ats-f (to he Ats 6 after launch) also would be used to extend coverage during the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission. Following completion of the Indian experiments, ats-f would he moved back over to the U.S. to continue experiments there. (Transcript)
Tass announced that the flight of the U.S.S.R.’s Salyut 3 orbiting space station, launched 25 June, would soon end, after completion of a six-month program that doubled the flight duration originally planned. During its six months operation the spacecraft had performed more than 400 scientific and technical experiments, received more than 8000 control commands from the earth, conducted more than 200 “dynamic operations,” conducted 70 TV transmission and 2500 telemetric sessions, fired its thrusters more than 500 000 times, and generated 5000 kw of electricity with its solar panels. A two-man crew, launched 3 July on Soyuz 14, boarded the space station and spent 15 days living and working in space. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. on Soyuz 15, failed in several attempts to dock with the station and returned to the earth after 48 hrs in space. Since that time Salyut 3 had operated in an unmanned automatic mode. The Western press later speculated that the mission was being ended to prevent any interference with the mission of Salyut 4 [see 26 Dec.—9 Feb. 1975]. The retrorockets were fired 24 Jan. 1975 and the station reentered the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean after 213 days in space. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 26 Dec 74, Ul-2; 24 Jan 75, Ul; gsfc SSR, 28 Feb 75; Soviet Aero, 6 Jan 75,1) 26 December—9 February 1975: The U.S.S.R. launched Salyut 4 space station into earth orbit and 16 days later launched Soyuz 17 with a two-man crew to join the Salyut and establish a manned orbital laboratory. Salyui 4 was launched 26 Dec. from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with a 252-km apogee, 214-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to test the design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific studies and experiments in space. The news agency also reported that onboard systems and equipment were operating normally. The Western press reported that major maneuvers 29 and 30 Dec. put the station at a record high altitude for a Salyut space station, reaching an orbit with a 350-km apogee and 337-km perigee by 31 Dec. Soyuz 17, launched at 2:43 am 11 Jan. 1975 local time (4:43 pm est 10 Jan.) from Baykonur Cosmodrome, carried cosmonauts Lt. Col. Aleksey A. Gubarev and Georgy M. Grechko into orbit with a 249-km apogee, 186-km perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the mission would carry out joint experiments with Salyut 4, including a comprehensive checkup of the spacecraft’s onboard systems in various flight conditions. In a launch-day interview with Tass, Maj. Gen. Georgy T. Beregovoy, head of the Soviet cosmonaut training center, said that Soyuz 17- was in “no way connected with additional checkups of ‘Soyuz’ systems before its rendezvous with ‘Apollo.’ ” An orbital correction raised the spacecraft to an orbit with a 354km apogee, 293-km perigee, 90.7-min period, and 51.6° inclination, permitting Soyuz 17 to dock with Salyut 4 on 12 Jan. The spacecraft was moved automatically to a distance of 10 m from the station and then the cosmonauts completed docking by manual control. The crew entered the space station, switched on the power and radio transmitters, and inspected the scientific equipment. In a 14 Jan. interview with Tass, Dr. Konstantin P. Feoktistov, cosmonaut who had helped design the space station, said that Salyut 4 improvements included three panels of solar batteries that were positioned like the tail of an aircraft and could be individually oriented toward the sun. The panels permitted the energy supply in the station to be replenished without using fuel for spacecraft orientation. Other improvements had been introduced in the flight control systems. During a broadcast from the spacecraft over Moscow Radio 15 Jan., Gubarev and Grechko said they had set up the first Soviet space-based teletype communications station. The teletype could receive and copy communications from the earth while the cosmonauts were busy at other tasks. Tass reported 17 Jan. that the cosmonauts, neither of whom had been in space before, had become accustomed to weightlessness about the fifth or sixth day of flight. During nearly 30 days aboard Salyut 4, Gubarev and Grechko used a newly developed high-resolution solar telescope to study solar phenomena, x-ray telescopes and sensors to study the flux of x-radiation from celestial bodies, and an infrared spectrometer to examine the earth’s radiation. The cosmonauts also studied effects of weightlessness on the human vestibular function, cardiovascular system, and blood; made earth resources observations; and studied the earth’s upper atmosphere. They resprayed two telescope mirrors dulled by exposure to space; carried out biological “Oasis” experiments using insects, microorganisms, tissue cultures, and plants; and tried recycling water, condensed from the cabin atmosphere, for drinking and food preparation. The crew began preparations for their return to earth 9 Feb., transferring equipment to Soyuz 17. The cosmonauts boarded Soyuz 17 and undocked from the space station at 11:08 am Baykonur time (1:08 am est). Soyuz 17 softlanded in the U.S.S.R. 110 km northeast of Tselino-grad, Kazakhstan, “in complex meteorological conditions” after 29 days 13 hrs 20 min in space. The Soyuz 17 cosmonauts had broken the previous 23-day 18-hr 22-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 11 crew on Salyut 1 (6-30 June 1971) before they were killed during reentry. On-the-spot and later medical checks showed that the Soyuz 17 cosmonauts had “withstood well the long space flight.” Salyut 4 was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days before their reentry tragedy. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973, but an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 [see 25 Dec.], (gsfc Wkly SSR, 19-25 Dec 74; gsfc SSR, 31 Dec 74; 28 Feb 75; Tass, fbis—Sov, 31 Dec 74^13 Feb 75; SF, June 75, 235; April 75, 144—5; O’Toole, W Post, 31 Dec 74, A7; upi, NYT, 16 Jan 75,14; SBD, 14 Jan 75, 62; LC, S&T News Alert 2645)
John H. Disher, Skylab Program Deputy Director since August 1965, had been named Director of Advanced Programs in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. Skylab had concluded operations with the 8 Feb. splashdown of its third manned mission to visit the Nation’s first experimental space station. In the Advanced Program Office, Disher would head evaluations of concepts for manned space activities within changing national needs and priorities, to guide transition from present to future programs. From 1959 to 1961 Disher had headed advanced manned missions. He had also served as Apollo Test Director and Assistant Director for Apollo Spacecraft Development, (nasa Release 74-48)
The Apollo command and service module for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, which had been delivered to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station by a C-5A transport, arrived at Kennedy Space Center. The spacecraft completed the ASTP flight hardware with exception of the docking module, which would arrive at ksc in late October after thermal and vacuum tests at Johnson Space Center, (ksc Release 132-74)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Experiments carried out during the U.S.S.R.’s eight-day Soyuz 13 mission launched 18 Dec. 1973 were further evidence that the U.S.S.R. was continuing manned space station efforts, a Spaceflight article said. The flight had included the Oasis 2 experiment, part of a plan to demonstrate that biological closed-cycle life support systems could be used for large space stations and other long-duration manned missions. Observation of stars in the ultraviolet range with the Orion 2 telescope was also a continuing program related to space station activity. Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov had said in a statement to the British Interplanetary Society that, in the years between the Soyuz 11 tragedy in June 1971 and the Soyuz 12 mission in September 1973, design engineers had been analyzing the performance of all spacecraft systems and making modification and improvements. He stressed that work on manned space stations was continuing because of the importance of these stations in the exploration of natural resources. Soyuz 12 and Soyuz 13 crews had made multispectral photos of the earth’s surface. (SF, March 74, 110)
The U.S.S.R. announced the mission of the Salyut 3 space station (launched 25 June) had been “completely fulfilled.” The “main program of work” had ended 23 Sept, and the recoverable module containing research materials and experiments had separated from Salyut 3. Engines were discarded before entry into the atmosphere, and the parachute system was activated at an altitude of 8.4 km to land the module in a preset area of the U.S.S.R. Salyut 3 plans had been for a
NASA announced selection of 39 scientists to provide experiments for the 1978 Pioneer twin missions to Venus. The selection, made from 162 scientists who had submitted proposals to NASA, included one scientist each from Germany and France. The scientists would participate in a detailed study of the planet, including composition, structure, and radiation field of its atmosphere; nature of the clouds; and magnetic and radiation environment of the planet, (nasa Release 74-155) 24 June—12 July: Eight U.S. astronauts—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, Donald K. Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R. Lousma, Robert F. Overmyer, and Karol J. Bobko—took part in training in Star City, near Moscow, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A ninth, Eugene A. Cernan, took part in the first two weeks of training, representing the Johnson Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. In addition to studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet flight crews in simulators and mockups. They also continued planning procedures and checklists for the joint mission, (jsc Release 74-121; JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 25 June-19 July: The Salyut 3 research station and—nine days later—the Soyuz 14 spacecraft carrying a two-man crew were launched into nearearth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R. manned orbital workshop. Salyut 3 was launched at 4:55 am local time 25 June (7:55 pm EOT 24 June) from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with 252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to improve the station’s design, onboard systems, and equipment and to perform scientific research during space flight. By 30 June Salyut 3, which consisted of two cylinders more than 21 m in length and weighing some 18 500 kg, had been raised to a near-circular orbit with a 268-km apogee and 265-km perigee. Soyuz 14 was launched 3 July at 11:51 pm local time (2:51 pm EDT) from Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich, commander and veteran of the 12 Aug. 1962 Vostok 4 mission, and Yuri P. Artyukhin, flight engineer, to rendezvous with Salyut 3. The launch was seen by Soviet citizens by delayed broadcast on Moscow TV. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 338-km apogee, 201-km perigee, 89.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July Tass interview that the main objectives of the mission were “testing methods and systems of controlling the craft, improvement in the life-sustaining complex, [and] exploration of new possibilities of using both separate craft and groups of space objects to accomplish scientific and applied tasks in a nearearth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July trajectory correction placed the spacecraft in an orbit with a 277-km apogee, 255-km perigee, 89.7min period, and 51.6° inclination. All spacecraft systems were successfully checked out and the crew was reported to be in good health. The Soyuz 14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and docked with Scdyut 3 on 5 July during their 17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the Soviets would use during the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m three-room laboratory. During their 15-day mission the cosmonauts studied geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, atmospheric formations and phenomena, physical characteristics of outer space, and manufacturing techniques, as well as testing the Salyut space station’s improved design and solar-panel energy system. The crew also studied the influences of space on the human organism and exercised to prevent loss of muscle tone, using an onboard comprehensive trainer to simulate running, jumping, and weight lifting. . Tass reported 15 July that some Soviet scientists considered terminating the mission because unexpected, intense solar flares 4-8 July dramatically increased the radiation exposure. However, because the flares subsided and the space station’s orbit prevented excessive exposure, the crew’s work was not disrupted. While the cosmonauts worked in space, two Soviet researchers lived in a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same work. All commands relayed to the orbiting Salyut 3 were first checked on the ground and alternate versions of decisions for unforeseen situations were calculated. On 8 July the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, in training at Star City for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, telegraphed congratulations to the Salyut 3 cosmonauts on their “great success.” They said they looked forward to meeting the two after their “happy return.” By 18 July the crew completed most experiments and began transferring equipment to Soyuz 14. After checking out spacecraft systems, the cosmonauts undocked 19 July. Retrorockets were fired, parachutes deployed, and Soyuz 14 softlanded at 5:21 pm Baykonur time (8:21 am edt) 140 km southeast of Dzhezkazgan 2000 m from the planned target after 15 days 17 hours 30 min in space. The crew left the spacecraft unaided, and on-the-spot medical checks showed the cosmonauts’ health was “good.” All mission tests were reported completed. For the first time, a U.S.S.R. orbital mission had been in touch with mission control continuously because of maritime tracking. Salyut 3 was the third space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz 10 docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. A second crew, launched 6 June 1971 aboard Soyuz 11, entered the orbiting station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days. The three died during reentry when an open valve evacuated air from the spacecraft. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 20-26 June, 3—10 July 74; gsfc SSR, 30 June, 31 Aug 74; Tass, FBis-Sov, 25 June-23 July 74; UPl, W Star-News, 14 July 74; Browne, NYT, 9, 20 July 74; SBD, 9, 27 July 74; A&A 1973)
Evidence revealed during U.S.—U.S.S.R. planning for the joint 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had indicated the Soviet Union was never in the race to the moon, the Associated Press reported. U.S. officials had learned the Soyuz capsule was designed for relatively brief earth orbital flights and for ferrying cosmonauts to and from a space station, but it could not make a journey to the moon. AP quoted Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, a member of the astp planning team, as saying, “Our Apollo spacecraft is far, far more sophisticated and has got a greater capability than their Soyuz. That doesn’t say the Soyuz is no good. It was just built for a different job.” In addition, Soyuz was designed to be controlled from the ground or by preautomated devices. “Their spacecraft ... is designed around a philosophy that it doesn’t need a man to fly.” Cernan said that the U.S.S.R. “had no major over-all goal like landing on the moon. Their goals were all to be first. Get the first iron ball in orbit. Get the first man there . . . the first woman . . . the first multiman spacecraft.” By proceeding in this way, politically they “gained some significant firsts.” (Benedict, H Chron, 7 June 74)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
The universe was 16 billion yrs old, 6 billion yrs older than earlier estimates, according to California Institute of Technology astronomer Dr. Allen R. Sandage, the Washington Post reported after an interview. After 10 yrs of observing 50 galaxies, Dr. Sandage had dated the galaxies from 14 billion yrs ago, meaning that 2 billion yrs were required for the primordial gas cloud to cool enough for stars to begin forming. Working with Swiss astronomer Gustav Tamman, Dr. Sandage had arrived at his new date when his observations had led him to recalculate the Hubble Constant, the rate of speed for the expansion of the universe. He had checked his figures by dating stars in globular clusters in the Milky Way and by measuring the amounts of metal still burning in their atmospheres. (O’Toole, W Post, 11 Dec 74, Al)
Prof. Mikhail Tikhonravov, Soviet rocket pioneer, died in Moscow at the age of 73. Prof. Tikhonravov had worked on the development of the first man-made satellites, pilot-operated spacecraft, and automatic space stations. With Sergey P. Korolev, he had worked on development of early liquicUfuel rockets in the 1930s. He had been an early expert in glider and aircraft engineering. Tikhonravov had been awarded the Orders of Lenin and the Red Banner of Labor, the title of Hero of Socialist Labor, and the Lenin Prize. (NYT, 7 March 74, 40; Av Wk, 11 March 74)
The success of the Skylab program had made the idea of continuous occupation of an orbital base more concrete to the directors of the American space efforts, a New York Times article reported. Such a base could be assembled by flights of the space shuttle being developed by NASA and could be used to observe the sun and the earth and for manufacturing special materials under weightless conditions. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider had said in an interview, “We have shown that there is no man or machine limitation on whatever we want to do in space.” The confidence of space scientists had been strengthened by the apparent adaptation of the astronauts to space, although the Times reported Skylab 2 Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin and Johnson Space Center Director Christopher C. Kraft as cautioning that nine men “is a very small statistical sample.” More long test flights would have to be made. However, if the medical data held true, the design of future space stations could be made much simpler and the number of space shuttle flights to establish it would be fewer. Schneider had noted that the conflict between the Workshop’s need for power and its program for observation was still to be solved. The current design called for Workshop solar panels to point toward the sun rather than the earth. In a future space station, observatories might be placed on long booms which could turn on their own, minimizing the station’s need to maneuver. (McElheny, NYT, 10 Feb 74,40)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers testified on the manned space program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Myers said NASA’s ability to hold close to the original cost target for the space shuttle in spite of schedule adjustments in the last two years was “due to bringing on our contractors below our cost estimates” and the ability 6f the management structure to remain dynamic and react to changes and “surprise problems.” He was confident that the average-cost-per-flight commitment of $10.5 million in 1971 dollars would be maintained. However, resolution of the protested selection of Thiokol Corp. for the solid-fueled rocket motor contract was necessary before work on the motor could begin; “a timely start of this . . . activity is very important to orderly progress in the shuttle development schedule.” In the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the astp spacecraft was to be delivered to Kennedy Space Center in the fall, joint docking system qualification testing and preflight docking system compatibility tests were to be completed during the winter, experiment hardware was to be qualified by early spring, and flight readiness activities were to be conmleted by spring, leading to the July launch. NASA had allocated $13 million for experiments for astp. More than 140 proposals from the scientific community had been evaluated by eminent scientists and medical doctors. The final, “first-rate” experiment package had been given final approval by the Administrator. Following astp, two Saturn Vs, two Saturn IBs, one complete and one partially complete command and service module, the unused Skylab backup Workshop cluster, and one astp docking module and system would remain unused. Acquisition cost of the hardware was $870 million. With the conclusion of the programs, the hardware would be stored. Total storage costs per year would be $100 000. After FY 1975, disposition of the hardware would have to be considered. (Transcript)
The International Aeronautical Federation held its 25th Congress in Amsterdam with the theme “Space Stations, Present and Future.” Among speakers, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, U.S. and Soviet commanders in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, stressed how well joint work and understanding had advanced. A paper by Daniel J. Shramo of Lewis Research Center, with B. R. Foushee and P. J. O’Leary of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., described the Centaur primary upper stage for solar system exploration and its potential adaptation as an upper stage for the space shuttle. A Ukranian Academy of Sciences research team reported on experiments in the formation of melts in weightlessness with radiant heating and on prospects of using solar energy for space engineering. Comparative studies of metal solidification had suggested that a more uniform distribution of short-grained structures under weightlessness might become the basis of space technology, with the added attraction of using the sun as an energy source. The team had built a prototype solar plant that could be mounted on a spacecraft or used in a vacuum chamber on the earth. Soviet medical investigations during the flights of Soyuz 12 (launched 27 Sept. 1973), Soyuz 13 (18 Dec. 1973), and Soyuz 14 (3 July) were reported by Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko and others. Findings indicated that prolonged exercises, full and partial spacesuits, and gravity-simulating fittings had reduced effects of weightlessness during the space flight and after the crew’s return. Although reports of initial adaptation symptoms were similar to American findings, the Soviet paper also noted that cosmonauts had reduced vestibular symptoms by deliberately slowing down movements, especially head movements. Prof. Hilding A. Bjurstedt, Head of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, received the 1974 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for studies of physiological responses to environmental stress. Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, was elected iaf President (iaa Ann Rpt, 28 Aug 74; Parks, SF, Feb 75, 42-50; Program, 25th iaf Congress; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74, 21) During September: Large-scale verification tests of the “rectenna” receiving system for microwave energy transmission were run at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA. A microwave energy transmission system was being developed to determine the possibility of transmitting energy through space. The tests established a new record for microwave power transmission, delivering one kilowatt over a 1.6-km range. The 10-yr program had increased DC-to-DC efficiency of transmissions from 17% to 50% and efficiency of the rectenna in converting radio frequency to dc from 25% to 78%. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 15 Oct 74, 57-60)
A New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial advocated international cooperation in space: The U.S. was committed to a reusable space shuttle for possible use in the future with a permanent manned space station. The U.S.S.R. would probably embark on its own space shuttle and space station program. “The cost of establishing a space station ... is such that it would be foolish for each nation to assume the full burden when a common station could provide everything a separate one could—even a ‘secure section’ for each side for passive military uses.” {T—Picayune, 13 May 74,23)
The Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data through 1972 and a Forward Look (74-35SP), prepared by Dt. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of the Science Policy Research Div. In its manned program the U.S.S.R. had launched a Salyut 2 space station 3 April 1973 but a failure—possibly a wildly firing thruster—had damaged the station, which reentered the earth’s atmosphere May 28. Other later attempts to launch and man a space station also appeared to have failed. Two manned launches, Soyuz 12 and Soyuz 13, had been successful in September and December, the second spacecraft remaining in space eight days to conduct astrophysical, biological, and earth resources experiments. By 30 June 1974 the United States expected to have spent $75 billion on combined military and civilian space programs since the beginning of the space program, spending about $4.7 billion in FY 1974. The Soviet Union did not publish space budget data, but its program was thought to be “at least of the same magnitude as that of the United States at its former peak” of $7.7 billion a year. The U.S. had several major space research and development centers operated by the military and private industry as well as NASA. There was no reason to believe the Soviet aerospace industry was as fully equipped but missiles of similar capabilities and different design philosophies which had appeared in Moscow parades “suggest the existence of more than one design and development team for space work.” The U.S. had launch vehicles scaled to lift payloads weighing from 9 kg to 136 000 kg. The Soviet Union had started to use in 1957 its original intercontinental ballistic missile and still used the same basic vehicle with stages added to improve performance. The very large Soviet vehicle predicted by NASA officials had not been seen. A Soviet lunar landing did not seem imminent but was still expected, as part of Soviet long-range plans, as soon as the problems of unreliable hardware were solved. U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperation in space efforts was “the hope of well-intentioned people everywhere.” Two motives for cooperation were to lessen tension and to save money. Although there was already exchange of information between scientists and engineers, “no assessment of the overall prospects can be made successfully without forecasting the future political climate.” (Text) Despite the loss of the prime power chain, causing automatic transfer to the backup system, Mariner 10’s instruments continued scientific studies. Comet Kohoutek’s tail was observed in the extreme ultraviolet range. On 13 Jan. hydrogen Lyman-alpha intensity, beginning 20° from the comet’s nucleus, climbed rapidly as the nucleus region drifted toward the uv airglow spectrometer’s field of view. The nucleus was scanned 16 Jan. On 17 Jan., while the spacecraft was powered down for its second trajectory correction maneuver, shutting off several instrument heaters allowed the TV optics heaters, which had failed to function earlier, to turn on. Scientists had feared that below-freezing temperature might prevent camera operation during the Venus encounter. On 21 Jan., instruments for Comet Kohoutek and solar wind experiments were turned on. On 22 Jan. the uv spectrometer measured hydrogen Lyman-alpha intensities out to 17° to map the comet’s hydrogen cloud. Comet Kohoutek was scanned seven hours 24 Jan. by the UV spectrometer—the only instrument of its kind to observe the comet from outside the earth’s own hydrogen cloud. During the seventh and final roll calibration maneuver 28 Jan., telemetry indicated a rapid increase in the use of attitude control gas, the nitrogen gas supply dropping from 2.7 to 2.1 kg. The gyros were turned off and the spacecraft put into celestial control, with the sun and the star Canopus as references. Nitrogen-gas-use rate returned to normal and estimates of the supply indicated a comfortable margin for reaching Mercury and executing experiments. The backup electric power system was still in use, as studies of that problem continued. On 31 Jan. Mariner 10 was 3 200 000 km from Venus and 38 800 000 km from the earth, traveling at 30 238 km per hr. (JPL Mariner Venus/ Mercury 1973 Bull Nos 14, 15; NASA pao press briefing transcript, 31 Jan 74; W Post, 10 Jan 74, A5)
Hills 1000 m high on the planet Mercury, as well as valleys 700 m deep and craterlike surface features 50 km across, had been found by Jet Propulsion Laboratory radar astronomers during high-resolution scans, NASA announced. The features were charted by directing high-powered beams at Mercury in 14 probes between 15 July and 8 Dec. 1972 from Goldstone Deep Space Station’s 64-m dish antenna. Months of computer work had analyzed the data and formulated a map of radar findings, which might be verified 29 March when Mariner 10 (launched 3 Nov. 1973) was scheduled to fly past and take the first closeup photos of Mercury, (nasa Release 74-12)
A massive new power source for earth—transmission of solar energy by microwave frequency—had been under study by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the Goldstone station near Barstow, Calif. The dish antenna equipped with a 450-kw klystron tube for microwave transmission, represented a space station; the tower a mile away with an array of solar receivers to which the experimental power converted to microwave energy had been beamed represented a ground station. This research had been designed to lead to a network of space stations that would collect solar energy 24 hr a day and beam it to ground stations; the Goldstone tests had been the first high-power field trials of the system. Tiny rectifying dipole antennas—called rectennas— collect and convert the radio-frequency beam; the 17 panels in the tower receiver contain 4590 of the rectennas. The system had demonstrated a maximum output of 30.4 kw converting the microwave beam to usable electricity, an efficiency of 82.5%. A space-to-earth system would be 6 times more effective than a surface system, the Los Angeles Times commented, and could probably supply 15% to 20% of the earth’s energy needs in the next century. Development of a utility operating system delivering 10 000 mw of power would cost about $60 billion, as much as NASA has spent to date on space programs. A single equatorial space station carrying a 1-km-diameter antenna transmitting to a U.S. earth station 15 km long and 10 km wide could supply all the electrical needs of New York City or a third of the needs of the Los Angeles basin. (LA Times, 6 Oct 75, 1; NYT, 10 Oct 75, 2)
Radio astronomers in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had intensified their search for possible civilizations out in space, Walter Sullivan wrote in theNew York Times. Little publicity had been given the search to prevent raising public expectation for “what is likely to be a prolonged effort.” Costs were minimal, because the observations had made use of equipment also used for other research. Dr. Hans Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, had told students at the Polytechnic Inst, of N.Y. that the search for other civilizations would become “one of the major scientific enterprises,” and cited his belief that “communicative civilizations” had been a natural consequence of biological evolution. Dr. Mark pointed out that the U.S. giant antenna at Goldstone, Calif., used for spacecraft communications, could pick up emissions only from the vicinity of the nearest stars. One American search is using the largest antenna on earth—the dish at Arecibo, P.R.—to scan the five nearest galaxies at 1420 mhz, the frequency of radio waves given off by hydrogen atoms, long considered a logical frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The Arecibo search had been conducted by two Cornell professors, Dr. Frank B. Drake and Dr. Carl Sagan. Another American search had been using the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., to scan 700 stars (resembling earth’s sun) within 80 light years of the solar system for signals at the 1420-mhz wavelength. No obvious signals had been detected, but the recordings had not been subjected to detailed analysis, according to Dr. Patrick Palmer of the Univ. of Chicago and Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of the Univ. of Md. The Soviet program, scanning the entire portion of the celestial sphere visible from the Soviet Union, had been using two networks with a total of eight stations spread across the vast width of the Soviet Union. The November issue of Icarus, international journal of solar-system studies, had carried a prospectus of the Soviet CETI (communication with extraterrestrial intelligence) program divided into two phases. CETI 1* scheduled from 1975 to 1985, included the whole-sky Scan by eight stations plus monitoring by two space stations and a survey of nearby galaxies like the one under way at Arecibo. Only the eight-station project had been initiated, as far as U.S. scientists knew. CETI 2, from 1980 to 1990, had been scheduled to continue satellite monitoring but would also use setnirotatable antennas such as the RAT AN—600 antenna 600 m wide, known to be located high in the Caucasus; the system consisted of numerous plates that had to be aimed individually* calling for hand alignment since no computer had been designed to perform this role. The Soviets also envisioned a monitoring station at the point beyond the moon where the gravitational fields of earth and moon would balance each other; a station at that point would be protected from the earth’s own radio emissions. Identical fluctuations of signal recorded simultaneously at widely separated points would be considered to have extraterrestrial origin rather than to result from a local manmade effect. (NYT, 29 Nov 75, C13) During November: An x-ray telescope assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center for the study of remnants of an exploded star had been shipped from England; where it had undergone payload integration, to the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia for launch. The project, called Skylark for the British sounding rocket on which the telescope would fly, was a joint British-Anierican undertaking to study a supernova remnant known as Puppis A for information on the evolution of stars and perhaps oil the formation of neutron stars. The flight would provide at least 3 min 20 sec for the 346.5-kg payload to make its observations above 120-km altitude. (NASA Release 75—287; MSFC Release 75—238)
NASA’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Chester M. Lee said at a NASA Headquarters press briefing that a number of modifications had been made on the Apollo command and service modules to accommodate the special requirements of the July U.S.—U.S.S.R. ASTP mission. Changes to the command module included a modified umbilical to accommodate docking-module functions, an additional TV camera and recorder for coverage of joint activities, modified controls and displays for new equipment and experiments, additional equipment for communications and TV coverage via Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974), modified stowage, added intervehicular intercom, and additional VHF-FM communications capability at the U.S.S.R. frequency. Changes in the service module included added heaters and insulation of propellant systems for solar inertial attitude, added propellant storage module for increased attitude-control and backup deorbit capability, and deletion of the unused main propellant tank. The docking module would be carried in the same position in which the lunar module had been during lunar landing missions. It would be extracted in the same manner, by separating the CSM from the booster once in orbit, turning around, and pulling out the docking module with the nose of the CSM. In response to questioning, Lee said that the U.S. cost of the ASTP mission would fall within the $245-mi]lion congressional authorization. Although the Soviets had not quoted a specific amount, Lee believed that the launch of the two unmanned Soyuz spacecraft to check out modifications made for ASTP, the launch of a manned mission, and the preparations for two complete spacecraft and crews would indicate that the Soviets were investing “at least the equivalent” in resources. (Transcript)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
A long-duration free-flying manned space station in earth orbit appeared to be the most economical way of providing a continuing manned presence in space, according to “Manned Orbital Systems Concepts,” a study conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. A station that could significantly extend the time in space planned for the Space Shuttle would offer advantages for doing a given amount of work with fewer flights and reducing the number of turnarounds, checkouts, and similar operations. A permanent facility could offer maintenance and repair and even reconfiguration of payloads. The study envisioned development of four-man facilities that would serve as building blocks for growth into larger stations for 12 or 24 workers as needed; the four-man configuration would consist of a subsystems and habitability module carried into orbit by one Shuttle and joined with a logistics and payload module carried on a second mission. Several payload modules could be docked in tandem with the core vehicle, or in radial locations through use of a multiple-port docking adapter. The core vehicle would be left on station for a nominal lifetime of 5 yr, logistic and payload modules being replaced at 90-day intervals. Crew exchange and resupply would occur every 90 days. The study concluded that problems anticipated by the world in the 1990s should be solved in the 1980s, and that an extended-duration manned orbital facility could contribute significantly to those solutions. (MSFC Release 75— 26)
The U.S.S.R. launched its 76th space mission for 1975, an unmanned Soyuz 20, from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam, and established a new procedure by identifying the unmanned flight as a spacecraft designed for manned flight. Reuters quoted Soviet scientist Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov as saying the purpose of the flight was to develop a transport system either to supply a space station with expendables, or to serve as an emergency rescue ship. One possibility would be to automatically dock a Soyuz with the manned station after one of the cosmonauts had removed the original Soyuz, or perhaps a new Soyuz would be used as a new return vehicle: one of these procedures would be required unless the Salyut space station had been designed with two docking positions. The Soviet director of July’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, Konstantin Bushuyev, in Houston for a conference, said Soyuz 20 had not been designed to transfer expendables to the current Salyut 4 space station; Christopher S. Wren, reporting from Moscow for the New York Times, pointed out that it was not known how provisions could be transferred from the Soyuz to the space station, since neither craft had been reported to have such an automatic capability. (NYT, 20 Nov 75; 21 Nov 75, 25; SBD, 18 Nov 75, 90; 21 Nov 75, 114)
The development of space law, which had begun about the time of the launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 in 1957, was a unique process. “The problems are both literally and symbolically out of this world,” NASA General Counsel Neil S. Hosenball said in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Star. Does any state have the right to claim the natural resources of celestial bodies? Were earth’s criminal and civil laws applicable in space? What was the difference between establishing a planetary base and planting a nation’s flag? Which court would rule on extraterrestrial squabbles? These were some of the questions lawyers and politicians would have to consider in the space age. Few precedents existed, and no judge had yet heard a case in a legal dispute originating outside the earth’s atmosphere. In fact, a world court, recognized by all major powers, did not exist. In 1962, a United Nations ad hoc committee on peaceful uses of outer space had developed principles later incorporated into the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. These included a ban against military activity in outer space and against any nation’s claiming a section of space or a planet as its own. Other treaties dealt with specific points such as the rescue of astronauts and the registration of spacecraft and space stations. Hosenball stressed that most charters and treaties were drawn up ahead of time in anticipation of problems likely to occur as space exploration expanded. The Sentinel quoted G. P. Zhukov, chief legal counsel of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, as saying that detente between , the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had been assisted by the success of “legal regulation in space. . . . Man’s foot had not yet stepped on the surface of-the moon and we had already formulated what man could and could not do on the moon. The law was ahead of science.” (Orlando Sentinel Star, 12 Aug 75)
Soviet engineers had been working on a “spaceplane” to carry cosmonauts to and from orbit as part of a long-term project to establish a major space platform in the 1980s, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Western observers had expected the reusable spacecraft to be launched by an expendable booster, but CSM reported that the rumored aim was to fly it from the back of a ramjet-powered boost vehicle that would return to base. The project was thought to be linked with development of a large multiman modular space station that the Soviets expected to assemble in orbit before 1980. CSM reported that U.S. Air Force reconnaissance satellites had noted preparations at the Baykonur Cosmodrome to retest the huge SLX—14 booster, scheduled to launch the station. The SLX—14 had been delayed for 5 yr by a series of mishaps: Two launch complexes had been built for the SLX—14, one of which burned during a 1969 fueling test. Intelligence reports indicated it had been rebuilt. In an August 1975 issue of Sputnik magazine, reprinted from the Soviet Naukal Zhin, U.S.S.R. Chief of Cosmonaut Training Vladimir A. Shatalov confirmed Soviet interest in a reusable space vehicle. Although “the future of cosmonautics is largely connected with longterm orbital stations,” he said, the fact that carrier rockets were extremely expensive and could be used only once was “becoming a serious brake on the development of cosmonautics and relevant research.” Neither the airplane nor the spaceship had proven capable of flying into orbit and then reentering. But there is every reason to believe that in the not-so-distant future aviation and cosmonautics would “draw appreciably closer together.” Shatalov said Soviet and U.S. scientists had already made important high-altitude and highspeed experiments. Shatalov visualized “a new-type spaceship” consisting of a smaller one launched from a larger one after reaching required speed. The carrier craft would return to a landing field, and the smaller craft would orbit, accomplish its mission, and then land. “Creation of an apparatus with greater orbital maneuverability would . . . make it possible ... to deliver satellites on orbits in the spacecraft’s freight compartment, serve and repair them in space and bring back to earth samples of explorations and observations and even the satellites themselves if they go out of order.” Although “creation of this new type of space apparatus” posed a host of technical problems, “modern science and technology can solve them” and “the time was not far off when such a plane would make its maiden flight.” (Gatland, CSM, 28 July 75, 11; Sputnik, “Plane for Outer Space,” Aug 75, 68-71)
Most of the 40 participants at a space-food exhibition banquet in Zvezdny Gorodok, U.S.S.R., found the meal tasty but not very filling, the Washington Post reported. Presiding over the affair, cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, Soviet commander for the scheduled July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, said that after the third day of spaceflight, when an astronaut’s appetite improved, he could consume four meals a day. The banquet menu included fruit juices, coffee, borsch, cabbage soup, bite-sized bread, and a compote of cucumber, chicken necks, and kidney. During the dinner Leonov revealed that the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, launched 24 May and in orbit aboard the Salyut 4 space station, would continue in orbit during the ASTP mission and would probably remain in orbit for another month. (Piper, W Post, 27 June 75, A2)
Soyuz 20, the unmanned Soviet spacecraft launched from Baykonur 17 Nov., docked automatically withSalyut 4 using onboard radio devices and computer installations for a program of “testing unit constructions and onboard systems. . .in joint flight,” Tass announced. Salyut 4, the orbiting space station, had been visited by the crew of Soyuz 17 for almost 30 days and by the crew of Soyuz 18 for more than 60 days. The Soyuz 20 mission had been analyzed as transfer of fuel to Salyut 4; in orbit since 26 Dec. 1974, the space station was thought to be running low on maneuvering fuel. Reporters had speculated that a new two-man crew might be sent to Salyut 4 later this year for a stay of 3 mo or longer that would break the 84-day record set by U.S. astronauts in 1974. The value of the automatic docking for resupply would be the economy of not sending men with each flight, although the Soviets had never indicated the cost of their launches. Tass reported that the “space complex Salyut-4— Soyuz-20” was in an orbit with apogee 367 km, perigee 343 km, 51.6° inclination, and 91.4 min period of revolution. (IF Post, 21 Nov 75, B14; NYT, 21 Nov 75, 25; FBIS No. 225, 19 Nov 75, No. 226, 20 Nov 75; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 108) 19 November—23 December: Atmosphere Explorer—E, third in a series of new deep-dipper spacecraft designed to investigate the ionosphere, was launched from Eastern Test Range aboard a Delta vehicle at 9:07 pm EST (0206GMT) into an almost perfect orbit: apogee, 3026 km; perigee, 157 km; inclination, 19.7°; period, 118.1 min. In orbit the satellite became Explorer 55. Major difference between the original and new generation of atmosphere explorers was the unusually large onboard propulsion system that enabled the later spacecraft to move themselves up or down in space by hundreds of km or go from highly elliptical to circular orbits. The name “deep-dippers” meant that the spacecraft could drop into the atmosphere and pull out again, taking measurements only while in the upper reaches of the thermosphere. This region, important because it absorbed most ultraviolet light and heat received from the sun and because movement of that heat determined the structure of the upper atmosphere, had been difficult to study because the altitude was too high for all aircraft and most balloons and too low for other satellites. The dipping orbit prevented accumulation of excessive heat in the metal skins of the AE spacecraft. Explorer 55 would also carry a backscatter ultraviolet spectrophotometer to obtain a vertical profile and density measurements of the ozone layer between 20°N and S; the measurements would be compared with those from Nimbus 4, launched in 1970, to evaluate the long-term accuracy of the Nimbus instrumentation. A mission operations report 23 Dec. said Explorer 55 had completed more than 400 orbits and all subsystems were performing well. (NASA Release 75— 290, 70-29, 72-212; KSC Release 266-75; SBD, 21 Nov 75, 114; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75, 3; MORs 13 Nov 75, 3 Dec 75, 23 Dec 75)
The 38 000-kg second stage from the Saturn V booster that placed the Skylab 1 orbital workshop in orbit 14 May 1973 reentered the atmosphere over the Atlantic Ocean just before 3 am EST. NASA reported that radar tracked one large chunk that survived the fiery plunge through the atmosphere and fell into the ocean at 34° north latitude, 19° west longitude, about 1600 km west of Gibraltar. Smaller pieces might have scattered over an area several kilometers to the . northwest and southeast of that point and some charred debris might have fallen on the Sahara Desert, but NASA received no report that any fragments had caused damage or injury. (NASA PAO, interview, 30 June 1976; Reuter, W Post, 12 Jan 75, A14; AP, WStar-News, 12 Jan 75, Al; UPI, NYT, 12 Jan 75, 55) 11 January—9 February: The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 17, carrying cosmonauts Lt. Col. Aleksey A. Gubarev and Georgy M. Grechko, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 2:43 am local time (4:43 pm EST 10 Jan.) to rendezvous and dock with the Salyut 4 space station launched 26 Dec. 1974. Soyuz 17 entered orbit with a 249-km apogee, 186-km perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the mission would carry joint experiments with Salyut 4, including a comprehensive checkout of the spacecraft’s onboard systems in various flight conditions. After an orbital correction that raised the spacecraft’s orbit to 354km apogee, 90.7-min period, and 51.6° inclination, Soyuz 17 docked with Salyut 4 on 12 Jan. Gubarev and Grechko entered the station, switched on the power and radio transmitters, and inspected the scientific equipment. During tbeir nearly 30 days aboard Salyut 4, the cosmonauts studied solar phenomena, x-radiation from celestial bodies, and earth’s radiation. They also studied the effects of weightlessness on the human body, made earth-resources observations, and studied the earth’s upper atmosphere. They resprayed two telescope mirrors dulled by exposure to space; carried out biological “Oasis” experiments using insects, microorganisms, tissue cultures, and plants; and recycled water, condensed from the cabin’s atmosphere, for drinking and food preparation. The crew began preparations to return to earth on 9 Feb., reboarding Soyuz 17 and undocking from the space station at 11:08 am Baykonur time (1:08 am EST). Soyuz 17 softlanded in-the U.S.S.R. 110 km northeast of Tselinograd, Kazakhstan, “in complex meteorological conditions” after 29 da 13 hr 20 min in space. On-the-spot and subsequent medical checks showed the cosmonauts to be in good health. The Soyuz 17 cosmonauts broke the previous 23-day 18-hr 22-min Soviet record for time in space, set by the Soyuz 11 crew (6—30 June 1971) before they were killed during reentry. (GSFC SSR, 28Feb 75; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 13 Jan—13 Feb 75;SF, April75,144-5, June 75,235; UPI, AFT7, 16 Jan 75, U-,SBD, 14 Jan 75, 62; LC S&T News Alert 2645)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had turned down a request by Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) to postpone the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for launch on 15 July) until the U.S.S.R. brought back the two Soyuz 18 cosmonauts who had been docked with the orbiting Salyut 4 space station since 26 May 1975. Sen. Proxmire said that the Soviet Union would be unable to maintain ground control of two manned missions simultaneously. He had based his judgment on closed-door testimony given him as chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee by Carl Duckett, deputy director for science and technology at the Central Intelligence Agency. The Post quoted Prox-mire as saying that the Soviet command center would be strained to handle two manned flights, particularly if one were in trouble in space. Sen. Proxmire said that it would he a simple matter to deorbit the two Soyuz 18 cosmonauts and bring them home. In a telephone interview with the Post, ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said that the Soviet Union had two mission-control centers, one managing the Salyut flight, the other managing ASTP. Lunney said NASA had calculated that the two Soviet spacecraft would cross over the same Soviet tracking stations only twice: One overlap might last as long as 30 sec and the other 90 sec. Soviet officials had assured NASA that ASTP communications would have priority during these two short passes. (O’Toole, W Post, 3 July 75, A33)
The U.S.S.R. had turned down a U.S. invitation to participate in another joint manned space mission in 1976, Thomas O’Toole of the Washington Post reported a U.S. space official as saying. O’Toole reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low had suggested to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Vladimir Kotelnikov that two Soviet cosmonauts and three American astronauts dock with a Soviet Salyut space station and work together in earth orbit for up to 2 wk. However, the Soviets had replied that they would undertake a repeat of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to fly an Apollo-Salyut in any reasonable length of time. The Post quoted Dr. Low as saying, “Any second American—Russian space flight will have to wait until the 1980s.” The Post also quoted Dr. Low as saying that NASA had suggested an Apollo-Salyut mission as early as 1971, but the Soviets had requested a change back to an Apollo-Soyuz mission during a presummit meeting in April 1972 just before President Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. Low said that the Soviets had said that it was too expensive to modify Salyut to accept both a Soyuz and an Apollo spacecraft at the same time. (O’Toole, W Post, 14 July 75, Al)
In a letter to Rep. Don Fuqua, chairman of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher summarized options for missions that could use the remaining Apollo-Saturn flight hardware. Options included an earth-orbital mission as an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project backup; a Skylab revisit; an Apollo geosynchronous mission; a lunar orbital mission; an earth-orbital mission to visit a Soviet space station; and a manned-satellite inspector. The hardware could also be used to launch a U.S. unmanned space station carrying a large U.S.S.R. payload, a large orbiting reflector, a space solar-power demonstration, a planetary probe, or multiple payloads. Another possibility might be to carry an Apollo spacecraft into space aboard the Space Shuttle to provide a crew-rescue capability or to serve as a habitable module, to demonstrate a Shuttle-serviced free-flying module, or to inspect and service orbiting satellites. Dr. Fletcher’s letter added that he did not foresee that funds would be available to support additional Apollo-Saturn missions in the period preceding the Space Shuttle operation. The subcommittee at a 25 March meeting had asked NASA to summarize the options when the agency had sought permission to dispose of surplus Apollo-Saturn equipment [see 9 April]. (Text, letter from Fletcher to Fuqua and attachment “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Satum-Apollo Hardware,” 15 Sept 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)
NASA issued a request for proposals from industry on a space-station systems analysis study. The proposals would be due 26 Jan. 1976. Two $700 000 contracts would be issued in April for parallel 18-mo concept studies, one to be managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the other by Johnson Space Center. Contractors would study low-orbit and synchronous-orbit facilities, to begin module construction in the mid-1980s. The space station would be used as a test facility and construction base to support the manufacture and assembly in space of various kinds of space structures—e.g., generation of electric power by large solar collectors and transmission to earth by microwave antennas. Other uses would be the retrieval and repair of automated spacecraft, or storage and transfer of fuel and other expendables. Elements of the station would be compatible with the Shuttle cargo bay, 18.3 m long by 4.6 m in diameter. (NASA Release 75-310; MSFC Release 75 -262; JSC Release 75 -99)
Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, received the gold medal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers at its annual winter meeting honors assembly in Houston. Faget had been responsible for design and testing of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft and the Skylab space station, as well as of the Space Shuttle scheduled for flight in the late 1970s. Previous JSC recipients of the ASME gold medal had been JSC Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., in 1973 and former JSC Director Robert R. Gilruth in 1970. (JSC Release 75—98)
Salyut 4, launched into earth orbit on 26 Dec. 1974, was continuing its flight, Tass reported. To date, the space station had completed 4200 revolutions of the earth and, in automatic mode, was collecting data and making astrophysical observations with the onboard instrumentation. All systems were functioning normally. Since its launch, Salyut 4 had been inhabited by two two-man crews. The first crew, launched 11 Jan. 1975 aboard Soyuz 17, lived and worked aboard the station for nearly 30 days. A second crew, launched 24 May 1975 aboard Soyuz 18, visited the station for a Soviet manned space flight record of 63 days. A third mission, launched 5 April, was aborted when the booster third stage malfunctioned. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 23 Sept 75, Ul; A&A 74)
The USSR had made good use of observations from its manned space stations, Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov said, citing photographs taken by Salyut 3 showing 67 locations where oil and natural gas could be found in the Caspian Sea region and 84 in Uzbekistan. The satellite did in 3 mo a job that had taken 60 yr of ground prospecting to reveal 102 deposits, he said. Published in the Feb. issue of the British magazine Spaceflight, the report by Sedov mentioned contributions to agriculture from a space survey that revealed millions of gallons of water “just below the surface” of arid lands near the Caspian Sea, showing areas that might be suitable for “oasis farming” or grazing livestock. Discussing changes in the environment made possible by space technology, Sedov said such influences should “bear a global character,” to avoid a repetition of the “notorious experiment” (the so-called West Ford) in which the U.S. released a cloud of copper fibers in orbit in 1963 for communications experiments; West Ford caused worldwide complaints by radio astronomers. (Spaceflight, Feb 76, 54) March 1976
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
The failure of Soyuz 23 to rendezvous with Salyut 5 indicated that the USSR was still encountering the technical and procedural problems that had beset its manned space program for the past 15 yr, said Aviation Wk & Space Technology magazine. The failure was the seventh in 11 attempts to complete various space-station missions and the second in a row for Salyut; the unplanned water landing that concluded the failed mission was the first in Soviet space history, but was attributed to “nothing more than bad luck,” said Av Wk. The rendezvous-system failure was the fourth Soyuz mission plagued by procedural errors or hardware malfunctions associated with docking: Soyuz 3 failed to dock with Soyuz 2 in 1968, Soyuz 8 failed to dock with Soyuz 7 in 1969, and Soyuz 15 had been unable to rendezvous and dock with Salyut 3 in 1974. Because the failure of a system on the Soyuz 23 ended its mission rather than any problem with Salyut 5, Western observers wondered how soon the Soviets would attempt to reman the space station, which Av Wk referred to as “military.” (Av Wk, 25 Oct 76, 23)
Recovery of the unmanned Soyuz 20 spacecraft that landed in Kazakhstan 16 Feb. carrying a “comprehensive biology payload”—including both plant and animal life—concluded what the Christian Science Monitor described as an impressive 3-mo biology experiment. Results from Soyuz 20 would be compared with those of similar experiments— including some from the U.S.—carried on the Vostok-type biosat Cosmos 782 which stayed 19.4 days in space last year. Cosmos 782 had carried a small centrifuge to test effects of artificial gravity on flora and fauna; comparison of the previous tests with those from Soyuz 20 would help decide whether—and how much—artificial gravity would be needed in future space stations. Soyuz 20 had docked with the Salyut 4 space station 19 Nov. 1975, an example of a self-docking biolab that demonstrated the USSR plan for assembling complex space objects from separately launched modules. (CSM, 26 Feb 76, 6)
A “tethered” satellite—suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle orbiter’s cargo bay—could serve to deploy and control materials used in constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80 and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles— sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites—could not remain in that region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)
Soyuz 21 cosmonauts Boris Volynov and Vitaly Zholobov, who landed safely 24 Aug. from a 48-day mission to Soviet space station Salyut 5, returned to Moscow from the Baykonur cosmodrome near Tyuratam where they had been resting after their flight. The two received the title of Hero of the Soviet Union, Volynov for the second time. The news agency Tass reported that Salyut 5 was flying in a “controlled automatic regime.” In a Pravda interview, Academician Georgy Petrov emphasized the importance of orbiting stations, which he said would serve in preparing for space flights to other planets as well as in studying the earth from outer space. Petrov predicted the building of space stations with changeable crews of 20 to 30, serving for periods of time up to decades, and later the establishment of “super-large multipurpose orbital complexes with crews consisting of a hundred members and more.” A special role would be that of stations for moon study in selenocentric orbits, from which crews would land on the moon’s surface in “small expeditionary spacecraft.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 1-6 Sept 76)
The organizational structure of a large earth-orbiting space station was the topic of a doctoral study at Fla. State Univ. for Dr. James Ragusa of Kennedy Space Center’s Science and Applications Office. The study was an offshoot of work on future space projects (with Gene McCoy of KSC’s Shuttle Payload Integration Office) before Dr. Ragusa left to work on his Ph.D. The topic was one about which little had been written, and was timely in that the structure should be included in plans for such a mission. Spacelab, with a 7-man crew, needed no complex organizational structure; a space colony with a projected population of thousands would require a government rather than an organizational structure. A space base housing 50 to 100 persons would bring together people of varying backgrounds for extended periods of time—the station being designed with a 10-yr operating life—and large-group behavior would be a factor in considering the best type of organization. Ragusa investigated the organizational structures used on submarines and destroyers, interviewing the submarine captains and taking cruises on the nuclear sub Nathanael Greene and the research sub Benjamin Franklin. Among those interviewed for the study were Dr. Wernher von Braun; Arthur Clarke, author of 2001 and father of the communications satellite; several astronauts; and Gene Roddenberry, creator of the TV series “Star Trek.” Ragusa found that the organization on Roddenberry’s U.S.S. Enterprise was modeled after that used on 18th century English ships, which in turn was based on that used on Phoenician ships 2500 years ago, in which the ship was considered an extension of the country itself and abided by the laws and traditions of the homeland; the captain was king, and his word was law. The structure best fitting the needs of a space base was the “total matrix model” with four levels of hierarchy, best for efficient and orderly management of the crew because of its adaptability. Of 8 models, the “Star Trek” structure ranked fifth because of its lack of flexibility and efficiency. (Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 5)
Calling the Space Shuttle “clearly . . . the. next logical step” in tapping the scientific and commercial possibilities of space, the Baltimore Sun said in an editorial that criticisms of the Shuttle program from an economic point of view should be balanced with the rewards that would come only from experience. The first Shuttle was never intended to be selfsupporting, the editorial said, and the rewards would include increased knowledge to serve as the basis for more sophisticated programs and the increased likelihood of constructing a permanently staffed permanently orbiting space station. Complaints from prospective users—ComSat and DOD—that Shuttle fees would be too high “before NASA even has announced these fees” were an obvious ploy to keep the fees as low as possible, the editorial said. (B Sun, 13 April 76)
NASA selected Grumman Aerospace Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp. to negotiate fixed-price contracts for parallel systems analyses of concepts for space stations in low- and synchronous-altitude earth orbits, including orbit-to-orbit transportation. The 2 studies, each to last 18 mo and cost about $700 000, would be managed by MSFC for Grumman and by JSC for McDonnell Douglas; the work would begin 1 Apr. The studies would define an operational base in space to serve as a space laboratory, of modular construction with potential for growth over the years. Proposals were also received from Rockwell International Space Div. and Boeing Aerospace Co. (NASA Release 76-41; JSC Release 76-19; MSFC Release 76-50)
The 2 Soyuz 21 cosmonauts aboard space station Salyut 5, first manned space mission since last July’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, were experiencing “a state of sensory deprivation, a sort of sensory hunger,” according to the government newspaper Izvestia. Although Col. Boris Volynov and Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov continued to carry out their scientific and medico-biological experiments as they entered the 7th wk of their stay on Salyut 5—the halfway mark toward breaking the U.S. endurance record of 84 days in space set by 3 Skylab 4 astronauts in 1973—and despite their years of training to combat the problem, Izvestia said “the organism still reacts in a peculiar way to space conditions.” One symptom of “the increase in their need for communication” was that the cosmonauts were asking ground control more and more often for news from earth. On the advice of psychologists, ground control had begun playing music to the cosmonauts, Izvestia said. (UPI, in W Star, 17 Aug 76, A-4)
Clocking the speed of plasma at 50 km per sec in the active regions of the sun was “among the most interesting results” of investigations carried out aboard the USSR space station Salyut 4, Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov wrote in the Bulletin of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Feoktistov, one of the cosmonauts on the flight of Voskhod 1 in Oct. 1964, was quoted in a Tass broadcast as saying that data from the two manned expeditions to Salyut 4 were still being processed, but that the missions had established man’s ability to “work well in conditions of weightlessness” for more than 2 mo. Citing the stay of Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov aboard the station from 25 May to 25 July last year, and describing the use of exercises and pressurized suits to maintain health during that time, Feoktistov said the mission results offered hope that orbital stations and piloted space flights would be further developed. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 May 76)
The European Space Agency’s launch vehicle Ariane during its 5-yr development period would use hydrazine fuel supplied by the USSR, reported the British journal New Scientist. The U.S. hydrazine plant near Baltimore had been closed down because of contamination by nitro-samines, hydrazine sources suspected of causing cancer. Hydrazine, highly corrosive and difficult to handle, had not been manufactured in Western Europe, and no one wanted to do so, according to the report. Ariane’s discontinued predecessor Europa used a less powerful fuel— liquid oxygen and kerosene—and the USSR had used hydrazine from the plant near Moscow to power the large rockets that launched the Salyut space stations and large interplanetary probes. The report said that the hydrazine deal stemmed from France’s longstanding cooperation with the USSR in aerospace technology; if the Soviets should restrict hydrazine supplies, France would build a European plant because its commitments would override environmental objections. (W Post, 22 Apr 76, A-52)
The Soyuz 21 manned mission to space station Salyut 5 ended abruptly after cosmonauts Vitaly Zholobov and Boris Volynov had been in orbit 48 da. Although the first manned space flight since Apollo-Soyuz failed to break the U.S. 84-day record, no problem was mentioned by the Tass news agency; the first hint of termination came about 10 hr before the landing. The Soyuz 21 descent module landed by parachute on the Karl Marx collective farm near Tselinograd in Kazakhstan at 9:33 pm Moscow time (1:33 pm EST); general condition of the cosmonauts was “satisfactory,” said Tass. Experiments returned to earth for analysis were of 3 kinds: geophysical and astrophysical observations, technological, and biological. Technology experiments used processes potentially useful in constructing a larger space station, such as studies of the behavior of gases and liquids in space and a soldering technique using a chemical reaction to produce the necessary heat. Cytological and genetic experiments should provide additional data on the nature and hazards of solar radiation in prolonged space flight. (Nature, 26 Aug 76, 735; Av Wk, 30 Aug 76, 23; FBIS, Tass in English, 24 Aug 76; NYT, 25 Aug 76, 20; W Post, 25 Aug 76, B-9)
First of 4 U.S.-West German rocket launches to investigate the source of the aurora borealis, in a study called Project Porcupine, would be fired to an altitude of 500 km from northern Sweden, NASA announced. Two identical 250-kg payloads would be flown at twilight between 17 Mar. and 4 Apr. when moonlight interference would be at a minimum; a second pair of rockets would be launched in 1977. The instrument packages would have 12 quill-like booms sticking out to gather data for aurora-probe experiments beyond the orbits of the U.S. Skylab and USSR Salyut space stations. At about 450 km altitude, canisters of barium would be exploded to identify magnetic-field lines and plasma drifts; a NASA jet from Ames Research Center would be in flight over Greece to photograph the clouds released from the rockets. Data from Project Porcupine would be compared with energetic-particle and magnetic-field data gathered by NASA’s Ats 6. The payloads, largest and most complex to be fired on sounding rockets, would he the first flown on the new Aries rocket, modified from Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile parts provided by the U.S. Air Force. Project Porcupine would be part of the 1976-78 International Magnetospheric Study, a 40-nation effort to explore the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 76-44; NYT, 28 Mar 76, 21)
NASA issued 2 major reports—SP-386, “Outlook for Space,” and SP-387, “A Forecast of Space Technology 1980-2000”—prepared by a task group initiated by Administrator James C. Fletcher in June 1974 to examine the civilian role of the U.S. space program during the coming 25 yr. The group included 20 representatives of NASA and 1 from the USAF. “Outlook for Space,” according to the foreword by Fletcher, was “an impressive analysis of the services that space systems and technology might provide the world of today and tomorrow,” and related this analysis directly to national needs and human purposes. “A Forecast of Space Technology,” according to a preface by study director Donald P. Hearth, “was an important element of the study and provided key inputs to the study and its conclusions.” The technology forecast was conducted by a team from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, supported by representatives of other NASA centers; Jack N. James and Rob Roy McDonald of JPL led the technology team. This report forecast developments in technology of acquiring, processing, transferring, and storing information, energy, and matter. “Outlook,” on the other hand, identified future objectives of space programs and prepared background information that could serve as a basis for development of program plans. Objectives were established as earth-oriented or extraterrestrial; categories of need were either physical (provision of food, shelter, health, security, education, good environment, and the work necessary to obtain these) or needs of mind and spirit (the quest for knowledge, the need to explore the unknown, the sense of accomplishment in the face of challenge). The 3 conclusions of the report were that a space program could help fill the need to improve food production and distribution, to develop new energy sources, to meet new challenges to the environment, and to predict and deal with natural and manmade disasters; that the space program could answer the need for intellectual challenge, exploration, and knowledge that would help humanity understand its relation to the universe; and that those in charge of the space program must make it recognized as meeting these public needs. Efforts recommended by the study group would be in data management, predictive modeling of future missions, advanced communications, space processing, and a permanent space station. (Text) February 1976
The Soviet Union had radioed commands to its orbiting Salyut 5 space station to position it for rendezvous with a forthcoming Soyuz launch, according to a story in the Washington Post. Ideal time for a Soyuz launch would be within the next 5 days, the report said, and two Soviet tracking ships were already on station in the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea to keep in touch with the cosmonauts. (WPost, Jan 21/77, C8)
NASA announced that it and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed to continue joint technical, scientific, and operational activity developed in the Apollo-Soyuz mission July 1975 by starting studies of 2 programs, one for a joint orbited manned flight, the other for an international space station. The agreement signed May 6 by Acting NASA Administrator Dr. Alan • M. Lovelace and May 11 by Anatoly P. Aleksandrov, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, envisioned preliminary project documents within 6 to 12mo and definitive documents within a yr, noting that the working groups should proceed on the assumption of a first flight in 1981. Working groups to study experiments, basic and applied, and the operation of a Salyut-Shuttle mission would be named within 3 days after the agreement became effective; a third group, which would consider development of an international space platform, would be appointed within 2mo. NASA stressed that neither side would be committed beyond initial studies, and either could proceed with its own space station interests, (NASA Release 77-98; NYT, May 18/77, A15)
FBIS reported that the USSR had launched space station Salyut 6 into an orbit with 275km apogee, 219km perigee, 89.1min period, 51.6° inclination. A control center near Moscow would process information from the station aided by tracking stations on Soviet territory and on Soviet Academy of Sciences ships in the Atlantic. Onboard systems were functioning normally. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 29/77) •
MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to build a tethered satellite system for launch on an orbiting Space Shuttle. The idea had been to provide long-duration measurement, observation, or performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude, where density would be insufficient to support the flight of aircraft or balloons, but too thick for free-flying satellites. Exploration here had been limited to short-term flight of sounding rockets or low-level satellites. One concept had been to use a 100km cable to “troll” a tethered satellite from an orbiting Shuttle; the pull of gravity, with constant tension on the cable, would keep the captive craft at the end of its string, oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be global mapping of earth’s magnetic or gravity fields; cargo transfer between space vehicles; retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle maneuvering; transfer of large amounts of energy to a remote experiment, or from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source to a space station. MSFC would manage tethered satellite activity for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-82)
U.S. aviation experts had changed their minds about the USSR’s MiG-25 “Foxbat” interceptor plane and now considered it superior to western planes of its type, the Chicago Tribune reported. New Scientist magazine had quoted aviation experts who had examined the Foxbat flown to Japan last Sept, by defecting pilot Viktor Belenko; their conclusions were completely opposed to earlier assessments that described the Foxbat as crude and outdated. Shortly after its landing in northern Japan, the Foxbat had been described as a “manned rocket” less advanced than previously thought. The magazine said that U.S. officials now considered it unsurpassed in ease of cockpit maintenance and a masterpiece of standardization unmatched in the U.S. The experts said they were impressed not only with the speed and rate of climb, but also with the electronics on the Foxbat, now believed to have the most powerful airborne fire-control radar in the world as well as a highly sophisticated computerized flight-communications system that could perform most of the missions without the pilot [see Jan. 26]. U.S. and Japanese experts had examined the Foxbat for 2mo before returning it to the USSR; Belenko, now in the U.S., was still being debriefed. (C Trib, Feb 7/77, 1-2) Orbit parameters reported Feb. 8 were: 281km apogee, 218km perigee, 89.2-min period, 51.6° inclination. This first manned launch of the year was part of a USSR program of earth-orbital research using the Soyuz capsules on a one-mission basis, according to NY Times reporter Christopher S. Wren, who noted that the USSR had continued manned flights while the U.S. was waiting until the Space Shuttle became available in 1979 or 1980. Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post that the cosmonauts might stay in orbit as long as 2mo; both pilots had been trained for space walks, and the choice of an all-Air Force crew indicated that Soyuz 24 might be a military mission. Tass reported successful docking and occupation of the Salyut 5; it later described housekeeping and biological experiments, plus communications with ocean-going vessels, studies of crystal growth and surface tension, and use of an infrared radiometer for long-distance nighttime observation of earth’s surface and temperatures. The cosmonauts continued exercising with special equipment to measure body functions. On Feb. 21, they tried a new system for recharging the space station atmosphere: Tass said the air was satisfactory, but the test would verify the system for future prolonged flights. A multifunctional system would supply compressed air to control stabilization or to compensate for leaks in the compartments. Tass announced Feb. 23 that the crew had begun preparations for leaving the station. (The unexpectedly early termination of the Soyuz 24 mission recalled reports that the Soyuz 21 mission ended ahead of time because the Salyut 5 environmental-control system had produced an “acrid odor” that “became unbearable” [A&A 76, Oct 18].) A commentary recorded by Gen. Shatalov for broadcast Feb. 24 on the Moscow Domestic Service noted “a whole series of cyclones and strong winds with snow” over the landing site in Kazakhstan. However, the cosmonauts landed safely at dusk Feb. 25 on a farm near Arkalyk on the Kustanay steppe, and were brought to the local airport by helicopter and flown from there to Baykonur. They held a press conference at Baykonur Feb. 24, in which Glazkov called the Salyut 5 spacecraft “a fine old work horse” that had brought them home safely. (NYT, Feb 9/77, 11, B6; WPost, Feb 8/77, A16; Feb 9/77, A12; C Trib, Feb 9/77, 1:12; FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7-26/77; Moscow Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 10-25/77; Moscow Inti Svc Rusn, Feb 9-25/77; W Star, Feb 25/77, A4)
Tass reported that Soviet space station Salyut 4, launched Dec. 26, 1974, to house cosmonauts working in space up to 90 days, disintegrated over the Pacific Ocean when it moved on ground command into “a descent trajectory” and burned up. Tass noted that the station had flown for 3mo joined to the unpiloted space capsule Soyuz 20. The longest, most successful career of a Salyut in the 16yr-old USSR space program had included what Tass called “an extensive program of medical and biological research” as well as study of the sun, stars, and planets in the electromagnetic spectrum; views of Soviet territory in the middle and southern latitudes; and a great amount of data on physical processes in earth atmosphere and in space. Cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Aleksey Gubarev had docked Soyuz 17 with Salyut 4 for 29 days between Jan. 10 and Feb. 9, 1975; Vasily Lazarev and Oleg Makarov failed to dock with Salyut 4 on Apr. 5 of that yr; and Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov had docked Soyuz 18 with Salyut 4 May 25 and remained for 63 days, during which they talked with their compatriots on the ASTP mission and returned July 24 with the Soviet duration record for a manned mission. Salyut 4 had completed 12,188 orbits around the earth before being destroyed, Tass said. (Today,, Feb 4/77, 10A; FBIS, Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 3/77)
NASA announced publication of the first book of a series on the Skylab mission, Skylab, Our First Space Station (NASA SP-400), a general introduction to and overview of the mission’s problems and successes. The 10 chapters tell how Skylab grew from existing technology; how it nearly failed when its micrometeorite shield and one of its solar panels were lost, and how it was saved; how 3 manned visits occurred, one of them for a record 84-day occupation; and how it proved the possibility of living and working for extended periods in a space environment. (NASA Release 77-135)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
NASA had decided to plan construction of an orbiting space station from existing hardware because the Carter and Ford administrations had refused funds for major space station development, AvWk reported. Four station concepts were under examination: increasing the duration of Space Shuttle missions, using Skylab Apollo telescope-mount components to supply additional electricity for any extended mission; making a Space Shuttle external fuel tank into a Skylab-type station [see Mar. 7]; launching unmanned platforms to be occupied in the future; and modifying the ESA-NASA Spacelab to fly as an independent orbiting laboratory, without Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 42)
MSFC announced it would consider using the Space Shuttle’s external fuel tank (ET) as a permanent space platform. James E. Kingsbury, head of MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate, proposed to replace 57m3 of an ET’s liquid oxygen with provisions for 90 days, then launch another Shuttle to bring a crew, a Skylab-airlock module and multipledocking adapter, and a solar electric-conversion wing to the orbiting ET to constitute a habitable space station. All the required equipment, now in storage or on display in the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, had been flight-tested. (MSFC Release 77-36; NASA Release 77-42; Htsvl Times, Feb 20/77, 8)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
The NY Times reported that “observers in the U.S. and abroad” were puzzling over a Soviet space vehicle called Cosmos 929 that had been orbiting for a mo and was large enough to be manned, but apparently carried no passengers. Orbital and radio telemetry characteristics of the vehicle were like those usually related to a manned mission; speculation was that the vehicle might be the first unit of a large space station to be assembled in orbit. Reports from Europe that the USSR would launch a space vehicle during the summer had assumed that the mission would be another Salyut, five of which had previously been orbited, the first early in 1971. Cosmos 929, launched July 17, had drawn attention because of its size and its unusual telemetry, apparently two distinct systems, as though it were two objects joined together. On Aug. 18, after a major change in orbit, one of the two radio transmissions had also changed “significantly,” and part of the vehicle might have been detached at that time. Members of the Kettering Group, an international group of nongovernment space watchers, had confirmed that the vehicle was as large as a Salyut and that its 51.6° orbital inclination had usually, though not exclusively, been used for manned flights as had its telemetry signals. Cosmos 929 had produced no voices, however, and the group was “virtually certain” that no crew was aboard. (NYT, Aug 26/77, A10)
The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save the Skylab space station “which is moving closer to earth and may fall in bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch a “remote-controlled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit, where it would be available for future astronaut visits. The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every 1,5hr at a 200mi altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still the world’s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77, A-10)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
Latest word on Progress 1 refueling of the Salyut 6 propulsion system in orbit indicated that redesign of the space station had been more extensive than the USSR had previously revealed, Av Wk reported. The Soviets had made a fundamental change in the station’s rocket engine and fuel system by switching to pressure-fed from turbine-driven main engines, and adopting a common hypergolic propellant for both the main propulsion and reaction-control system engines. Before Salyut 6, the Soyuz and Salyut propulsion systems had been the same: in the reaction-control system, hydrogen peroxide thrusters had provided attitude adjustments and hydrogen peroxide had also driven turbines pumping hypergolic oxidizer and fuel to the main propulsion system. Fuels in the main propulsion system were a form of nitric acid and of hydrazine. This arrangement had required 3 sets of propulsion lines and tanks: 1 for the hydrogen peroxide, 1 for the main-engine oxidizer, and 1 for the main-engine fuel. Changing the Salyut 6 had allowed both the main engines and the reaction-control thrusters to use propellants from the same tanks, permitting much simpler and more effective orbital refueling than if it had to include hydrogen peroxide. The change had required design of an entirely new internal-tanking and propellant-line fuel system, and development of the pressure-fed engines and the hypergolic-thruster system. The aft section of the station containing the main engines and a concentration of reaction-control-system engines could now accommodate docking at that end by a second Soyuz transport vehicle. The Salyut’s standard forward port was able to accept both Soyuz and Progress-tanker spacecraft. (AvWk, May 1/78, 1)
If the flight of Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko aboard Salyut 6 space station continued to go well, they would establish a new space-duration record in the early morning of March 13, announced the Natl. Aeronautic Association, the organization maintaining official aviation and space records. The cosmonauts would surpass the previous record of 84 days set by U.S. astronauts Carr, Gibson, and Pogue aboard Skylab 4 in 1973. The Soviets had not indicated when the mission would end. On Feb. 10 the Soyuz 26 team equalled the previous USSR manned-spacecraft record of 63 days set by Soyuz 18. (NAA Release Mar 10/78)
The Washington Star reported that, despite Soviet efforts to suppress news of the incident, western sources said that in Feb. a Soviet cosmonaut had narrowly avoided hurtling off to his death in space. The near-mishap had occurred during an unauthorized spacewalk by cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko on the record-breaking 96-day orbital flight aboard the Salyut 6 space station. Only cosmonaut Georgy Grechko had been slated to make a spacewalk; however, both cosmonauts had been wearing a new type of spacesuit that included a radio and an hr’s supply of oxygen, with only a simple tether to the spacecraft to keep the cosmonaut from drifting away. During the Grechko spacewalk, after the Salyut had passed over the western Pacific and was out of range of Soviet ground stations, Romanenko (who was untethered) had jumped out of the open hatch. Why he did this remained unknown, although a U.S. space official speculated he might have gotten “space rapture.” Grechko had been able to grab the end of Romanenko’s safety line just before it passed out of his reach. (W Star, June 28/78, A4)
Cosmonaut Valery Kubasov had spoken of the possibility of joint experimental flights by the USSR’s Salyut-type orbital station and the U.S. Space Shuttle, according to a Tass report. Kubasov noted that such flights could use the joint approach and docking procedures worked out for the Apollo-Soyuz test project and tested during the joint Soviet-U.S. flight of Apollo and Soyuz in July 1975. A new agreement between the USSR and the U.S. on cooperation in space research for peaceful purposes had came into force the previous May, Kubasov pointed out. He added that millions of Americans, like the citizens of the USSR, had viewed the Soyuz-Apollo program as a display of goodwill by the two nations and the beginning of great cooperation between nations in space. However, Av Wk reported that any U.S. Space Shuttle/Soviet Salyut space station joint mission was in deep trouble, if not already dead, because of increased U.S. concern over technology transfer to the Soviets and the current abrasive political climate between the two countries. A NSC interagency committee had reevaluated the entire joint mission idea, while U.S./Soviet discussions on the project were in limbo. The project probably would have been discussed during a planned technology-oriented trip to the USSR by presidential science adviser Frank Press, but the White House had canceled the trip in disapproval of the Soviet treatment of dissidents. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, July 12/78; AvWk, July 17/78, 13)
Space station Salyut 6 would complete a thousand orbits on this date, Tass announced. During the day, cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko had installed and switched into operation a new life-support-system air filter delivered by Progress 1. Of great interest to Soviet scientists were the crew’s regular reports on natural calamities: dust storms, forest fires, and volcanic activity. Orbital complex Salyut 6/Soyuz 27 would continue its flight. (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 12/78)
AvWk reported that the third instead of the fifth Space Shuttle mission would attempt to raise the orbit of the abandoned Skylab space station, bettering chances of Skylab’s remaining in orbit until the Shuttle could come to the rescue. NASA had scheduled the third Shuttle flight for Oct. 1979; the fifth, for Feb. 1980. A Martin Marietta teleoperator propulsion unit carried on the Shuttle to boost Skylab to a higher orbit would be left in space for retrieval by the fifth Shuttle flight. MSFC would build a solar panel for the teleoperator to keep it in orbit for as long as necessary. (AvWk, Jan 23/78, 22)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had built and bombers drop-tested a new manned space vehicle similar to the U.S. Space Shuttle. The delta-winged reusable vehicle had been dropped from a Soviet Tupolev TU-95 Bear bomber in atmospheric tests of the spacecraft’s aerodynamic and handling qualities, like recent tests of the Space Shuttle. No known space testing of the delta-winged vehicle had occurred, although the Soviets might have begun orbital tests with a second new manned-flight craft with space-tug capabilities. Design characteristics of the test vehicle were apparently similar to those of both the U.S. Shuttle orbiter and the lifting-body research vehicles flight-tested earlier by the U.S. Air Force and NASA. The vehicle strongly resembled the USAF/Boeing X-20 DynaSoar concept, which had been viewed as a space station resupply vehicle before the program was canceled. The Soviet spacecraft was described as smaller than the 150 0001b NASA Shuttle orbiter, but larger than the Soyuz expendable manned transport. The NYT said the new vehicle indicated the USSR believed it had the technology to proceed with building reusable manned spacecraft. (NYT, Mar 21/78, 12)
NASA’s struggle to save 3 astronauts trapped in a foundering spaceship during the flight of Apollo 13 had begun the most harrowing 6 days in NASA’s history, NASA Activities reported in observing the 8th anniversary of the flight. The astronauts had heard a loud bang; when Fred Haise, Jr., scanned the instrument panel, he saw that one of the main electrical systems was deteriorating. The words Jack Swigert spoke to mission control long haunted NASA: “Houston, we’ve got a problem.” At the time of the explosion, Apollo 13 traveling at 2100mph was 205 OOOmi from earth and more than 50 OOOmi from the moon, with a dead mothership (Odyssey) that included the main propulsion engine. After moving the astronauts into the lunar module, NASA focused on getting the Apollo on course for home while conserving limited supplies of power, oxygen, and water. Not only had NASA employees worked round the clock, but also specialists and computers from North American Rockwell, the contractor; Grumman Aerospace Corp., manufacturer of the LM; TRW Systems, builder of the descent propulsion engine; and many others. NASA had decided to drop the service module and put the command module Aquarius into the correct attitude for earth-atmosphere reentry; when the latter entered earth’s gravity 216 277mi from home, it needed another course correction. The tnird descent-engine burn was successful, putting Aquarius into the proper reentry corridor. As the spacecraft drew closer to splashdown, one of the astronauts described to ground control what he was seeing: “There’s one whole side of that spacecraft missing . . . right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the engine . . . it’s really a mess . . . man, that’s just unbelievable—looks like a lot of debris is just hanging out of the side near the S-band antenna.” The astronauts had returned safely to earth 142hr, 54min, 41sec after launch. As Jim Lovell said, “We do not realize what we have on earth until we leave it.” (NASA Actv, Apr 78, 14)
NASA announced it would rotate the Skylab space station 180° in its orbit Nov. 3 because of low temperatures encountered by one of the control moment gyros (CMG) as a result of periodic long-term shading from the sun. The sun angle was a function of the orbit inclination (in Skylab’s case, 50° relative to the equator), the position of the earth around the sun, and certain other seasonal factors. When the CMG, essential to Skylab’s holding a stable attitude, was in shadow for ^xcessive periods, the bearing temperature dropped, interfering with lubrication and increasing friction on the bearings that could lead to possible CMG failure. Turning the Skylab in its orbit before mid-November would expose the CMG to more sun and maintain normal bearing temperatures. The reversed position was not expected to change Skylab’s orbital-life predictions significantly. The maneuver would use none of the remaining nitrogen thruster fuel now on reserve for docking with the teleoperator-retrieval system, planned for the second Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 78-172; Marshall Star, Nov 8/78, 2; JSC Roundup, Nov 10/78, 1; WPost, Nov 4/78, A-6; AvWk, Nov 13/78, 65)
Soyuz 31, carrying East Germany’s first cosmonaut and a Soviet commander, had docked with the Salyut 6 space station, the Washington Post reported. The USSR had launched Soyuz 31 Aug. 26 at 17:51 Moscow time. Sigmund Jahn of East Germany and Valery Bykovsky had joined the Soyuz 29 cosmonauts who had been circling earth in the space station since June 16. Tass said the crew was well and had begun implementation of tasks assigned to them. It added that the launch of Soyuz 31 had been part of the preparations for an historic event, the 30th anniversary of the creation of the first German socialist state. The flight had been intended as an example of the use of space for peaceful purposes, based on “disinterested international cooperation and comradely mutual assistance.” (WPost, Aug 27/78, A 21; FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 26/78)
The Washington Post reported that two Soviet cosmonauts had set a new Soviet space walk record on July 29, spending 125min outside the Salyut 6 space station testing a new type of suit and working with equipment mounted on the station, the accompanying Progress 2 supply ship, and their own Soyuz 29. Cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were the fourth team of cosmonauts to successfully board the Salyut 6 after it reached orbit the previous Sept. Kovalenok had filmed his colleague during part of the walk and had relayed the color footage to earth for broadcast on Moscow television. Tass, the Soviet news agency, said the two cosmonauts had dismantled instruments and devices on the outer shell of Salyut 6, loading them into Soyuz 29 for shipment to earth, and had mounted new instruments, including devices to measure radiation^ on the Salyut. Instruments being returned had measured micrometeor activities and had aided research on "polymers, optical and other structural material used in building advance spacecraft,” Tass said. The report did not give details on the new space suit, but the cosmonauts said that their “semistiff’ clothes were well designed and that life-support systems had been improved to facilitate movement and “better fixation outside the station.” U.S. experts had interpreted the length of the Salyut mission and repeated trips to it by Soviet cosmonauts as indicating a focus by the Soviet space program on building permanent orbital platforms. The report had not indicated when the two cosmonauts would return to earth, but observers suggested that the next mission (Soyuz 30) would probably come soon and would be a marathon stay aboard the orbiting station. (WPost, July 30/78, DIO; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/78)
NASA announced it had decided not to reboost or deorbit the Skylab space station in orbit around the earth because success was unlikely. Uncertainties that had developed in Skylab systems, Skylab lifetime, Space Shuttle schedule, and teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) delivery had made further planning for a rescue mission impractical. Factors leading to the decision included deterioration of systems aboard Skylab (recurring control-moment gyro anomalies, marginal power conditions, and minimal attitude-control impulse gas); high sunspot activity that was accelerating decay of Skylab’s orbit; and reviews showing that a Skylab-rescue mission would be difficult to arrange before April 1980. Skylab, currently orbiting at about 426km (265mi) altitude, was being maintained in a low-drag attitude and would be continually monitored while NASA assessed the possibilities of damage on reentry, now predicted to occur between mid-1979 and mid-1980. Most of the vehicle would burn up during reentry, but some fragments probably would reach earth’s surface. Skylab’s flight path was 75% over the ocean; the probability of injury or damage from it was less than that from meteorites, according to estimates. (NASA Release 78-191) At a press conference following the announcement, Bill Haines of the Chicago Sun Times asked: “Way back in the olden days I remember that there was a lot of talk about space rescue, and one of the philosophies seemed to be that if we got into trouble or the Russians got into trouble, the other side would come to the rescue. Have you made any approaches at all to the Russians to see if they could do anything about this? If not, why not? And do you intend to?” John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, answered: “This is a little different from the space rescues that we had talked about. As you know, part of the ASTP program was to design docking equipment that could be prototypes of that. And we still have a long-range plan with the Russians, albeit rather fuzzy, to some day have this capability. “With respect to Skylab: After our ASTP, working with the Russians, of course, we had a fairly good working knowledge of the capabilities, at least that we knew of that were done in that program. And at least a year ago we got our own heads together and talked about whether or not they could do anything that we couldn’t do. We concluded that there are many problems that we won’t go into that it probably is not feasible, so we did not ask them. However, they are being informed of what we are doing here and if they make any proposals that we haven’t thought of that could be useful, we will certainly entertain them.” (NASA press conf Dec 19/78)
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
In an interview on NASA’s 20th anniversary, JSC director Christopher Kraft, Jr., said that speeding up the space program would require private capital. “Production in space will become an important part of our competitive position and have a great deal to do with the balance of trade.” Speculating on the future at JSC, Kraft said he believed it “highly probable that we’ll see a well developed space industry in the next ten years. I have an intuitive feeling that the thing is going to mushroom on us.” First major project for JSC would be to make the space transportation system operational: “If we’re going to make this thing a routine operation, it’s got to go in a more matter-of-fact manner, more like an airline operation, than we’ve seen in the past.”Tor the first 6 or 10 Space Shuttle flights, center employees could expect a level of activity similar to that during Apollo and Skylab “but after that point we’re going to have to phase into this new mode.” He emphasized he wasn’t implying airline pilots would fly the Space Shuttle: “It will still require highly trained astronauts because it is a very complex vehicle. With development of the transport system, we will see a new kind of astronaut—techniques will go into space very rapidly. The need for specific talent and skills will develop.” Kraft predicted that, in the next few years, the U.S. would “recognize a need for permanency of man in space. The best way to do that is with a space station. We will probably develop a permanent space station that would be carried up as modules in the Space Shuttle.” (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 4)	.
Tass reported that, in an interview marking the first anniversary of the Salyut 6 launch, Pilot-Cosmonaut Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov had recommended designing a new orbiting scientific Salyut laboratory with a minimum of 7 or 8 docking units. The presence of only 2 docking units on Salyut 6 meant that, after a cargo vessel had arrived and its equipment was transferred, it had to undock to make room for another vehicle. This was irrational, Feoktistov said. When a cargo ship departed, the Salyut would lose one complete “room” of the cosmic house (with a volume of about 6m3) that could accommodate equipment and scientific instruments. To add even one more component to a Salyut was not simple, as virtually its entire surface was covered with solar batteries, windows, television cameras, and various sensors. The nose fairing covering the station in the active phase of the launch also had restricted designers. Feoktistov stressed, however, the need to equip future space stations with several mooring ports to handle units for specialized research: technological, astronomical, and geophysical. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 26/78)
Aerospace Daily reported that Progress 3, launched by the USSR to dock with Salyut 6, had carried 6171b of food, 9921b of oxygen-regeneration equipment, and 41gal of water to cosmonauts Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov, according to cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, one of the designers of the Progress resupply vehicles. UPI quoted a Novosti report that consumption of food, water, and air by a 2-man space crew would range from 44 to 661b per day; a 2-man space station would need about lOtons of these supplies to stay in full operation for a year. (A/D, Aug 16/78, 202)
The Marshall Star reported that a NASA decision to boost the Skylab space station to a higher orbit could lead to reactivation and use of Skylab’s onboard systems and instruments in a number of useful projects. MSFC had awarded parallel study contracts, each in the amount of $125 000, to Martin Marietta Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for independent reports on the possibilities and benefits of Skylab reuse. The 9-mo studies of the most effective ways to , use Skylab in further missions, experiments, and demonstrations would concentrate on the experiments or equipment already aboard Skylab, for firsthand evaluation of how materials and equipment were affected by 10 or more yr in space; on crew quarters and other support, for Spacelab missions and experiments that could benefit from long duration and an additional energy supply; and on opportunities offered by the Skylab in itself, or in conjunction with other hardware elements, for new missions or experiments. For example, the relatively large facility (comparable to a 3-bedroom home) might provide a convenient platform for fabricating and constructing large space structures, or could aid in converting such structures into useful demonstrations or operational systems. The ground station in Bermuda had begun operations Mar. 6 to 13 to reactivate Skylab, turning on command and telemetry systems and receiving data. Transfer of power from the airlock module to the Apollo telescope mount permitted reception of telemetry; the ATM solar arrays also provided power when turned toward the sun. Data received from the ATM computer indicated it was in good working order and had enough power. On Skylab’s last working pass, controllers had used about llmin to check the status of the trickle charge to batteries 2,4, and 5; the charge had been turned off on battery 7, which had remained fully charged and ready for the next mission. Controllers also had performed some systems checkoffs, Bermuda reporting the command receiver as strong throughout the pass. Plans were to reactivate Skylab in mid-April, using the TAC system to reduce atmospheric drag and prolong Skylab's orbital lifetime for several months. (Marshall Star, Mar 22/78, 1)
The USSR had decided to keep a permanent manned space station in earth orbit as a result of the current Salyut 6 space station mission, AvWk reported. Staffing this and follow-on Salyuts without major intervals between missions would be a milestone in manned spaceflight, and would demonstrate the USSR’s decision to invest major resources in space. The USSR had claimed the Salyut 6/Soyuz 27 mission was more scientific than military; its activities had included photographing the Soviet Union to explore for natural resources, detailed medical studies of cosmonaut blood circulation, and upper-atmosphere and micrometeorite monitoring. The crew had also devoted more time to system checkout and monitoring, because the design of Salyut 6 was a significant change from that of previous Salyut space stations: The USSR had not previously flown a spacecraft configuration like Salyut 6/Soyuz 26/Soyuz 27 to test the interaction of three large vehicles. It had tried various spacecraft attitudes to evaluate stresses during maneuvers on the docked system, and had transferred food and equipment from the Soyuz 27 resupply vehicle and film, biological samples, and records to the Soyuz 27. The Soyuz/Salyut mission had achieved three manned-spaceflight firsts: four-man space station, simultaneous docking of two transport spacecraft with an orbiting space station, and manned resupply of an occupied station. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 20; Jan 9/78, 25; Jan 16/78, 20; Jan 23/78, 19)
As the climax of a 4-mo attempt to stabilize and trim the orbital position of Skylab, a NASA team of engineers and controllers from JSC, MSFC, IBM, and three tracking stations (Bermuda; Madrid; and Goldstone, Calif.) had successfully put the space station in an orbital position they hoped would prolong its lifetime in space, JSC announced. Maneuvers in June had put the space station in an attitude intended to reduce atmospheric drag at its orbital height of 389km (242 statute mi). Assuming that the gyros continued to function, NASA hoped the new attitude would extend the orbital lifetime of Skylab by 6 to 12mo to late 1979 or early 1980, giving NASA time to arrange an early Space Shuttle test flight to reboost Skylab into higher orbit, or deorbit it into a remote ocean area. Maneuvers had begun in Mar. when engineers and flight controllers at the Bermuda tracking station checked out Skylab systems and brought its batteries to a fully charged state. On June 8, flight controllers had turned on the dormant control-moment gyros in the Skylab attitude-control system. (The other part of the system, the thruster attitude-control system, would expel nitrogen gas through nozzles to move Skylab into various attitudes in its orbit.) A computer with various sensors to indicate position had controlled both systems. Although one gyro that failed during the last Skylab mission in 1974 could not be used, the other two gyros were activated and worked as expected. On June 9, controllers had commanded Skylab into a solar inertial attitude in which the spacecraft’s solar cells always faced the sun. On June 11, they had maneuvered it into the desired “end-on velocity-vector” attitude, docking port forward and long axis parallel to the ground along the flight path. Skylab had remained in that position while engineers continued to monitor it, periodically transmitting minor corrections to the onboard computer controlling Skylab’s position. (JSC Release 78-25; Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; June 14/78,1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78,1; June 23/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, June 2/78, 2; June 30/78, 2; W Post, June 12/78, A-19))
NASA had not yet decided when to command the Skylab space station into a cartwheel maneuver that could extend its orbital life by 9 to 14mo, Science magazine reported. The maneuver could increase chances of a Space Shuttle mission either boosting Skylab or propelling it into controlled reentry. Major factor in the decision would be assessment of how long the station’s control-moment gyros could sustain the maneuver before failing; without the cartwheel, NASA believed reentry would occur between May 1979 and July 1980. According to Science, however, Skylab’s chances of remaining in the sky until NASA could get to it with a Space Shuttle were no better than 1 in 2. {Science, Apr 7/78, 28; AvWk, Apr 24/78, 15)
Mstislav Keldysh, Soviet scientist and mathematician who had been spokesman for the USSR’s space program as head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died June 24 at the age of 67, the Washington Post reported. Soviet news agency Tass described the death as sudden. Dr. Michael DeBakey had traveled to the Soviet Union 5yr ago to operate on Keldysh’s circulatory system. Recognized in a wide range of scientific and mathematical disciplines bearing on aviation and rocketry, Keldysh had proved his administrative ability by rising to the top of his country’s scientific establishment. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences from 1961 to 1975, Keldysh had been not only USSR science spokesman but also a key figure in organizing and developing scientific research throughout the Soviet Union. He had won the Stalin Prize in 1942 for “The Theory of Calculating and Developing Methods of Reducing Various Types of Vibrations in Aircraft,” and in 1946 for “The Front-Wheel Shimmy of the Tricycle (Aircraft) Landing Gear.” In 1943, Keldysh had become head of a top secret aircraft-development institute with increasing administrative responsibilities. As head of the Academy of Sciences, he announced in Oct. 1969, shortly after the U.S. had put men on the moon, that the USSR had abandoned plans to do likewise and would concentrate on putting manned space stations into orbit around the earth. He acknowledged that the Soviet Union had been debating space expenditures, and said, “My personal view is that, when a man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (WPost, June 27/78, B6; FBIS, Tass Inti Serv in Russian, June 26/78)	•
U.S. analysts believed the USSR would continue to fly manned military space station reconnaissance missions even though the Soviets had not launched any such Salyuts since June 1976, Av Wk reported. Salyut 3, launched in June 1974, and Salyut 5, launched in June 1976, were successful military missions; the Salyut 2 spacecraft, which failed in orbit in April 1973, was also apparently a military Salyut. Significant design differences between the military and scientific versions included docking configuration, overall structure, and solar-panel placement. Introduction of the military configuration as early as the second Salyut flight was considered to be evidence of USSR emphasis on military-man-in-space planning and engineering. Photo reconnaissance was the prime objective of Salyut military missions; other military activities such as high energy research for possible weapons application were secondary. (AvWk, Dec 4/78, 17)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 32 from the Baykonur site at 2:54 p.m. local time, carrying a two-man crew to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 space station for the first time since November 1978, when the Soyuz 29 astronauts returned after a record 139 days in space. Soyuz 32 was manned by Lt. Col. Vladimir Lyakhov, 37, acting as commander on his first flight, and civilian flight engineer Valery Ryumin, 39, who was aboard Soyuz 25 when it failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and had to return to Earth 2 days later. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, head of the USSR’s space training program, said Salyut 6 had been “an effective platform for work in space,” having been occupied for 8 of the 16 months since its launch in September 1977. It had seen five successful manned dockings (three by international crews including cosmonauts from Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Poland as part of the Intercosmos program), as well as dockings by a number of unmanned supply vessels delivering food and fuel. (NY Times, Feb 26/79, A-14; W Post, Feb 26/79) During February: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported that the Federation Aeronautique International (FAI) had admitted the People’s Republic of China as an active member effective January 1. (NAA News, Jan-Feb 79)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
The New York Times said that Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, had told a House subcommittee that problems with the Space Shuttle would delay flight of the Galileo mission for two years. NASA now planned to launch the mission in 1984 in two parts: one Shuttle flight would take a Galileo orbiter into Earth orbit for launch toward Jupiter, and another Shuttle flight would take another spacecraft for launch into the atmosphere of Jupiter carrying instruments to record its composition. Earlier mission plans were for a 1982 Shuttle launch carrying a single Galileo package including orbiter and Jupiter probe; the change would add more than $184 million to the cost of the project, previously estimated at about $450 million. NASA had had problems not only with the Shuttle insulating tiles but also with the rocket engines. An improved engine was to be standard after the first test flights. Angelo Guastaferro, NASA’s head of planetary programs, said that the 4,600-pound Galileo spacecraft would be too heavy for the Shuttle to carry into Earth orbit without the improved engines. (NY Times, Oct 18/79, A-15)
Neil Armstrong, “America’s reluctant space hero,” said the United States should develop a permanent manned orbiting space station for long-duration exposure of people and equipment to the space environment. At an interview about the 10th anniversary of the moon landing, the University of Cincinnati engineering professor who in 1969 had been the first man to walk on the moon said that, if the United States had an ongoing manned space program, “we could have solved the problems” with Skylab. {Today, June 12/79, 16A)
Flight controllers at JSC reported that they would halt their 24-hour Skylab watch February 2, following NASA’s decision to abandon attempts to boost or deorbit the space station. The January 25 maneuver that positioned Skylab’s solar panels for constant sun tracking had removed it from the minimum-drag position and would result in speeding up its orbital decay. The repositioning was intended to increase power available to controllers to alter the path of Skylab’s descent, now expected between June and August. (JSC Release 79-03)
The Washington Post said the empty Soviet spacecraft that linked up December 19 with Salyut 6 was probably a three-person version of the vehicle the Soviet Union had been launching for 10 years. The Soyuz T (probably for Transport) docked on ground command at one end of the two-part space station in the fourth unmanned test of the new configuration (the first was Cosmos 869, November-December 1976; the second, Cosmos 1001, April 1978; the third, Cosmos 1074, January, 31-March 1, 1979). The Washington Post said the interior of the Soyuz “command craft” probably was changed to accommodate three instead of two cosmonauts;, making it easier for the Soviet Union to use the Salyut as a permanent orbital station with interchangeable crews, difficult with only two men at a time. (WPost, Dec 20/79, A-27)
August 19 saw the end of the record-breaking flight in the Salyut 6 space station of Soyuz 32 cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Valery Ryumin, returned safely in the Soyuz 34 capsule after 175 days in space since launch February 25. FBIS had carried daily reports of their progress. Besides the experiments in materials processing (alloys and coating processes) and the intensive physical routines designed to assist long-term assignments in space, the crew in their last days in orbit had worked with the KRT-10 radiotelescope sent last month by cargo craft and unfurled in space to study extraterrestrial radio sources and nonatmospheric radioastronomy. As early as August 15, they had begun to pack the return capsule with items demonstrating the results of their space stay. Difficulty with the radiotelescope had presented another challenge to the crew; upon completion April 9 of the scheduled scans, the antenna was to be jettisoned, leaving the docking unit free. “Space sprung another surprise,” Tass reported, when the antenna became entangled with a projection on Salyufs surface. The crew tried to free it by “a minor jerk of the station,” which was not successful. A space walk was already scheduled to check the exterior of the station, dismantle outside scientific equipment, and retrieve samples of materials exposed for a long time to outer space. Ground control wanted to spare the cosmonauts the stress of an extra task in outer space, but the crew insisted it was the only sure way to solve the problem. On August 15, the crew in “full pressure suits” opened the hatch, and flight engineer Ryumin moved to the attachment point, releasing the 10-meter (30-foot) antenna with pliers, and “imparted the antennae acceleration relative to the station” (in other words, pushed it away toward the Earth for reentry). Then, Ryumin and Lyakhov disassembled and brought in the micrometeorite registration instruments and the panels with samples of structural, optical, insulation, and polymer materials, some of which were in orbit since Salyut 6’s launch in September 1977, others installed by the Soyuz 29 crew in July 1978. Total time of the space walk was 1 hour, 23 minutes: Tass noted that the suits, “fitted out with metal shielding against cosmic radiation and possible concussions” from meteorites, had previously served Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov of Soyuz 29 and Grechko and Romanenko of Soyuz 26. The cosmonauts landed safely August 19 and appeared to be in the best shape yet: they wanted to walk but were not allowed to do so immediately, although they did get brief dips in the hotel swimming pool. Later reports praised the exercise routine for its good effects on the crew, who agreed that even longer flights were possible. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 1-25/79; CSM, Aug 14/79, 2; NY Times, Aug 16/79, A-19)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, on March 29 signed a memorandum of understanding in Washington, D.C., on a joint international solar-polar mission to be launched in 1983. NASA and ESA would each provide a spacecraft, and ESA would supply software and personnel to support ESA’s flight operations in the United States. NASA would be responsible for mission control, launch operations, and tracking and data acquisition, and for several experiments. JPL would manage the NASA scientific effort and development of a NASA spacecraft; JSC would manage the Shuttle launch portion of the mission; ESTEC would manage the European effort. The objectives of the mission would be to study the structure and emissions of the Sun as a function of latitude from the solar equator to the solar poles and to study the interplanetary medium Earth-to-Jupiter and the Jovian magnetosphere. Launched from a Shuttle, the two craft, each propelled by an upper-stage booster, would take a path in the ecliptic plane (that containing all the planets in Earth’s system) toward Jupiter, using its gravity to propel them out of the ecliptic toward the Sun on trajectories to pass one over the north and one over the south solar poles, retrace the ecliptic track, pass over the opposite poles, and fly back toward Jupiter. Mission lifetime would be about five years. (NASA Release 79-37; ESA anno Mar 30/79) During March: FBIS carried regular reports on the progress of the Soyuz 32 cosmonauts aboard the Salyut 6 orbiting space station. Upon arrival February 26, the crew had begun reactivating the thermal regulators, water regeneration system, and ventilation. On March 1, they had begun checkout of individual consoles and scientific instruments, tested the manual attitude control system, and corrected the flight path of Salyut 6 using Soyuz 32 propulsion. The following day the crew did baseline medical checkups using Polynom apparatus; the flight engineer was tested in the morning, and the commander was tested in the afternoon. In an interview March 4, the crew’s doctor reported that Lyakhov had needed 1.5 days to adapt to weightlessness but was now feeling well. The crew had asked to begin their exercise program on trainer machines and cycles several days ahead of schedule. Lyakhov’s regime emphasized his “vestibular system”; Ryumin’s, the cardiovascular. On March 5, Tass, the Soviet news agency, said that the doctors were keeping close watch on Commander Lyakhov, “a thick-set man...on his first flight in outer space.” The commentator said “unhasty adaptation” was important during the first few days on the space station, which imposed three peak loads at one time: adaptation to weightlessness, complicated docking and transfer procedures, and emotional strain. More time had been allowed on this flight than usual for the crew to check all the station systems, both those governing flight and those controlling living conditions (the “boost week,” a term used by cosmonaut Vladimir Kovalenok, one of the communications team keeping in touch with the Soyuz 32 crew). A March 6 broadcast interview with a “scientific employee at the Flight Center” on repair and servicing of the Salyut said that the intensive activity “did not mean that anything is broken or needs mending.” On Salyut 6, unlike its predecessors, individual items of equipment for the first time could be exchanged when their resources were exhausted. The station had been in orbit for 18 months and carried almost 1,000 different instruments, the reporter said. Important systems, such as life support, had been designed to be practically failure proof by using interchangeable units within easy reach, facilitating periodic exchange of equipment. Introduction of the Progress automated cargo ships meant that new instruments, equipment, and tools were available upon crew request. Progress 2 had brought the Soyuz 29 crew a globe indicator for the control panel to show the station’s location in relation to Earth; it had also brought new computer units for the Delta automated navigation system. The first job in reactivating the Salyut 6 station had been to check out the docking unit on the transfer module, with its opening into outer space; the Soyuz 26 crew had done this last year. Lyakhov and Ryumin would have to test each on-board system and plug in reserve circuits or replace units. The reporter pointed out that, notwithstanding the long use of the station, “not one reserve circuit in any system has so far been switched on.” The current crew would replace ventilators in the thermal system, light bulbs, cables in the television and communications systems, components of the exercise equipment, and filters and regenerators in the life-support systems. On March 12, Progress 5 was launched with a load of fuel for the Salyut 6 propulsion unit and materials for its on-board systems. A commentator said that portable cables and other mobile elements of radiocommunication “wear out heavily” on long flights; the crew had replaced headsets, cables, and switches. They had also set up and operated an on-board videotape recorder and a video monitoring device. An interview March 13 with cosmonaut Vladimir Aksenov said that the Salyut represented a new stage of technology, not only because it could be supplied but also because it could be overhauled in space with components and assemblies flown there by freight and crew transport vessels. Aksenov noted that the crew had used an ordinary soldering iron, said to be an enormous departure for repairs in a closed weightless space. Also, he said, basic scientific apparatus had heretofore been assembled in a ground workshop and checked out in a ground station; for the first time, the installation and test of new apparatus would take place on an operating space station in orbit. This was made possible by a wide selection of tools designed especially for use in space: pliers, screwdrivers, clamps, and special instruments to handle special nuts and bolts. Upon the arrival March 14 of the Progress 5, bringing fuel, equipment, experiment materials, and mail, the crew’s doctor said in an interview that previous flights had indicated that weightlessness had some tricky aspects and that the consequences of exposure to it could be very serious. The current crew were apparently beginning to feel at home in the new surroundings, however. After unloading the ferry, the crew had the job of dismantling the Kristall electric furnace used for more than 40 experiments in space processing of materials and installing new apparatus better designed to operate in weightlessness; they had also plugged in a new chemical battery to reinvigorate the power system. By March 21, the unloading of the supply ship was completed, and the crew was ahead of schedule using the new equipment, especially a color television camera to show the interior of the station with equipment replacements including new sensors installed in the work area to detect minimal air pollution in the station’s atmosphere. On March 24, the crew communicated by television with the flight control center “in the direction from earth to the spaceship.. .for the first time in the history of space flight.” The control center could now transmit drawings, plans, and working documents from the ground to the Salyut; “in principle,” said the report, “any central TV transmission can be sent to the spaceship.” By month’s end, Tass said that the crew had adapted to weightlessness and were proceeding with scheduled tasks. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 1-28/79)
The Soviet Union launched a redesigned spacecraft, Soyuz 13, carrying three cosmonauts in what the New York Times called a possible bid to break the 185-day endurance record set in October. Launch at 5:18 p.m. Moscow time was from the cosmodrome at Baykonur in Soviet central Asia; Tass reported that all systems were working well. The pilot of the flight was Lt. Col. Leonid Kizim, 39, a first-time flyer in space; flight engineer Oleg Makarov, 47, had flown on Soyuz 12 in September 1973 and Soyuz 27 in January 1978, as well as the “anomaly” of April 1973. Research engineer Gennady Strekalov, 40, also a rookie, had worked for 20 years in spacecraft design. This was the first three-person flight launched by the Soviet Union in nine years, since the crew of Soyuz 11 died during reentry in June 1971 when their capsule sprang a leak and lost pressure. The cosmonauts had not worn their space suits because of crowded conditions on the capsule. Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said that Soyuz T3 had “all the latest accomplishments of science and technology” including a fast onboard computer to free the crew “to the maximum from . . . .routine operations.” The system was said to perform all calculations needed to dock with another craft such as Salyut 6. However, Radio Moscow did not say how long the flight would last, and Moscow media did not say whether Soyuz T3 would link with Salyut 6, which had been in orbit three years—only that the crew would test a new spacecraft. Soyuz T3 was first of that type to carry a three person crew, 39th in the Soyuz series, and sixth manned craft to be launched in 1980. Two tests of the new design had been successful: an unmanned Soyuz 7"had docked with space station Salyut 6 in December 1979, and Soyuz T2 carrying Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V. Aksyonov had joined the Soyuz 36 crew (record-holders Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov) there in June of this year. Salyut 6, designed to last only 18 months, had supported four expeditions over its three years in orbit. When Ryumin and Popov left it six weeks ago, after a thorough overhaul of its equipment, they said that it was fit for further use. (NY Times, Nov 27/80, A-3; W Post, Nov 28/80, A-28) During November: MSFC announced that Dr. William R. Lucas, center director, had appointed Thomas J. (Jack) Lee deputy director, effective December 1. Lee had worked at the center and its predecessor since 1958 and for the past six years had managed the Spacelab program, working with ESA on this Shuttle payload. John W. Thomas, Lee’s deputy, would succeed as manager of the Spacelab office. Lucas named John S. Potate, associate director for management, to a new position as associate director. Potate had come to MSFC in 1973 from the Apollo lunar-landing program at KSC and at Headquarters. (MSFC Release 80-149)
Tass reported that Soyuz 38, launched September 18, carried a Cuban cosmonaut and a Soviet mission commander to join cosmonaut Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who were within two weeks of breaking a space-endurance record on the orbiting Salyut 6 space station. Armando Tamayo Mendez, 38, was the seventh non-Soviet citizen to fly in the USSR’s Intercosmos program. His companion on Soyuz 38 was veteran cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko. (W Post, Sept 19/80, A-30)
.The longest spaceflight in history ended at 12:50 Moscow time when cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin landed near Dzhezkazgan in the. descent module of Soyuz 37 after 185 days aboard the Salyut 6 space station. A previous record of 175 days was set last year by Ryumin and Vladimir Lyakhov; shown on Soviet television immediately after landing, they seemed to have trouble walking and talking. The Soviet Union did not have television coverage of the Ryumin-Popov landing, but the two appeared on television at 9 p.m.. local time in recliners, being interviewed. A Reuters report from the landing, carried by the New_ York Times, said that the two men appeared well when they climbed from their capsule in the rain, Ryumin noting “it’s always pleasant to have a soft landing.” He joked with journalists and insisted on walking two yards unaided “almost without staggering,” said Trud, a trade-union newspaper. Doctors said that neither man seemed to show the physical deterioration suffered by other long-mission crews; Popov had gained 6.5 pounds, Ryumin almost 11. They had kept up their strength in space with exercises. (The New York Times noted that the new record far outdistanced the longest U.S. space mission, the 84-day mission of Skylab 4 with Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue, that ended in 1974. In the absence of U.S. space exploits since the Moon landings, Western observers said that the new Soviet feat might indicate that the Soviet Union had regained the lead in space; coupled with the delay in the U.S. Shuttle program and public awareness of growing Soviet military might, the Salyut accomplishment might translate into political advantage.) Salyut 6 had been orbiting for three years, being manned for about half that time. Four main and eight visiting expeditions had been working there, backed by automatic cargo craft bringing fuel and supplies. Tass said that the preventive maintenance and resupply procedures carried out by the crews were a big step toward “lasting manned complexes for scientific and national economic purpose.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 11/80; NY Times, Oct 12/80, 23; Oct 13/80, A-13)
NASA announced that a sunspot hotline set up at GSFC would keep the public informed about solar flares during the 1980 peak cycle of activity. Daily recorded messages would contain information on sunspots, solar flares, geomagnetic storms, and the impact of solar activity on radio transmissions, for instance. The recordings provided jointly by NASA and NOAA through its space environment services center in Boulder, Colo., would originate in the SMM facility at GSFC. The “Solar Max” spacecraft launched February 14 was an orbiting solar observatory carrying seven instruments whose data, coordinated with data from scientists at ground-based observatories throughout the world, would permit the most comprehensive investigation of solar flares ever made. Information from these sources would be relayed to GSFC on a 24-hour basis so that NASA scientists could determine which active regions of the Sun to study during the next 24 hours. (NASA Release July 23:The Soviet Union launched Soyuz J7 at 9:33 p.m. Moscow time, carrying Col. Viktor Gorbatko and a 33-year-old Vietnamese air force pilot, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, first Asian space traveler and sixth citizen of an eastern-bloc country to be part of the USSR’s Intercosmos program. The Soyuz would link up within 24 hours with the orbiting Salyut 6 space station where Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin had been working for more than three months. The Salyut’s docking port had been cleared July 19 by jettisoning cargo ship Progress 10, which burned up reentry. (W Post, July 24/80, A-15; Today, July 24/80, 1A; W Star, July 20/80, 2; July 24/80, A-7)
Press reports said that the three cosmonauts launched November 27 in Soyuz 73 on a repair mission to the three-year-old space station Salyut 6 had returned safely from their 13-day flight December 10 at 12:26 p.m. Moscow time. Landing was in Kazakhstan in Soviet central Asia. Leonid Kizim, Oleg Makarov, and Gennady Strekalov were in perfect condition, Tass said. This was the sixth manned mission by the Soviet Union this year and the first three-person crew orbited since 1971, when three cosmonauts died during reentry after a valve blew on Soyuz 77. A new guidance system on Soyuz T3 took over after liftoff and guided it to smooth docking with Salyut 6. The spacecraft, third of an improved version of the Soyuz (mainstay of the Soviet space program since 1967), carried solar batteries, an. on-board computer, improved maneuvering rockets, and improvements in cabin comfort for the cosmonauts. The crew had performed repairs and maintenance oh Salyut 6 telemetry, refueling systems, and temperature controls. (W Post, Dec 10/80, A-2; Dec 11/80, A-13; NY Times, Dec 11/80, A-23)
Cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin set a new record for spaceflight duration, breaking the mark of 175 days, 36 minutes set last year by a crew in Soyuz 32. Ryumin had been on that record mission also; he had stayed on Earth for only 236 days since February 25, 1979. Popov, 40, and Ryumin, 34, had set out April 9, 1980, in Soyuz 35 to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 launched September 29, 1977, one of 13 crews to visit the 20-ton 49-foot-long space station. Three times during the spring and summer visiting crews brought the “permanent occupants” food and experiment materials, life-support equipment, and companionship. These relief missions included the first Vietnamese, Hungarian, and Cuban cosmonauts. Earlier this week, an unmanned cargo ship Progress 11 arrived with fresh supplies of food, fuel, and technical equipment for the cosmonauts. The Soviet Union had not set a time limit for the Salyut-Soyuz flight; Popov and Ryumin reported themselves healthy. (NY Times, Oct 2/80, A-17)
Progress reports on the continuing flight of Leonid Ryumin and Valery Popov in the Salyut 6-Soyuz 37 orbiting space station noted that their mission had lasted 115 days as of August 1. The cosmonauts were busy redocking Soyuz 37 (which Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko had used to get to the Salyut) to make room for more supply-ship missions. The visitors had returned to Earth safely July 31 in the Soyuz 36 craft; next on the list for the long-term occupants was “cleaning of the premises of the orbital complex” and physical training, Tass said. On August 5 Tass reported completion of various crystal experiments using Splav and Kristall apparatus in “cosmic material studies” of semiconductors cast from gallium arsenide, and crystals of indium antimonide and gadolinium cobalt, a magnetic material. Tass August 9 reported a first: crystallization of a substance from a smelt in “directional microgravitation.” The idea was to form crystals at more than “minimum microacceleration.” The crew put into the Splav an ampule of raw material and activated it; they then used the space station’s motors in a twisting maneuver during which the station became “a sort of centrifuge” for a few hours. Acceleration, zero at the center, “near the transfer compartment and transfer chamber. . .was at its maximum.” Previous experiments had always been during sleep periods, as movement of people around the station affected the results. For more data on crystal formation in orbit, the crew tried it in the span between Earth gravity and zero gravity. Tass called the test a first step in a new science of “weightlessness physics” whose practical conclusions were already being felt. On August 12 Tass noted the crew had been in space for 18 weeks; further tests were going on, making special glass in zero gravity and monocrystals of germanium. On August 22, Moscow radio said that this expedition had had more technological tests than any previous ones: the lsparitel apparatus alone had provided more than 186 samples, most of them deli vered to scientists on Earth by Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko. One substance, a solidified solution of cadmium telluroid and mercury telluroid, would be impossible to obtain on Earth where “when molten they separate out as oil and vinegar do when poured into the same glass.” The large crystals of this obtainable in space would permit “heat viewing” or detection of negligible variations in temperature, important to industry and to medicine. (FBIS, Tass in English; Moscow Dom Svc, Aug 1-26/80)
The Wfashington Star carried a Tass report that cosmonauts Vladimir Aksyonov and Yuri Malyshev had soft-landed in Central Asia after a visit to orbiting space station Salyut 6. The two were launched June 5 in a new transport vehicle called Soyuz T-2. Salyut 6 had been occupied since April 9 by Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who would probably remain in orbit to greet visitors to the Moscow Olympics, the dispatch said. (WStar, June 10/80, A-8)
**** - AS i .-INTENftONAUf fiLAIft Aeronautics programs canceled or deferred included efforts in vertical/ sidewise takeoff and landing (V/STOL) systems, supersonic cruise research, the variable-cycle engine, and the proposed numerical aerodynamic simulator. A initiative in large, composite primary aircraft structures was eliminated. Other programs affected were materials processing in space, AgRISTARS, instrumentation for an upper-atmosphere research satellite, and the Spacelab flight schedule. Lovelace said that adjustments in FY81 figures would reflect impact of decisions on the FY82 budget: an increase of $60 million in 1981 Space Shuttle changes and upgrading would “provide added schedule confidence” in Shuttle development and testing and in production of orbiter vehicles. The amended budget reflected NASA’s decision announced in January to discontinue the three-stage version of an inertial upper stage and to modify the Centaur upper stage instead. The modified stage would allow NASA to fly the Galileo mission to Jupiter on a single launch in 1985 and could be used for a restructured solar-polar mission in 1986 and VOIR in 1988. (NASA Text, Mar 10/81) March 12:	The Soviet Union announced the launch of Soyuz T-4 at 10 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting space complex Salyut 6-Progress 12. Salyut 6, in space since September 29, 1977, had docked January 26 with cargo craft Progress 12, which refueled it automatically on ground command and used its engine to raise the orbit. Soyuz T-4 carried as commander Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, veteran of Soyuz 25 that failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and of Soyuz 29, which docked there for 140 days in June 1978. Also on the T-4 flight was Viktor Savinykh as flight engineer. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 12/81) —Tass said March 13 that the Soyuz T-4 had docked with the Salyut 6-Progress 12 complex March 12 at 11:33 p.m. Moscow time and the cosmonauts had transferred into the space station, being the 15th crew to occupy it in the 3Vi years. They would check on-board systems and equipment, do maintenance, and replace instrumentation as necessary. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 13/81)
The Soviet Union launched from Baykonur the Soyuz 40 spacecraft crewed by Leonid Popov, who in 1980 achieved a world space-endurance record of 185 days with fellow cosmonaut Valery Ryumin, and Dumitru Prunariu of Romania’s air force. Tass said the ship would dock with orbiting space station Salyut 6,. occupied since March 14 by Vladimir Kovalenok and Viktor Savinykh. This flight, ninth in the Intercosmos program of launching a Soviet cosmonaut with one from another country, would complete the first round that began in March 1978 with representatives from Bulgaria, East Germany, Poland, Cuba, Hungary, Vietnam, Czechoslovakia, and Mongolia. (W Star,
Press reports said that two the cosmonauts who occupied orbiting space station Salyut 6 for 75 days had returned safely at 4:38 p.m. Moscow time in Soyuz T-4 to a landing site in Kazakhstan. Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, flight commander, and flight engineer Viktor Savinykh had two sets of visitors during their mission: Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Mongolian cosmonaut Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha of Soyuz 39 in March and Leonid Popov and Romanian cosmonaut Dumitru Prunariu of Soyuz 40, just a week ago. The New York Times said that this was the final mission for Salyut 6, which would probably be abandoned. Launched in 1977, it had been the base for nearly four years of record-setting tests of human endurance. Last week, Popov said that the Soviet Union would also retire the old-model two-person Soyuz spacecraft used for the past 14 years in favor of the Soyuz-T, a three-man version more maneuverable and sophisticated, with four successful flights, including the one just ended. (NYTimes, May 27/81, A-l; W Post, May 27/81, A-14) During May: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported unofficial records set by Columbia’s first flight, pending review for world certification. As the official U.S. certification authority for aerospace records since 1905 and sole U.S. representative of the Federal Aeronautique International (FAI), NAA gave the following figures: duration, 54 hours, 20 minutes, 52 seconds; maximum altitude, 209 kilometers; distance, 1,144,709 kilometers; mass carried into orbit, 95,201 kilograms; payload mass to altitude, 4624 kilograms. NAA said that Columbia was “the world’s first and only aerospacecraft.. .capable of operating in space or in the atmosphere.” NAA had awarded the Voyager mission team represented by Dr. Edward C. Stone the Collier Trophy, oldest U.S. aviation award, for space exploration achievement peaking in the close examination of Saturn after a comparable visit to Jupiter the previous years. Established in 1911 and first presented to Glenn Curtiss for development of a seaplane, the Collier Trophy was awarded yearly for achievement demonstrated by actual use. (NAA newsletter, May 1981)
Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, marked the fourth anniversary of orbital laboratory Salyut 6 with a report of planned space activity. A “lull” was being used for an overhaul of the ground-control center in the Crimea. Employees were on long-awaited vacations, and a skeleton staff was monitoring Salyut 6, orbiting without a crew since May 26. After orbiting for nearly two months of unspecified tests, a Cosmos craft launched April 25 had linked with the Salyut in June to form a 34-ton complex. A flight-test manager said that the complex would help in designing future space stations and was being monitored to see how such a heavy system behaved in space. Since docking with the Salyut the Cosmos had used its engines twice to raise the orbit of the complex. (NY Times Oct 7/81, B—11) During September: William F. Lilly, named NASA comptroller in 1973 and the only person so far to hold that position, announced that he would retire in October after 37 years of service to the federal government, the last 21 with NASA. (NASA Release 81-148; Sp anno Sept 22/81) —Isaac T. Gillam IV, director of DFRC since June 1978, would become special assistant to the NASA administrator October 1, detailed to the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy to participate in a space-policy review. (NASA Release 81-151; DFRC Release 81-30; NASA anno Sept 15/81) —Abraham D. Spinak, acting director of Wallops Flight Facility, would leave government service in December after nearly 33 years with NASA and NACA, its predecessor, which he joined in 1948. He had actually retired September 1, 1980, but stayed on to help in the consolidation with GSFC. (WFC Release 81-14) —Edwin C. Kilgore, associate administrator for management operations at Headquarters, would retire in October after 37 years of service with NASA and NACA. After graduation from Virginia Polytechnic Institute in 1944, he went to work at Langley, joined Headquarters in 1970, and was named deputy associate administrator for center operationas in 1974. As head of management operations, he had been in charge of agencywide institutional management. (NASA Release 81-139; LaRC Release 81-67) —Ann P. Bradley, deputy associate administrator for management operations, who had been acting associate administrator and acting executive officer at NASA Headquarters pending the retirement of E.C. Kilgore, would return to her duties in management operations with the appointment of A.B. Virkler Legate to the office of the administrator as NASA's executive officer. Legate had been associate deputy undersecretary for intergovernmental relations at the Department of Labor since February 1971: he had previously been a congressional special assistant and executive secretary of DOT from 1969 to 1977. He had also been a congressional administrative assistant. (NASA Spl anno, Aug 28/81, Sept 21/81)
NASA said that it had selected eight companies to negotiate fixed-price contracts of less than $1 million each for space-station mission studies. The companies were Boeing Aerospace, General Dynamics, Grumman Aerospace, Lockheed, Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell, and TRW. The eight-month studies to be covered by the contracts would identify and analyze the scientific, commercial, national security, and space operations missions that could be conducted most efficiently by a space station. Contractors would use the studies to develop alternative concepts for the station, with specific mission requirements and architectural options to be incorporated in NASA’s Shuttle-tended permanent orbiting facility. (NASA Release 82-121; MSFC Release 82-75)
The Soviet news agency Tass reported that the Soviet Union had launched space station Salyut 7 apparently to replace Salyut 6, home in space for cosmonauts since September 1977, for a joint French-Soviet manned flight this summer. Orbital parameters were 278-kilometer apogee, 219-kilometer perigee (between 136 and 172 miles), 89.2 minute period, 51.5° inclination. Agence France-Presse said that a Soviet-French team would shortly be launched in a Soyuz-T craft to link up with Salyut 7. Lt. Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, France’s “spacecraft” who had had “intensive training in Soviet facilities” with his backup, Col. Patrick Baudry, would fly to Salyut 7 with two Soviet cosmonauts about June 22. The report said that the French preferred the neutral word spacenaut because the Soviets used “cosmonaut” and the Americans “astronaut.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/82; Paris AFP in English, Apr 20/82; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-18) The New York Times reporter in Moscow said that the French-Soviet mission would be the first launch of a noncommunist in a Soviet spacecraft and the first East-West spaceflight since Apollo-Soyuz in 1975. Flight commander Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Aleksandr Ivanchenkov would occupy Salyut 7 a few days earlier. An three-man crew on another spacecraft—two cosmonauts, Leonid Kizim and Vladimir Solovyev, and Jean-Loup Chretien—would join them. The Soviet Union had released few details on the mission. The USSR’s goal was said to be deployment of a 12-man station weighing more than 100 tons, permanently occupied by rotating crews. Salyut 6’s lifetime had included two “marathon missions” of 185 and 175 days; the U.S. record was 84 days during the Skylab program of 1973 and 1974. Soon after the last mission on Salyut 6 the Soviet Union had sent a large craft (Cosmos 1267) to link with it and test “methods of assembly of orbital complexes of great size and weight.” No one said what would become of the Salyut-Cosmos; Western observers believed that the assembly, even with a combined weight of 36 tons could safely burn up on reentry. The U.S. Skylab that scattered debris on western Australia in 1979 during its uncontrolled plunge to Earth had weighed 77.5 tons. (FBIS Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/83; NY Times, Apr 21/82, A-12)
NASA announced that MSFC had selected four of the eight aerospace firms making space-station mission analyses for Headquarters to negotiate contracts exploring early uses of a space station. Each MSFC contract would address a specific area: Boeing would describe building large structures in orbit, such as huge communications antennas; both Martin Marietta and TRW would study servicing and maintenance of satellites by a manned facility in space; and General Dynamics would study operations of a Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) serviced in space by a manned facility to move payloads from lower to higher orbits. William R. Marshall, MSFC director of program development, said that the studies would posit a space station in orbit by 1990 and the kinds of experimental operations to be carried out there that would lead to a fully operational station by the end of the century. (NASA Release 82-134)
At 9:57 local time May 23 the Soviet Union launched supply ship Progress 13, which docked automatically with Salyut Ts service module at 11:57 Moscow time May 25, bringing 660 kilograms of fuel and 290 liters of water as well as air, food, equipment, and mail. On May 28, Tass described the unloading and refueling procedures. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 13-28/82; NY Times, May 19/82, A-4)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs established a space station task force, directed by John D. Hodge, to be responsible for developing program aspects, including mission analysis, definition of requirements, an program management. Hodge would report to Philip E. Culbertson, associate deputy administrator, and would draw on space-station activities at each program office and field center. (NASA anno, May 20/82)
Tass said that Venera 15, launched June 2, had reached Venus October 10 and fired its engine to assume an elongated elliptical orbit around the planet with a 24-hour period of revolution. Venera 16, still on its way, was scheduled to arrive about October 14. (FBIS, Tas;s in English, Oct 10/83) The New York Times said that Soviet officials had “privately admitted” that one of their rockets exploded on the launch pad as three cosmonauts prepared to join the crew on orbiting space station Salyut 7. However, “in the absence of any public accounting of the incident,” questions remained as to the damage done to the Soviet Union’s space program or its effect on the mission of the crew now in their fourth month aboard Salyut 7. The private sources said that the 160-foot A-2 rocket began to topple on the launch pad before its liquid oxygen and kerosene fuel exploded. The accounts were contradictory, some saying that a woman was in the crew and others that the crew was either injured or merely shaken up by the experience. The explosion could amount to a major setback, in view of a Soyuz crew’s failure to dock with the Salyut last April at the end of a “harrowing 17-hour struggle.” The Washington Post said that the crew sustained “unspecified injuries” and that the event was important because the visitors to the Salyut would have returned to Earth in the capsule that took occupants Aleksandr Aleksandrov and Vladimir Lyakhov to the station June 28, leaving their module for the “permanent crew” to use on their return. No immediate concern was expressed about the latter, as the original capsule was still usable. A later report noted that Aleksandrov and Lyakhov had been endangered September 9 by a leak of nitrogen tetroxide propellant into space; the cosmonauts had put on their space suits in case the toxic gas entered the cabin. They were allowed to remain in orbit after they found no traces of the gas. But the leak had left 16 of the station’s 32 control jets unusable, and less than 1,000	pounds of the gas in its single operating tank, meaning that a new crew could not operate the station in a normal mode. A new crew could fly a different type of space tug to one of the docking ports, however, and use its control jets to maneuver the station. The New York Times reported October 18 that a Soviet official with direct contact to senior mission control that said two experienced cosmonauts were recuperating from effects of acceleration when emergency rockets blew their capsule clear of the exploding A-2 launch vehicle and that the crew did not include a woman. The Washington Post said October 20 that the two cosmonauts on Salyut 7 were “in no danger,” according to Eugeny Tabakaev of the Soviet academy of sciences; the statement followed a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) report that the station was crippled because of a propellant leak. British teacher Geoffrey Perry, a regular listener to Soviet radio transmissions, told AP that he had detected no signs of stress and that the cosmonauts “sound fine.” James Oberg, U.S. specialist on Soviet space programs, said that the Salyut 7 crew could get back to Earth in the Soyuz that took them into space, but the Soviet Union had not used the Soyuz craft after 115 to 120 days in space because batteries and other systems could deteriorate over time. Oberg said that Lyakhov and Aleksandrov were to have returned late in September after another crew arrived but were delayed by the launch-pad explosion. The Soviet Union launched a supply ship, Progress 18, from Baykonur at 4:59 a.m. EDT October 20 to rendezvous with Salyut 7, claiming that the cosmonauts there were “living normally.” Lyakhov and Aleksandrov appeared on Moscow television October 16 and appeared to be “in high spirits.” However, their flight had reached its 116th day October 21, and the previous record for a stay in space was the 114 days set last year in the course of a 211-day endurance flight. It would take 10 days to 2 weeks for the cosmonauts to unload Progress 18, which would be burned on reentry. Nature magazine, published in Great Britain, said that the crisis was exaggerated and concern for the crew came not from Soviet engineers but from physicians, who had seen significant declines in activity and efficiency after four months in space. Nature described as “fanciful” a suggestion that the Soviet Union wanted to keep the cosmonauts in orbit until they could be rescued by the U.S. Shuttle on its November flight. (FBIS, Paris AFP in English, Oct 10/83; Tass in English, Oct 14, 20, 21, 22, 28/83; NY Times, Oct 12/83, A-7; Oct 18/83, C-2; W Post, Oct 12/83, A-19; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 20/83, A-39; Oct 21/83, A-7; Nature, Oct 27/83, 756)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2) Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch. First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years. After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.” On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each. Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.” The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space. Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures. Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cbuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two intervening missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.” Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts. The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A-l; June 23/83, A-l; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; WPost, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A-l; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs told a symposium of several hundred government, industry, military, and foreign space-station planners that President Reagan would approve a manned U.S. space station within the next 12 months. Dr. George A. Keyworth, presidential science adviser, had dropped opposition to the space station and asked NASA to come up with a “grand vision.” NASA hoped to get from the administration and Congress “seed money” of about $200 million for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1984; Beggs said that it would cost $6 to $8 billion to get a permanent station with four to six persons aboard into orbit by 1991. The station would enhance U.S. economic well-being by providing new areas for research. (NY Times, July 19/83, C-3; C Trib, July 18/83, 1)
Tass reported that the two cosmonauts aboard Salyut 7 had opened doors to a large attached module, Cosmos 1443, and were working in essentially a three-part assembly consisting of a Salyut, a Cosmos, and the Soyuz T-9 in which they arrived at the space station June 28. When the Cosmos docked automatically March 10 with the Salyut, U.S. space experts said that it would double the size of the 21-ton Salyut and had carried 3 tons of cargo, such as scientific gear, experiments, and life-support materials. Cosmos had sets of small thrusters generally used to change the orbit of the entire complex, which weighed in total about 50 tons. The Cosmos itself, 43 feet long and 13 feet in diameter with solar-cell panels to generate electricity, consisted of an orbital module and a descent module. The descent module could return to Earth unmanned and land by parachute carrying experimental data and materials no longer needed on the Salyut, giving the same sort of round-trip supply service instead for the U.S. Shuttle without being reusable. Tass said that the cosmonauts, Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov, were unloading Cosmos 1443 and reactivating systems on Salyut 7, putting film into cameras and turning on observation instruments, such as an East German mass spectrometer, which would photograph and measure “vast tracts of Soviet territory in middle and southern latitudes.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 1/83; NY Times, July 1/83, A-l)
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz T-9 descent module after a 150-day flight on board the Salyut-7-Soyuz orbital space station. The two landed at 3:00 p.m. EST (in the middle of the night in the Soviet Union), 16 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan in that country. U.S. intelligence sources said that the two were expected to return in September, when an exchange crew of cosmonauts was due to visit them. However, they were forced to stay in orbit an additional six weeks when an explosion at the launch pad almost killed the two other crewmen. And at about the same time that the launch pad accident forced the extension of their flight, the two cosmonauts had to deal with a fuel leak aboard the Salyut that left the space station with less than half of its normal navigating propellant. The two men had to live in space suits, because the fuel that leaked was nitrogen tetroxide, which was so toxic it might have killed them if it penetrated the cabin of the space station. Western space observers had noted that the six-week extension in space might cripple the Soyuz T-9 spacecraft because it had been in orbit longer than 115 days and this length of time could possibly cause its nonrechargeable batteries to burn out, allowing the corrosive nitrogen textroxide fuel the Soyuz used to navigate to eat through engine valves and jeopardize the flight home. Western space experts were also interested in the night landing. The cosmonauts, earliest day landing would have been December 15, which might have been too long for them to trust the Soyuz T-9 to return safely. The official Soviet news agency Tass said that, during the flight, the crew carried out a large volume of scientific-technical and medicobiological research and experiments and gathered data on the Earth’s natural resources, its atmosphere, seasonal changes, and the biological productivity of the world’s oceans. New research was carried out under the program of material studies in space. An Elektrotropgraf instrument on board the station provided data on the state of construction materials following exposure to open space. Tass also noted that an important part of the crew’s flight program was to carry out complex assembly work on the external surface of the Salyut 7 station. During two space walks of 5 hours and 45 minutes, the two cosmonauts installed additional solar batteries on the station, in addition to other construction tasks. Over the course of the flight, there were regular medical checkups of the crew, which confirmed the possibility of man’s active functioning in weightlessness. (FBIS Moscow Pravda in Russian, Nov 25/83; NY Times, Nov 3/83, A-8; W Post, Nov 12/83, A-2, Nov 24/83, A-12)
Tass announced the docking of Cosmos 1443, probably an advanced version of earlier Salyut craft, with Salyut 7 that had been orbiting since April 1982. Cosmos 1443, launched unmanned from Baykonur March 2, weighed about 20 tons and was larger than the Soyuz or Progress spacecraft. The 21-ton Salyut 7 was about the size of a small house trailer., said the New York Times. The linkup was thought to demonstrate the Soviet Union’s ability to assemble larger space stations. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 10, 11/83; NY Times, Mar 11/83, A-12; W Post, Mar 11/83, A-24)
NASA said that President Reagan asked his Senior Interagency Group for Space, chaired by William P. Clark, assistant to the president for national security affairs, to establish a basis for an administration decision on whether to proceed with NASA development of a permanently based manned space station. (NASA Release 83-51; MSFC Release 83-24)
The New York Times carried a report by “American intelligence sources” that three Soviet cosmonauts escaped death but might have been injured when a USSR launch vehicle exploded or caught fire September 27 at a site in Asia. The crew was saved when an escape rocket on top of the capsule pulled the spacecraft away from the booster. The incident, first of its kind in manned space programs, occurred as the liquid-fuel rocket was about to launch the crew to the orbiting Salyut 7 space station. (NY Times, Oct 3/83, B—13)
MFSC said that the Space Telescope, NASA’s future optical orbiting astronomical observatory, had been named the Edwin P. Hubble Space Telescope to honor a foremost U.S. astronomer who had died in 1953. Scientists had differed on the extent and dimensions of the universe: Earth’s solar system was considered part of a larger system of all stars visible to the naked eye. It was not known whether faint spiral nebulae were part of the Milky Way or distant universes, each composed of myriad stars. Hubble, working with the 100-inch telescope at Mt. Wilson, Calif., looked at individual stars in the Andromeda nebula and by the end of 1924 was able to show that Andromeda was many times farther away than any star in the Milky Way system. He later showed that the universe was expanding (evidence of the Big Bang theory), that external galaxies were moving away from earth, and that the more remote the galaxy the faster it was moving. This was called Hubble’s Law; the coefficient relating distance and velocity of the galaxy was called Hubble’s Constant. The newly named Space Telescope was scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1986. (MSFC Release 83-70)
Svetlana Savitskaya, a Soviet cosmonaut, today became the first woman to walk in space. Savitskaya, 36 years old, performed welding and soldering operations in the course of her walk in space, which lasted 3 hours and 35 minutes. She was also the first woman to make two spaceflights, her first being in August 1982 aboard the Soyuz T-7, which like the current flight linked with the Salyut 7 space station for a brief period. Savitskaya went into space July 18 along with Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Igor Volk aboard Soyuz T-12 and linked with the Salyut-7 space station, where three other cosmonauts had been in orbit for more than five months. Tass said that the main goal of the space walk was to test a new general-purpose handoperated tool designed “to carry out complex technological operations.” Dzhanibekov accompanied her on the space walk. Savitskaya, along with Dzhanibekov and Volk, returned to Earth July 29 aboard Soyuz T-12. They landed in an area 140 kilometers southeast of Dzhezkazgan. The three were reported to be feeling fine after landing. Remaining aboard Salyut 7 were cosmonauts Leonid Kisim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov. Savistskaya was born in Moscow and graduated from the Sergo Ordzhonikidze Aviation Institute in Moscow. She had worked as an instructor pilot and, since 1976, had been a test pilot on 20 types of aircraft, Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 17/84; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/84; NY Times, July 26/84, A-24; W Post, July 26/84, A-31)
NASA issued a Requet for Proposal (RFP) for definition and preliminary design of a permanently manned Space Station to be operational in low-Earth orbit early in the 1990s. Proposals were due by November 15. The Space Station would support scientific and commercial endeavors in space, stimulate new technologies, enhance space-based operational capabilities, and maintain U.S. leadership in space. The RFP contained four “work packages” covering definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of Space Station elements. NASA planned to let competing contracts for each of the work packages and scheduled April 1, 1985, as the effective date of the contracts. (NASA Release 84-130)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced today that JSC was named “lead center” for the agency’s Space Station Program. In a letter to center director Gerald D. Griffin, Beggs said that he was requesting the center to form a program office to execute five basic program responsibilities: systems engineering and integration, business management, operations integration, customer integration, and support of NASA Headquarters Space Station Program Office. Beggs noted that he planned to form a new organization at NASA Headquarters to direct the Space Station Program and that he would make assignments to other centers under overall project management of JSC. Terry White, a NASA spokesman in Houston, said that space station work would probably not require a large increase in personnel there because people working on the Space Shuttle program would shift over to the Space Station, the New York Times reported.
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger today named Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA’s associate director for space flight, to be manager of what the Reagan administration called the strategic defense initiative, a program to explore the feasibility of building a space-based defense against nuclear ballistic missiles. President Reagan had suggested the program the previous year. Abrahamson’s job would be to direct and coordinate several research programs that had been under way for some time at DOD and in the Department of Energy (DOE). These included research on several kinds of laser and particle beam weapons, work on large mirrors needed for some lasers, advances in high-speed data processing, and methods of generating large amounts of electrical power in space. Abrahamson had been at NASA since November 1981 and had directed not only the Space Shuttle operation but also commercial sales of Shuttle services and relations with Congress and the space industry. He would begin his new duties on April 15 after the nation’s 11th Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch on April 6. (NY Times, Mar 28/84, A-19) —NASA announced that Jesse W. Moore would become acting associate administrator for spaceflight on April 15, succeeding Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who would become director of strategic defense at DOD. Moore, who had been Abrahamson’s deputy, had come to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as the deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. He was director of the Spacelab Flight Division until December 1981, when he assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division in the Office of Space Science and Applications. In February 1983 he was appointed to the position of deputy associate administrator for spaceflight. (NASA Release 84-40) —U.S. Ambassador to Portugal Allen Holmes and Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama signed today in Lisbon an accord that would provide for a satellite tracking station in Portugal. Under the accord, the United States would provide Portugal with $60 million annually, of which $20 million would be for military aid and $40 million for economic aid. The United States would use the station to track flying military targets; U.S. plans called for five satellite tracking stations in the world, and stations in New Mexico, Hawaii, and South Korea were completed. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua in English, Mar 28/84)	" During March: In an interview following his around-the-world trip to sell the U.S. Space Station idea to U.S. allies, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said, “I thought the trip went well, I thought it went extremely well.” He added that he had proposed that as much as one-fourth of the proposed $8 billion cost of the Space Station be borne by western Europe, Japan, and Canada. “They didn’t exactly stand up and cheer when I said I’d like them to think about contributing a couple of billion dollars, but they didn’t blink at the numbers either,” he said. Beggs said that the countries had about a year to decide if they wanted to join in a partnership with the United States, since NASA planned to begin awarding contracts for the Space Station’s final design in the spring of 1985. He noted that all of the countries had laid down conditions under which they would agree to participate: the station must provide technological challenges to their industries; they must have what Beggs called a “clearly defined role” in the direction of Space Station operations and selection of flight crews; they must have access to the entire station; and their industries must have the same access that U.S. industry had. (W Post, Mar 27/84, A-2)
NASA named Neil B. Hutchinson manager and John W. Aaron deputy manager of the Space Station Program Office at JSC in Houston, Tex. Hutchinson was serving in a staff assignment to the Johnson director since his return in January 1984 from a one-year assignment at NASA Headquarters, where he was director, Space Shuttle Operations Office in the Office of Space Flight. Aaron had been chief of the Spacecraft Software Division at JSC since 1981. He also had served as avionics flight software project manager for the Shuttle approach and landing test and orbital flight test programs. (NASA Release
President Reagan approved today National Space Strategy intended to implement the National Space Policy, which was supplemented by the President’s 1984 state of the union address. Concerning the STS, the Strategy pointed out that the STS was a critical factor in maintaining U.S. space leadership, and, therefore, it was NASA’s first priority to make the STS fully operational and cost effective in providing routine access to space. The Strategy further noted that the STS was to be fully operational by 1988. Regarding the civil space program, the Strategy indicated that NASA should develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade and that the United States should seek agreements with friends and allies to participate in the development and use of the Space Station. In the area of commercial space programs, the Strategy called for the United States to encourage and facilitate commercial expendable launch vehicle operations and minimize government regulation of these operations. Concerning national security space programs, it was mandated that the national security sector must pursue an improved assured launch capability to satisfy two specific requirements—“the need for launch system complementary to the STS to hedge against unforeseen technical and operational problems, and the need for a launch system suited for operations and crisis situations.” The Strategy further stated that to fulfill this requirement, the national security sector should pursue the use of a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the STS. (National Space Strategy, WH Fact Sheet, App F-4, Aug 15/84, 137)
NASA announced that approximately 200 people representing every NASA installation and the JPL were selected to augment the staff of JSC to help plan the next phase of NASA’s Space Station Program. This team had two major objectives: issue a request for proposals to industry for the definition of the specific elements of the Space Station and define a reference configuration or configurations to accompany the request for proposals. “The purpose of the reference configuration is to provide a framework to help industry understand how the various elements of the Space Station are related,” said Dr. Ralph Muraca, deputy head of LaRC, designated a “center of excellence” to help plan this next phase of the program. “In addition, it will help individual companies determine which of the elements or work packages they would be interested in competing for.” The group’s guidelines were to develop a configuration that would meet all the requirements associated with the final configuration of the Space Station, expected to be operational in the 1999-2000 time frame, and then scale that PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED back to an $8 billion configuration that would provide maximum mission capability in 1991. (LaRC Release 84-35)
Charles Yost, a member of NASA’s Space Station task force, speaking at the Shuttle/Space Station business opportunities conference in Washington, said “There’s been an overhyping of the commercialization of space idea.” He added that it would take years before investments in many of the space-based opportunities being explored showed a significant return. However, he pointed out, “industry must be willing to risk its money up front,” and said that nine companies had applied for a joint endeavor agreement with the space agency. At the time, only four companies had actually signed with NASA to use the Space Shuttle for business ventures. Space industry analysts said that it would cost “a minimum of few million dollars” to begin exploiting the commercial potential of space. Though satellite communication had proved profitable, most space-based efforts faced an uncertain future. A Reagan administration recommendation to turn the nation’s Landsat remote-sensing and weather satellite systems over to private industry had met resistance in Congress, and some analysts believed there might not be a market for remote-sensing data. Many attendees at the conference questioned whether any company would make money in space manufacturing before 1990. (IV Post, Mar 7/84, D—16)
Engineers at NASA’s GSFC completed checkout and activation of the Landsat-5 Earth resources satellite, launched from the Vandenberg Air Force Base complex in California on March 1, and turned over today operational control of the spacecraft to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The 1,950-kilogram (4,300-pound) spacecraft was placed in a 705-kilometer (438-statute miles) near-polar orbit. NASA engineers had checked out all computer, communications, telemetry, and other spacecraft systems and declared the spacecraft ready for operational use. With Landsat-4 still functioning, data acquisition over the same ground swath was possible on an eight-day repeat cycle. NASA planned to turn over to NOAA operational responsibility for Thematic Mapper operation and data processing in January 1985. (NASA Release 84-49; NASA Dly Ac tv Rept, Apr 9/84) —NASA announced that it had established an interim Space Station Program office as a result of President Reagan’s January 25, 1984, directive to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station and to do it within a decade. Philip E. Culbertson, in addition to his duties as associate deputy administrator, would assume the role of acting director of the interim office, with John D. Hodge (former director of the Space Station task force) as acting deputy. The interim office superseded the former Space Station task force and would be responsible for direction of the Space Station Program and for planning the organizational structure of a permanent Program Office. (NASA anno, Apr 6/84)
Soviet cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov aboard Salyut 7 equaled the record of 211 days in space, set by cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev in December 1982. The increasingly long flights, coupled with Western intelligence reports that the Soviets were experimenting with rockets capable of lifting heavy payloads into orbit, indicated that the country was moving toward a goal of establishing a permanent, manned space station. Soviet reports said that the flight of Salyut 7 was proceeding normally and that there was no indication how long the flight would last. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT l&ldS§ During the flight the cosmonauts had spent 22 hours and 50 minutes outside the craft in 6 space walks, breaking the U.S. record for a single mission by 29 minutes. The three have been visited by six other cosmonauts, including an Indian and the first woman to walk in space, Svetlana Savitskaya, who during her space walk used a welding machine that space analysts said could be used for building large Space Stations. The three cosmonauts had focused on the psychology of long periods in space as well as carried out important repairs outside the craft, demonstrating the crew’s ability to maintain their spacecraft in an extended flight. In a televised ceremony, Soviet leader Konstantin U. Chernenko honored the cosmonauts taking part in the flight and spoke of the great advances in knowledge and equipment since the first manned spaceflight by Yuri Gagarin, 23 years previously. “In the successes of cosmonautics we see a blend of the daring thinking of scientists, the remarkable skills of engineers, technicians and workers, and the great courage of cosmonauts,” he said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 6/84; FBIS, Moscow Tass in Engligh, Sept 7/84; NY Times, Sept 6/84, B-10)
NASA announced that it had selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington Beach., Calif., and TRW, Inc., Space and Technology Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., for negotiations that would lead to two parallel Space Station study contracts, each contract for a firm fixed price of approximately $2 million, covering a performance period of approximately 27 months, beginning in March. Contracts would be for the development of functional, performance, and technology requirements; the definition of system architecture for the Space Station data system; and the relationship of that system to the overall NASA end-to-end flight and ground information system. The studies would define the role of the Space Station data system and its relationship, and interfaces to the Space Station information systems elements. They would also define the data system to determine the environment in which both the user and facility subsystems interface and operate; address all avionics and other electrically automated Space Station functions; develop a clear understanding of system functional, operational, and interface requirements; identify major cost items to enable effective management decisions and development control; and define a program plan. NASA’s JSC would negotiate and administer the TRW contract; NASA’s GSFC, the McDonnell Douglas contract. (NASA Release 84-36)
Cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov returned safely to Earth after 237 days in space. Soviet television broadcast the return, showing a parachute bearing the crew coming down about 500 miles northeast of Tashkent in Kazakhstan at 1:57 p.m. Moscow time. The three crew members had lived on the Salyut 7 orbiting space station since February 9. In television interviews, the cosmonauts said that they were glad to be back with friends on the “warm earth,” although one commented he was sad to leave the empty space station behind. The Soviet media had indicated recently that the crew was growing weary and to save energy had their working day cut by one hour. However, a medical checkup given the day after their return found the three to be in good health. In an interview in the newspaper Socialist Industry, a medical specialist said that recent endurance flights showed humans could live in space a year or more. The cosmonauts spent their last days on board transferring material to their Soyuz T-ll spacecraft and mothballing scientific equipment on the Salyut. The space station, launched in April 1982, would continue in orbit. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet awarded medals to the three cosmonauts; and Kizim, who headed a crew that linked up with an earlier space station in 1980, would be honored with a bronze bust, the Washington Post reported that Tass said. (W Post, Oct 3/84, A-23; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Oct 1/84, Oct 2/84; FBIS Moscow DomSvc in Russian, Oct 3/84)
The congressional Office of Technology Assessment released a report, “Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space,” which said that the kind of Space Station that NASA was planning could not be justified on scientific, economic, or military grounds. It went on to say that not just Congress, but the entire nation, ought to consider what the country wanted to do in the second quarter-century of the space era. The Space Station envisioned by NASA, the report said, “is only one alternative in a wide range of options.” Thomas F. Rogers, director of the two-year study, said that the time had come for the general public to play a greater role in space program goals. “We’ve been spending $7.5 billion a year, every year; we can do anything want to do,” he said. “It’s great, it’s exciting, but we’re missing large numbers of important activities by allowing all this to go on under technological drive— not policy drive, economic drive, social drive, the way everything else is done in this country at that level of public expenditure.” The report characterized the nation’s goals in space as shortsighted and narrow, reflecting the views only of the science and technology communities and not of the general public, which foots the bills. The study also said, “There is no compelling, objective, external case” for building a Space Station “to be used to support over 100 conceptual uses, few of which have been sharply defined or gained wide acceptance as important objectives of the space program.” The report concluded by spelling out the “kinds” of goals the nation should set: increase the efficiency of space activities and reduce their costs; involve the public; reap scientific, economic, social, and political benefits; increase international cooperation; and “spread life, in a responsible fashion, throughout the solar system.” (Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space, (D.C.: OTA, 1984; W Post, Nov 14/84, A.-4; NY Times, Nov 14/84, B-20)
NASA announced that MSFC had awarded contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace Company Denver, and Boeing Aerospace Company, Seattle, to study a space vehicle to move payloads from low Earth orbits to higher orbits. The “parallel” studies, concurrent but independent studies in the same area of concentration, for an Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) would run for 15 months at about $1 million each. The companies would conduct conceptual studies to examine the possibilities of both space-based and ground-based transfer vehicles. The space-based version would be maintained and refueled at the Space Station; the ground-based vehicle would be carried into space by the Space Shuttle for deployment. The transfer vehicle, as it was conceived by Marshall engineers, would be an unmanned upper-stage in the beginning. The ultimate goal, however, would be to develop a manned vehicle capable of ferrying a crew capsule to geosynchronous orbit. The vehicle would then return the crew and capsule for other missions. (NASA Release 84-90)
NASA announced the start of the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), a new astronomy satellite project that would be launched into Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1988. The purpose of the explorer was to make the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) band of the electromagnetic spectrum, a band between ultraviolet and X-ray light. The EUVE, managed by JPL, with scientific instruments supplied by the University of California, Berkeley, was a true explorer in that it would conduct the first in-depth investigation of that critical band and was expected to discover stars and other celestial objects with unexpected characteristics. The EUVE would orbit Earth at an attitude of 340 statute miles and from that point above the atmosphere would be able to scan the sky for emissions of extreme ultraviolet radiation. EUVE would use four 40-centimeter (15.7-inc.h) ultraviolet telescopes to conduct the all-sky survey and a spectrometer to carry out detailed observations of the new sources and stars expected to be discovered. JPL was responsible for overall EUVE project responsibility. The UCB would supply the 1,100-pound science payload, consisting of the extreme ultraviolet telescopes and the spectrometer; and the university’s Space Sciences Laboratory would design and fabricate the payload. JPL would control flight operations, and the science operations center would be at the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. (NASA Release 84-125) Discovery was oriented with the port side in direct sunlight, so when the crew awoke the next morning they found about half of the large ice block had melted. Then, astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr., switched on heaters in the pipes leading to the nozzle and fired the orbiter’s thrusters to see if the vibrations would shake the ice free. Next, Hartsfield, assisted by Judith Resnik, took the controls of the mechanical arm and following procedures outlined by Sally K. Ride on the ground knocked off with little difficulty all but about 5 inches of the ice chunk. The remaining ice apparently then melted in the warmth of the sunlight. Discovery landed September 5 at Edwards Air Force Base, completing its six-day maiden flight. During the flight, crew deployed three communications satellites, LEASAT-1 (SYNCOM-1), Telestar-3, and SBS-D in the first three days of the flight; extended an experimental solar-powered array in a test for future Space Station construction; and processed a sample of a hormone that could lead to a commercial pharamaceutical product. Lt. Col. Richard M. Mullane, one of the astronauts on board, said that Discovery “performed superbly,” while NASA officials pointed out that all the mission’s objectives were accomplished. (W Post, Sept 4/84, A-6; NY Times, Sept 3/84, A-l, Sept 4/84, A-l, Sept 5/84, A-l; W Times, Sept 5/84, 4A)
President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said. NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries. NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said. At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
NASA announced the establishment of seven intercenter teams to conduct advanced development activities for high potential technologies to be used in Space Station design and development. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would lead three of the intercenter teams; JSC, three of the teams; and a lead center for the seventh team would be assigned later. The teams would identify emerging technologies for advanced development for Space Station design and establish test beds into which prototype technology hardware could be integrated, tested, demonstrated, and evaluated. MSFC would be the lead center for the Attitude Control and Stabilization System, the Auxiliary Propulsion System, and Space Operations Mechanisms. JSC would be the lead center in the Data Management System, Environmental Control and Life Support System, and the Thermal Management System. The Electronic Power System would have a leader designated later. Assisting on various assignments would be the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Langley Research Center (LaRC), Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), KSC, ARC, National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), and Lewis Research Center (LeRC). (NASA Release 84-31). During February: The mission of ESA’s first preoperational remote-sensing satellite, ERS-1, would be mainly to monitor ice and coastal and ocean zones, the agency announced. Among the instruments in the ERS-1 payload would be an active microwave instrumentation package operating in the C-band and combining the functions of a synthetic aperture radar, a wave scatterometer, and wind scatterometer for the purpose of measuring wind fields and the wave image spectrum and taking all-weather high-resolution images of coastal zones, open oceans, ice areas, and (on an experimental basis) land. Germany, the Netherlands, France, and Canada, each built a C-bank scatterometer for comparison of data in order to evaluate the optimal technical characteristics of the C-band scatterometers on board ERS-1 and to check the mathematical models used for data processing. This experimental campaign organized by ESA would operate in the North Sea, in conjunction with a German scientific platform supplying “sea truth” data, and about 40 kilometers off the Brittany coast, in conjunction with a French oceanographic vessel supplied by the Centre National d’Exploitation des Oceans (National Center for Ocean Exploitation). This would allow comparison of the data acquired by the various scatterometers and data acquired by conventional means on board the platform and the oceanographic vessel. (ESA Release, Feb 6/84)
The Soviet Union was developing a large laser-equipped prototype military spacecraft for launch on its heavy Saturn-5-class booster, which was also competing development, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Soviet scientists were designing the spacecraft to attack U.S. satellites and would launch it on the booster within the next two years. The new booster’s primaiy mission was to place the 300,000- to 400,000-pound Soviet space station elements in orbit, but the U.S. DOD had been concerned for some time that it also could be used for the type of heavy, unmanned, prototype directed-energy weapon known to be under development. (AvWk, Mar 19/84, 13)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that engineers had determined the problem with two types of rocket motors that had caused the loss of two $75 million satellites and the near-loss of a third and had led to postponements of two Space Shuttle flights, the Washington Post reported. A report from McDonnell-Douglas said that a team had found a way to determine which rocket nozzle would fail in space and which would work. Such a procedure might have saved the two communications satellites that gone into useless orbits. However, the solution had come too late to put a Canadian communications satellite on the next Space Shuttle flight scheduled for June 19. (W Post, May 4/84, A-2) —In a continuing series of reports on orbiting cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov, who had been in space for 85 days aboard the Salyut-7, Tass said that the crew had completed planned operations with the cargo craft Progess-20, storing supplies and pumping drinking water into the station’s tanks. Kizim and Solovyev then made their fourth walk in open space. The two removed a heat-resistant coating that had been installed during a previous space walk, assembled a second conduit, and checked it for airtightness. The two then reinstalled the heat-resistant coating, put tools into a container, and returned to the station. Their walk lasted 2 hours and 45 minutes, bringing their total time in open space to 14 hours and 45 minutes during 4 walks in 12 days. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 4/84)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
Because of the failure of two telecommunications satellites launched by the Space Shuttle, the insurance industry would receive more than $200 million in claims, and premiums would skyrocket when underwriters resumed writing satellite risk policies, the Washington Post reported. Analysts said that it was too early to determine what impact the satellites’ failures would have on their manufacturer, Hughes Aircraft Company, or McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which built the rocket motors that apparently failed on the two satellites. Western Union, owner of one satellite, was insured for $105 million to cover the cost of the satellite and potential revenue; Indonesia, owner of the other satellite, had $75 million in insurance to cover the cost of building and launching the payload. Robert J. Tirone, vice president of the large insurance broker Alexander & Alexander, said that underwriters would likely hold off issuing any new policies until they found out what went wrong with the two satellites. “Something went wrong,” he said, “and it went wrong twice.” A spokesman for McDonnell Douglas said that the company was puzzled by the apparent failure of the rockets that were supposed to lift both satellites into stationary orbits about 22,300 miles from Earth. The rockets, payload assist modules (PAM), had been successfully used in 16 previous commercial satellite launches—5 from the Space Shuttle and 11 by missiles. At the end of 1983, the insurance industry had collected $205 million in premiums and paid $210 million in claims. As a result of the two recent failures, claims would rise to about $420 million. An insurance broker, who asked not to be identified, said that he expected premiums to quadruple as a result of the loss of the two satellites. (W Post, Feb 8/84, D-2) —The Soviet Union launched today a three-man crew on board the Soyuz T-10 spacecraft, which successfully docked with the Salyut 7 space station on February 9. The crew consisted on Col. Leonid Kizim (commander), Vladimir Solovyev (flight engineer), and Oleg Atkov (cosmonaut-researcher). It appeared that only Kizim had previous space experience, having commanded the Soyuz T-3 in 1980 in the first three-man mission to test and dock the upgraded Soyuz-T and the Salyut 6. Because of the greater amount of instrumentation and power then in place, TASS noted that the current mission “will have broader possibilities for research than any of the previous ones.” Scientific, technical, medical, and biological studies were on the schedule of the current mission, and the cosmonauts were reactivating life support, power supply, and heat control systems and were inspecting on-board equipment as part of their “demothballing” process [See Oct 2/84 for return of crew], (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 14/84; FBIS, USSR Feb 9/84, Ul)
NASA announced that three of its centers would participate with JSC, named earlier in the year to be the lead center, in definition and preliminary design studies of the Space Station. MSFC would be responsible for definition of the pressurized Space Station modules that would be built and equipped with appropriate systems for use as laboratories, the ward room and galley, and logistic transports. Development of this single “common” module design, with provisions for data distribution, power, environmental control, thermal control, and communications systems to be used in all pressurized areas in the station would provide significant savings in the overall program. LeRC would be responsible for the definition of the electrical power generation and conditioning and storage systems. Although most Space Station studies had focused on large solar arrays as the probable power generation system, Lewis would also examine and evaluate a number of alternative systems. GSFC would be responsible for definition of the automated free-flying platforms that would be part of the overall Space Station program and for provisions to service, maintain, and repair these platforms, as well as other free-flying spacecraft. Goddard would also define the provisions for instruments and payloads to be attached externally to the pressurized sections of the Space Station and the pressurized modules as a laboratory. In addition to its lead contractor role, JSC would be responsible for the definition of the structural framework to which the various elements of the Space Station would be attached and for the integration and installation of systems into this structure. The center would oversee the interfaces between the Space Station and the Space Shuttle and be responsible for mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems. JSC would also manage the attitude control, thermal control, communications, and data management systems and the equipping of a common module for crew use as a ward room and galley. Other NASA centers would support the definition and design activities, particularly in technology areas. KSC would be responsible for preflight and launch operations and be involved in logistic support activities. (NASA Release 84-85) The flight of Discovery was delayed on June 25 for at least 24 hours when its backup navigating computer failed less than 30 minutes before takeoff. Though it was not operational in space, the fifth backup computer was used during ascent to “watchdog” the other computers during the critical first 10 minutes of flight. Four seconds from launch on June 26, the flight of Discovery was automatically aborted by a computer due to malfunctioning of a fuel valve on the rear starboard engine, causing the engine to catch fire. The fire was extinguished after three attempts with heavy sprays of water. NASA placed Hartsfield and his five-member crew on leave for two days after experiencing this first launch abort in 12 Space Shuttle missions and only the second launch abort in American manned spaceflight history. Thomas E. Utsman, Shuttle operations manager at KSC, said that he had no idea when the maiden flight of Discovery could be rescheduled. It depended, he said, on how much damage had been done to the malfunctioning engine that caught fire and to the Space Shuttle’s protective tiles from the high-speed water jets that extinguished the fire on the aft part of the fuselage. Utsman said that the fire may have burned through the heat shield on the engine nozzle, meaning that the entire engine would have to be replaced. NASA announced on June 27 that Discovery’s maiden flight would not be attempted for at least two weeks in order to verify all three main engines. John Talone at KSC said, “I don’t think we’re talking about mid-July before we can get to the point of launching again.” Talone said that the only serious question remaining about the aborted launch was why the valve stayed closed when commanded to start the liftoff firing sequence. When the valve failed to open, a backup actuator automatically started the opening sequence, and the valve opened soon enough for the engine to build full power, although it did not. He said that Discovery probably would have reached orbit, but mission rules said that a Space Shuttle could not lift off without redundant valve, and when the Shuttle’s main computer sensed that one actuator system was out, the computer ordered engine cutoff. Photographic inspection of Discovery showed remarkably little damage from fire that broke out below the main engine nozzles after engine shutdown. The only structural damage to the Space Shuttle’ airframe was the speed brake just below the tail and half of the brake’s protective enamel was scorched off. {W Post, June 23/84, A-3, June 25/84, A-l, June 26/84, A-l, June 27/84, A-3) During June: ARC Director William F. Ballhaus announced that center aircraft and their operation would be transferred to the Ames Flight Operations Directorate. Martin A. Knutson, director of flight operations and site manager of the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, would be responsible for all flight activities at the Ames’s Moffett Field location in northern California and at the Ames Dryden Facility in southern California. The Flight Operations Directorate office would continue to be maintained at the Ames Dryden Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Factors in the management change were continued safety of flight and continuity of aircraft operations to be assured with all flight operations reporting through a single management chain. And the change served to integrate more fully the Ames Dryden Facility into the day-to-day operations of the parent Ames Center. The Ames Research Center and the former Dryden Flight Research Center, now Ames Dryden, were consolidated in 1981, a move that enhanced the capabilities of both organizations. Ames officials said that the latest move was a continuing part of the overall Ames-Dryden consolidation and would centralize all flight operations activities in terms of operations procedures, safety, and management philosophy. There were no plans to move any aircraft or personnel involved from either location. (ARC Release 84-15) Later, NASA announced that it was considering a plan to continue the 12th and 13th Space Shuttle missions as a way to avoid expensive delays that could push at least one mission scheduled for 1984 into 1985. The problem with combining missions was the inability to combine crews. Five crew members from the aborted flight or from the August flight would have to step down and wait for another turn. The possibility of combining missions arose when technicians at NASA’s engine test facility at Bay St. Louis, Miss., were unable to duplicate the failure of Discovery’s starboard engine that had aborted the flight. “No matter what we did, we were unable to duplicate the failure,” a NASA source said. “And until we understand what went wrong, we don’t want to fly.” The failure of a rocket nozzle on a communications satellite during a test in St. Louis then further complicated NASA’s rescheduling decision. A final decision awaited analysis on the test of a Star^f8 solid-fuel rocket nozzle at the Astronautics Division of McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St. Louis. Star-48 rockets were on two communications satellites that would be part of the cargo on a combined mission. On July 12 NASA announced that the next Space Shuttle flight would consist of payloads from flights 41-D and 41-F and would be launched from KSC no earlier than August 24. The mission aboard the orbiter Discovery would retain the designation 41-D. The cargo would remain essentially the same, except that the large format camera and spartan would be replaced with the Satellite Business Systems (SBS) and Telstar payloads then scheduled for launch in the same time frame. The crew for mission 41-D would be the six-member team of Commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker. The crew of 41-F would be scheduled for a later flight. (NASA Release 84-95; WPost, July 3/84, A-12, July 10/84, A-5, July 11/84, A-6)
The USSR launched at 10:40 a.m. Moscow time today the Soyuz T-13 carrying cosmonauts Col. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, mission commander and a veteran of four previous space missions, and Viktor Savinykh for a rendezvous with the Salyut 7space station in the first Soviet manned launch in nearly a year, the Washington Times quoted the official news agency Tass as saying. By late evening, Soyuz T-13, fitted with new flight controls, was in an orbit ranging from 203 to 182 miles above earth. On June 8 the Soyuz spacecraft docked with the space station using the new flight controls and an onboard computer in the Soviet program's first known manual docking. The time between launch from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan and the rendezvous with Salyut 7 was twice as long as in previous Soviet space missions, leading observers to believe the time was spent testing the new flight controls. In the past, personnel on the ground and automated onboard systems controlled Soviet spacecraft docking with Salyut stations, while cosmonauts on board simply monitored the operation. But since there had been aborted dockings in recent years, the Soviets might have given more control to Dzhanibekov. The Salyut space station had been mothballed since the previous October when three Russians returned to earth after 237 days in space, a record. (W Times, June 7/85, 7A; NYT, June 8/85, 4; W Post, June 9/85, A27) During June: Although the Soviet Union in the past had responded to the introduction of every new U.S. weapons system by installing a corresponding system of its own and many observers assumed the same would be true with the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), there were increasing indications that the Soviet leadership might decide to restrict itself to taking countermeasures against the U.S. system and renounce the development of any Soviet counterpart to SDI, the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists reported. In 1983 Henry Trofimenko, head of the Foreign Policy Department of the Institute for the Study of the USA and Canada, said that in giving effective answer to the U.S.'s military program "the USSR is not going to match the U.S. in development of every new system of weapons, nor is it going to imitate it." More recently, a Soviet analysis by a committee of scientific and strategic experts of the implications of SDI stressed that Soviet countermeasures against a prospective U.S. system could be very effective, could be taken quite easily and quickly, and would cost much less than the system against which they were directed. Possible countermeasures discussed in the analysis included destruction of the space platforms (done by relatively small missiles, by land-based lasers, by armed satellites functioning as "space mines," or by "clouds" of obstacles set in their path; encasing missiles with material capable of absorbing laser beams or of reflecting them; masking missile launches by means of smokescreens; designing a pattern of missile launches over time that would force the lasers constantly to redirect themselves in haphazard fashion, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the system; or launching dummy missiles in order to use up the destructive power of the system. The Soviet scientists agreed with western investigators that an estimated total cost of SDI could eventually reach $2 trillion, and even at that expenditure SDI could not guarantee that at least a few missiles in a hypothetical Soviet first strike might not get through to their targets. The Bulletin also pointed out that Soviet scientists had noted that the technologies required for countermeasures were in a much more advanced state than those required for SDI itself; in fact, much of the necessary technology already existed. Well before SDI would be in place, "an effective means of counteraction" could be set up and would probably cost only 1 or 2% as much as the system it was designed to counteract. (Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, June/July 85, 38)
NASA Administrator James Beggs stirred up a controversy when he reportedly told a Washington gathering of the American Stock Exchange that the Soviets had "turned us down, flat, with no explanation" on the proposal of a joint space mission, the Washington Times reported. Later NASA spokesman Miles Waggoner said the Soviets had not rejected the idea, but a joint manned space mission was not likely to happen within the next few years. President Reagan had offered the Soviets a chance to participate in a cooperative space venture about a year previously. The Soviets responded that they believed it was not the time to fly that kind of mission. "To us, that means the item is still open," Waggoner said. "This time, though, Mr. Beggs decided to look at it from the other perspective." Other NASA officials, indicating the agency hadn't received any new word from the Soviets about the proposal, speculated Beggs might have said what he did to provoke a reaction from them. Originally, NASA planners envisioned a joint practice rescue mission in which a U.S. astronaut would use a jet backpack called a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) to fly from a Space Shuttle to a Soviet Salyut space station. The astronaut might also use the MMU to push a cosmonaut back to the Space Shuttle for a brief time. (W Times, June 12/85, 4A)
NASA announced selection of the scientific investigators whose projects would be included on the proposed Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), an observatory that would operate in low-earth orbit for at least 15 years. A spacecraft carrying an array of instruments and providing power, precise pointing, and data transmission would house the observatory containing a 1.2m diameter, 10m focal length telescope. AXAF construction could begin around 1987-88 with launch approximately five years later. In orbit, AXAF would join the Hubble Space Telescope, scheduled for launch in 1986, and the Gamma-Ray Observatory, planned for a 1988 launch. The three observatories, together with the planned Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would provide simultaneous observations of cosmic sources over infrared, visable, ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma-ray wavelengths. Those selected included instrument principal investigators to design and fabricate scientific instrumentation for placement in the telescope focal plane, interdisciplinary scientists to provide expertise on X-ray astrophysics and other fields of astronomy, and a telescope scientist to guide telescope fabrication. Instrument principal investigators selected were Dr. Gordon Garmire, Pennsylvania State University (charged coupled device imaging spectroscopy); Dr. Steven Murray, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (high-resolution camera); Dr. Stephen Holt, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) (X-ray spectroscopy investigation for the AXAF); Dr. Claude Canizares, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy using AXAF); and Dr. Albert Brinkman, University of Utrecht, Netherlands (high throughput transmission grating for cosmic X-ray spectroscopy). Interdisciplinary scientists selected were Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, Space Telescope Science Institute (advanced X-ray astrophysics facility mission); Dr. Jeffrey Linsky, National Bureau of Standards (the coronal structures of selected cool stars and close binary systems); Dr. Richard Mushotzky, GSFC (a program to measure the mass of galaxies and clusters of galaxies with AXAF); Dr. Andrew Wilson, University of Maryland (studies of radio jets and the narrow line regions of active galaxies with AXAF); and Dr. Andrew Fabian, Cambridge University, United Kingdom (cooling flows in clusters and galaxies). Dr. Leon Vay Speybroeck, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, would serve as telescope scientist. The investigators, as members of the AXAF science working group, would provide scientific and technical guidance throughout the project and would receive a specified amount of time to use the telescope during its first 30 operational months. Astronomers from the U.S. and around the world would . use the majority of observing time. Marshall Space Flight Center managed the AXAF project for NASA's astrophysics division, Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release
The Space Shuttle Discovery's crew on mission 51-D landed the orbiter at 8:54 a.m. EST April 19 at KSC, a return characterized by the worst damage in 16 Space Shuttle missions—a burn-hole in a wing, two failed brakes, two blown tires, and at least 123 broken heat-shield tiles, the Marshall Space Flight Center's Star and the Washington Post reported. NASA scheduled the mission to last five days, but extended it by two days to give the crew a chance to correct a malfunction in the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite. The damage to Discovery could set back preparation for its next mission scheduled for June 12. NASA would have to replace protective tiles, probably damaged when the Space Shuttle lifted off through the rain [see Apr. 12]. "There's little question that we suffered more severe damage on this landing than on any other so far," Space Shuttle launch director Robert Sieck said. Concerning the brakes, Sieck said, "Brake damage we've seen on previous flights. Brake failure is something we've never seen." NASA had waved off Discovery for a 7:16 a.m. landing because of rain over Cape Canaveral. One orbit later, Discovery headed down to KSC, where NASA told Commander Karol Bobko to land on runway 33 instead of 15 because of sun glare. Bobko landed with no headwind to slow him, touching down at 231 mph, the fastest any Space Shuttle had landed. As Discovery rolled down the three-mile concrete runway, it encountered a nine-knot crosswind and began veering to the right. When Bobko corrected for the wind by braking one side, the strain apparently caused one of the inboard brake assemblies to lock. Moments later the inboard brake assembly on the other side also locked, causing rubber to burn. A burn-hole the size of a dinner plate nearly penetrated through aluminum on the Space Shuttle's left wingtip where a landing flap apparently dislodged several protective tiles. Regarding the Leasat 3, a Hughes representative said initial belief that a lever failed to release was in error [see Apr. 18]. Once Discovery had maneuvered to within 10 feet of the satellite, the crew reported the lever had released. The crew successfully snagged the lever twice to ensure it was fully released, and reported the only change in the satellite's status was a slowing from two to one revolution per minute. The first congressional observer in space, Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), had difficulty negotiating the steps down to the runway and required assistance into the van that took the crew to the dispensary for medical examinations. There had been some controversy over his presence on the flight, including a NY Times editorial that said, "Having pressured NASA to give him his space trip, Mr. Garn is now indebted to the agency. That's a pity for those whom he represents in supervising NASA's budget and its request to build an $8 billion space station." However, Garn commented that "I'm carrying my own weight. I knew I had to prove myself . . . I've dealt with NASA for 10 years. I'm working on the space station right now, setting policy." (Marshall Star, Apr 24/85, 1; W Post, Apr 11/85, B1, Apr 20/85, A1; NYT, Apr 20/85, 22)
NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced it had awarded a total of $8.7 million in contracts to Sundstrand Corp., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Boeing Aerospace Co., and Harris Corp. for advanced development contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of the power system for the proposed permanently manned space station. A major technical issue in Phase B was determination of whether photovoltaic arrays or a solar dynamic (heat engine) system should supply solargenerated power for the space station. Photovoltaic arrays were the accepted system for electricity production in manned and unmanned space missions. However, the space station's electrical power requirements were ten times greater than any mission flown to date and would necessitate arrays of approximately one-half acre for the initial station. Therefore, there was interest in solar dynamic systems because of their higher overall efficiency and relatively smaller size. In a solar dynamic system, an alternator driven by a turbine in a heat engine cycle produces electricity. Focusing the sun's rays by means of a concentrating mirror into a heat receiver heats the engine gas or liquid. The system operates as a closed-cycle heat engine, and a radiator cools the working fluid and rejects waste heat into space. Sundstrand Corp., under its $1,010,303 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, would study the magnitude of possible chemical and thermal degradation in the working fluid of an organic rankine cycle engine. Under its $1,010,000 cost-reimbursement contract, Grumman would study solar dynamic waste heat radiator technology. Boeing Aerospace Co., under its $3,117,059 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, would study the heat receiver/storage unit and identify and recommend testing required for concept verification. And Harris Corp., under its $3,619,870 cost-sharing contract, would generate conceptual designs for the solar dynamic dish concentrator, as well as identify and test materials, identify and recommend testing required for concept verification, perform engineering designs, fabricate the concentrator, and conduct verification and testing. (LeRC Release 85-77) SPACE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS (STS) Civilian in Space Program
NASA announced it selected Dr. F. Drew Gaffney, an associate professor of medicine and cardiology and director of echocardiology at the University of Texas Health Science Center, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, and Dr. Robert Phillips, a veterinarian and professor of physiology and nutrition at Colorado State University, to serve as payload specialists for the initial Spacelab Life Sciences (SLS-1) flight. NASA also selected Dr. Millie Hughes-Fulford, an associate professor of biochemistry at the University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, and a medical researcher at the Veterans Administration Medical Center, to serve as a payload specialist for SLS-2. Dr. Hughes-Fulford was the first woman to serve as a prime payload specialist for a Space Shuttle flight. The flights were intended to improve significantly knowledge about living beings in the space environment and were a major step in preparing men and women for life aboard the space station scheduled for launch in the early 1990s. NASA would shortly select for the SLS-2 mission a second payload specialist, who would then train with the three already announced. (NASA Release 85-62)
"Space and Society—Progress and Promise" was the theme of the twenty-second Space Congress, a nonprofit technical symposium sponsored by the Canaveral Council of Technical Societies, April 23-26 in Cocoa Beach, Florida, Spaceport News reported. Speakers discussed new space initiatives, including operation and robotics in space, advanced missions and transportation, Space Station plans and development, and private sector investment and participation in space activities. Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, director of the Strategic Defense Office, would speak about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). The traditional "Meet the Astronauts" session would be open to the public, as would be a one-man play entitled Leviathan 99 by Ray Bradbury, a noted science fiction writer. (Spaceport News, Apr 12/86, 8) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. personnel fitted the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) wide-field/planetary camera (WFPC) into the Hubble Space Telescope, the JPL Universe reported. They then removed and returned it to JPL for modifications and testing. "Everything went fine," Dave Rodgers, JPL's WFPC project manager, said. "There were no problems with any of our equipment." The WFPC consisted of two complete camera systems with different focal lengths. There were four cameras in each system, all sharing the same housing and electronics. The wide-field camera would obtain a wide perspective of a region in the sky, while the planetary camera would make high-resolution studies of individual objects. "It's called a planetary camera, but you can use it for any object that you want to study in detail," Rodgers explained. Besides planets in earth's solar system, the planetary camera would study galaxies and star-like objects such as quasars. Astronomers could also use the camera system to search for clues suggesting the presence of other planets orbiting nearby stars. Because the space telescope would be above the earth's obscuring atmosphere, it would be able to detect objects 100 times dimmer than those visible from earth with about 10 times greater resolution. The orbiting observatory was a major part of NASA's astronomy effort through the end of the century. Space Shuttle crew would service and replace in orbit the space telescope instruments, keeping the telescope operating for at least 15 years. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1)
"The Dream Is Alive," a new IMAX movie that was perhaps the most advanced film of its kind ever made, opened today at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Post reported. The $3.6 million production, narrated by Walter Cronkite, was the first ever shot almost completely on location in space and was an informal sequel to "Hail, Columbia," the story of the U.S.'s first Space Shuttle. Because the film was shot on three of the most dramatic and action-packed Space Shuttle flights of the previous year, it was essentially a video yearbook full of special happenings, the Washington Times reported. The film showed the rescue and repair of the Solar Max satellite, the deployment of the 100-foot-tall solar array that someday could help power the space station, launching of two communications satellites, and the first spacewalk by an American woman. Among what appeared to be special effects produced in Hollywood were the immensity of Hurricane Josephine as seen from 200 miles overhead and the silence of a satellite drifting noiselessly in the blackness of space. The astronauts who shot the footage said the IMAX format came as close to capturing the real view and the true feel of spaceflight as any format ever had. IMAX expert Graeme Ferguson, who produced and directed the film, said the next step was to modify an IMAX camera so it could be taken outside the Space Shuttle. (W Post, June 22/85, D1; W Times, June 20/85, 3B)
NASA announced it selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. and Rockwell Internatl.'s Space Station Systems Division for fixed-price contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of the structural framework and other elements of a permanently manned Space Station. Johnson Space Center (JSC) would manage the 21-month contracts, which had an estimated value of $27 million each. NASA previously announced other industry teams selected for negotiations for definition and preliminary design of other Space Station elements [see March 14]. In addition to work on the Space Station structural framework, the JSC contracts would cover interface between the Space Station and Space Shuttle; mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems; attitude and thermal control; communications and data management systems; plans for equipping a module with sleeping quarters, wardroom, and galley; and plans for extravehicular activity. (NASA Release 85-56)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) engineers and technicians recently practiced the exact technique that would be used to fuel the Galileo spacecraft, simulating the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) environment where the spacecraft would actually be fueled, the JPL Universe reported. This was necessary because Galileo's propulsion system, designed and built by West Germany and unlike previous JPL spacecraft in which the propulsion system was a separate module, would be sandwiched in between the bus and the despun section of the spacecraft. This would require fueling when Galileo was fully assembled, and any resulting problems could jeopardize the sensitive cargo. "This four-day exercise is basically an 'undress rehearsal'," Hank Delgado, propulsion and pyro devices group leader, said. "We want to acquaint everyone with the procedures and equipment we plan to use to fuel Galileo." Instead of using the actual propellants—mono-methylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide—that Galileo would use, the team practiced with less hazardous fluids—isopropyl alcohol and freon—allowing them to work without special suits. When Galileo was fueled at KSC, technicians would wear 55-lb. SCAPE (self-contained atmospheric protective ensemble) suits to protect them from the highly toxic propellants. Although the suits had an air supply and thermal control system, the limited air supply allowed only about an hour of work, requiring technicians to work in shifts. JPL would send Galileo to KSC early in 1986 for final launch preparations. Technicians would then fuel the spacecraft, taking a day for each of its four tanks. For the following four months, the technicians would monitor the propellant closely for leaks or changes in temperature. (JPL Universe, Sept 6/ 85, 1)
Japan's highest space policy board, the Space Activities Commission, adopted in a meeting of its four commission members a plan to begin in FY 85 development of a rocket booster capable of putting a two-ton geostationary satellite into orbit, FBIS, KYODO in English reported. The new booster, code named H—II, a two-stage, 240-ton liquid-fueled rocket, 46-m high and 4-m in diameter, would dwarf the country's biggest rocket, N—II, whose capacity was up to 350 kg. Officials expected the project to cost 200 billion yen and take six to seven years to complete. The commission also agreed to start work on a science satellite and geostationary weather satellite, both intended for 1989 launch, and authorized the PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	163 naJUr.. INTENTIQNALU BLAHS design, beginning in FY 85, of a space module that Japan would construct as part of an international space station program planned for early in the 1990s. (KYODO in English, Mar 13/85) MATERIALS PROCESSING
The text of a joint declaration made public today at the end of a seven-nation economic conference in Bonn, West Germany, contained a statement concerning space activities, the NY Times reported. The text read: "We welcome the positive responses of the member states of the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan to the invitation of the president of the United States to cooperate in the United States manned space station program on the basis of a genuine partnership and a fair and appropriate exchange of information, experience, and technologies. Discussions on intergovernmental cooperation in development and utilization of permanently manned space stations will begin promptly. We also welcome the conclusions of the ESA Council on the need for Europe to maintain and expand its autonomous capability in space activity, and on the long-term European space plan and its objectives." (NYT, May 5/85, A16)
NASA selected the dual keel reference configuration, a modification of the power tower concept, for the proposed permanently manned space station, the Spaceport News reported. It was called the dual keel because of twin vertical booms that would provide the framework for attachment of other structures. The concept's primary attributes were that it would provide better customer accommodations and servicing, increased attachment area, and a more versatile design for growth based on future requirements and changing station roles. Another change in space station planning was placement of the pressurized modules near the station's center of gravity to increase the amount of space available for experiments, such as crystal growth, that needed a microgravity environment. NASA selected the dual keel configuration from a variety of layouts devised by teams of contractors working on two-year space station definition and preliminary studies. Overall space station shape and module placement were just two of the many significant technical decisions program officials had made since the space station definition period began in April 1985. NASA would conduct over the next three to five months a series of reviews to narrow design choices so that it could select by early 1986 a baseline structure for the proposed space station. Contractor teams would spend the second half of the study phase doing space station subsystem preliminary designs, leading to start in mid-1987 of the planned development phase. (Spaceport News, Oct 25/85, 2)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced today that it would open in September the microgravity materials science laboratory (MMSL) to help experimenters make better decisions about what is and is not feasible for science experiments in space. Such experiments are expected to provide knowledge leading to new materials, more efficient use of earth's nonrenewable fuel resources, new medicines, advanced computers and lasers, and better communications. Providing a capability that existed nowhere else in the world, the new laboratory would offer U.S. scientists and engineers a low-cost, low-risk way to test new ideas for materials science research in space. Initial research plans would support metal and alloy solidification and electronic crystal growth studies. The laboratory should give U.S. companies a competitive advantage in developing better ground-based materials and/or processing of materials through microgravity research. The laboratory, along with LeRC's assignment to develop the power system for the proposed space station, would put LeRC into the mainstream of the U.S.'s space research efforts. (LeRC Release 85-63) Marshall Space Flight Center
The NASA exhibit entitled "Living, Learning, Working in Space" at the 36th Paris Air Show, May 30 through June 9 in Le Bourget, would highlight full-scale elements of a space station, including mockups of working and living quarters, NASA announced. Audiovisual presentations throughout the 6,900-sq. ft. exhibit area would depict life inside a space station. To give viewers the impression they were looking out into space from a space station module, NASA would suspend in a diarama a large model of the power tower configuration space station along with models of future U.S. space science programs such as the space telescope and Galileo. Exhibits would also showcase NASA's latest aeronautical research. (NASA Release 85—41)
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched January 25, 1983, worked almost perfectly for 300 days until it depleted its liquid helium coolant and that it had achieved mission objectives, which were to produce an unbiased all-sky survey using a number of broad infrared photometry channels, to study selected galactic and extragalactic sources, and to map extended sources. For infrared astronomy, IRAS represented as great an improvement over ground-based telescopes as the Palomar 200-in. telescope had over Galileo's telescope. Because fewer than 1,000 infrared sources were cataloged before the IRAS launch, the sensitivity of IRAS produced a survey of a large unexplored area in the electromagnetic spectrum. The IRAS All-Sky Survey catalog contained about 250,000 sources, including some 20,000 new galaxies and 16,000 small extended sources. IRAS surveyed more than 96% of the sky, 16% more than was required for mission success. Information in the IRAS databased revolutionized the infrared study of the sky and provided a rich data source to observers in other wavebands. The IRAS program resulted from a cooperative effort among the U.S., The Netherlands, and the United Kingdom in the areas of operations, spacecraft design, infrared technology, and scientific collaboration. During the next four years, scientists would continue to examine and analyze the more than 200 billion data bits in the IRAS database and, by developing specialized processing techniques, possibly increase the sensitivity of the survey. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85) During October: NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSRC) awarded a 14-month $140,000 contract to Perkin-Elmer Corp. to study concepts and technologies needed fora next generation telescope with ten times the capability of the Hubble Space Telescope. This study, the first step toward preparing to launch a space telescope array in the first decade of the next century, would define a technology development plan for the array and provide NASA with cost and schedule data. Perkin-Elmer would initially examine the probable science such a telescope would perform as well as the concept of an array of telescopes working together as one. Perkin-Elmer said it would develop two telescope concepts based on the best use of the proposed space station and technology advancements needed to implement them. The first would emphasize assembly and optical alignment in orbit using the space station as an assembly base. The second concept would focus on modularization, ground assembly and checkout, and minimal on-orbit assembly. The study would also explore the possibilities of adapting, for visible light purposes, interferometer techniques used by radio astronomers to obtain high-resolution maps of deep space objects. In addition, Perkin-Elmer would define and recommend technologies needed for maximum use of the space station for assembling, testing, and servicing the next generation facility for optical astronomy. Perkin-Elmer built the Hubble Space Telescope scheduled for launch August 1986 on Space Shuttle flight 61-J. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 14)
Americans on board were commander Henry Hartsfield, Jr.; Air Force Lt. Col. Steven Nagel, pilot; and mission specialists Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, a biomedical engineer, Marine Corps Col. James Buchli, and Air Force Col. Guion Bluford, Jr., who had a doctorate in aerospace engineering. The two West Germans in the crew were Dr. Ernst Messerschmid and Mr. Reinhard Furrer, both physicists. The eighth crew member, Dr. Wubbo Ockels, a physicist from the Netherlands, represented the European Space Agency (ESA), which provided several scientific instruments in the Spacelab. The Europeans had prime responsibility for conducting the experiments; Bluford and Dunbar would assist them. Spacelab D-1, designed, built, and checked out in Europe, was flown to KSC for installation in Challenger's cargo bay. The V\fest German space agency's center in Oberphaffenhofen, near Munich, controlled scientific operations during the flight; ground control for flying the Space Shuttle was in Houston, as usual. Spacelab D-1 carried 76 experiments on racks that lined its walls. German researchers designed most of the experiments, which were for German and other foreign universities, research institutes, and industrial enterprises as well as ESA and NASA; other experiments were from France, Spain, Italy, Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and the U.S. All experiments were intended to take advantage of the weightlessness of space to study various processes that were normally affected by gravity. The Washington Post reported that West German officials said Spacelab was a major step toward what they hoped would be a larger laboratory module attached to the permanently manned space station that NASA envisioned for the 1990s. Most experiments were in materials processing. Along two sides of the Spacelab, the experiments were in racks containing small furnaces for heating metals and making alloys that were lighter and stronger than anything produced in full gravity of earth. Other materials processing experiments would study the flow of liquids in weightlessness; yet others would grow very pure and large crystals that could lead to improvements in electronic semiconductors. In a variety of life sciences experiments, the crew would study the growth of plants (corn and lentils) under microgravity conditions. Other studies were on how embryos of frogs and insects developed in weightlessness. Crew would use tadpoles for tests on how weightlessness might affect the development of vestibular, or balance, organs in vertebrates. ESA's vestibular sled ran down a pair of rails in Spacelab's center aisle. Experimenters would accelerate and tilt crew members riding in the chairlike device to test how the human balance system in the inner ear responded to weightlessness and a moderate gravity force, because it was thought the inner ear, which relied on gravity to function normally, might be the source of astronauts' motion sickness. Crew would use instruments in the cargo bay outside the Spacelab for navigation tests, such as synchronization of atomic clocks in space with those on the ground, checking for any discrepancies caused by weightlessness, and precise distance measurements by radio signals between the Space Shuttle and the ground. To accommodate the crew of eight, NASA installed an extra sleep station, bringing the total to four. Crew would conduct laboratory work in shifts around the clock. Despite early concern over the condition of the Space Shuttle's steering jets, mission control gave the Challenger the go-ahead for orbital operations. Later the mission control flight director said a valve malfunction prevented the flow of fuel through one line to Challenger's steering jets, but NASA considered an alternate line sufficient for regular operation to maneuver Challenger. Flight controllers also reported erratic temperature readings on one of the three fuel cells that generated electricity, but with crew supervision the affected unit was operating at full strength. (NASA Release 85-145; NASA MOR M-989-61-A [prelaunch] Oct 28/85; NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13; W Post, Oct 31/85, A30)
NASA announced that Frederick Hauck would command Space Shuttle flight 61 —F scheduled for no earlier than May 15, 1986, to deploy the Ulysses (International Solar Polar) spacecraft and David Walker would command the Galileo mission 61-G scheduled for no earlier than May 21, 1986. The Galileo spacecraft would explore the environment of Jupiter and its moons. Hauck first flew as pilot on Space Shuttle flight 7 in June 1983 and was commander in November 1984 of mission 51-A, for which Walker was pilot. Other 61-F crew members would be Roy Bridges, pilot, and mission specialists David Hilmers and J. Mike Lounge. Other mission 61-G crew members would be pilot Ronald Grabe and mission specialists John Fabian and James van Hoften. The Ulysses mission would be the first to use the liquid-fueled Centaur upper stage; the Galileo mission would also use the Centaur upper stage. (NASA Release 85-82)
NASA announced that a five-year project at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) resulted in development of the real-time multiprocessor simulator, a low-cost easily programmable computing system that simulated or monitored complex physical processes in real time. The simulator could offer considerable savings, for example, in the development and testing processes for producers of airplane engines. Real-time simulations were particularly important in studying the internal aerodynamics of a jet engine, including such variables as the performance of turbine and convergent-divergent nozzles, bypass valves, injectors, and fan and compressor geometry and the coordination of these variables with fuel flows and flight controls. In a real-time simulation of a helicopter engine, the NASA system solved all 63 engine equations within 1 /100th of a sec. The system had hundreds of real-time applications where there was a critical need to simulate or monitor many processes at once or when the reaction of one process could be vital to the performance of another, such as monitoring the structural dynamics of a space station at several locations, with a processor dedicated to each location. The essence of the NASA system was a network of computers tied together and operated simultaneously but with different programs, each one a portion of the overall task. The system could detect a change in one aspect of a dynamic process and report the effect of that change on other parts of the process. Using state-of-the-art, high-performance microcomputers, NASA scientists had designed hardware configurations that enabled a person at a single terminal to control up to 10 microcomputers operating simultaneously, each handling a portion of a total program. NASA scientists had also developed a companion form of computer language, taken from the PASCAL format, that enabled an engineer who was not a computer specialist to program his or her own multiprocessor for experimentation and monitoring. (NASA Release 85-39)
NASA launched at 7:29 p.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B to practice methods for building a space station and to launch three satellites, the Washington Post reported. People more than 400 miles away in South Carolina and Key West, Florida, saw the launch. There had been only two other previous U.S. night launches: in 1972 when the Apollo 17 crew left for the moon in the middle of the night and in 1983 when the Space Shuttle Challenger departed in early morning. Nine minutes after launch, mission control reported Atlantis was in a secure orbit about 200 miles high, and launch director Gene Thomas said the countdown was the smoothest yet in the Space Shuttle program. Crew onboard Atlantis were Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, commander; Lt. Col. Bryan O'Connor, pilot; mission specialists Dr. Mary Cleave, Maj. Jerry Ross, and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring; and payload specialists Rudolfo Neri Vela (Mexico's first astronaut) and McDonnell Douglas engineer Charles Walker. During the mission the crew would launch Mexico's Morelos B satellite, Australia's AUSSAT 2, and RCA's Satcom KU-2. Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring would also take two long spacewalks to assemble 93 aluminum struts into a 45-foot beam and six 12-foot beams into a 64-lb. inverted pyramid to test techniques that might be used to build the proposed permanently manned space station. Following each spacewalk, the mission specialists would disassemble and stow the beams. Cameras would record every move so that later a computer could reduce the photos to a motion study that engineers would use to determine how construction work could best be performed in the zero gravity of outer space. (NASA Release 85-153; W Post, Nov 27/85, A3)
Aerospace Daily reported that NASA would submit to Congress that week the space station automation and robotics study, "Advancing Automation and Robotics Technology for the Space Station and for the U.S. Economy," which appropriations legislation enacted in 1984 had directed NASA to prepare by April 1. NASA Administrator James Beggs approved the report compiled by the advanced technology advisory committee and augmented by the work of an automation and robotics panel, SRI International, and aerospace contractors. The report consisted of two volumes, an executive overview, which outlined major findings and contained proposed goals for automation and robotics applications in relation to the initial space station, and a technical report, which outlined the potential of automation and robotics technologies and would serve a major focus of definition and preliminary design (Phase B) space station contractor efforts. Under an agreement with the Senate Appropriations Committee the previous April, NASA had funded and managed several studies in automation and robotics that had included industry case studies of advanced automation and robotics. From these the committee determined what should be incorporated in space station initial operational capability and what the design should be so that these elements could be incorporated at a later date. The firms and functional areas studied were: General Electric Co., space manufacturing concepts; TRW, satellite servicing; Hughes, subsystem and mission ground support; Boeing, man/machine interface; and Martin Marietta, automation technology for assembly of the facility. Although NASA believed a commitment to the efforts outlined in the committee report would increase space station efficiency and result in significant cost savings, a breakdown of actual costs would not be available until NASA contractors completed the overall plan for implementation of the automation and robotics systems in initial space station studies. The report did recommend that automation and robotics be a key element of the basis space station program and that the initial space station design take into account evolution and growth in robotics. Examples of proposed goals for automation and robotics applications for the initial space station included a mobile remote manipulator with collision avoidance capability and dexterous manipulator systems that could inspect and exchange orbital replaceable units. (A/D, Mar 21/85, 1)
During a "Science and Engineering" radio program, Boris Belitskiy responded to a New Zealander's question about the possibility of there someday being a larger Soviet space station, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. "A Soviet orbital station of the next generation will be a larger and more comfortable complex with better facilities for research work, pilot production, cosmonaut exercises, recreation, and everyday life generally," Belitskiy said. When asked whether the Soviets were developing a reusable spacecraft like the U.S. Space Shuttle, Belitskiy responded, "For the present, freighters of the Progress type meet the needs of resupplying Salyut orbital stations. Nevertheless, Soviet space scientists do see a future for reusable transport systems and have been conducting tests in this area. The technological problems involved have, on the whole, been solved, but this cannot be said of the economic problems . . . This being so, Soviet space scientists are interested in quite a few other approaches to the problem as well," In response to a question about a manned mission to Mars, Belitskiy said, "Some day, undoubtedly, there will be such a mission but that's still a long way down the road. And a vast project of this kind, bound to be very expensive, would be greatly facilitated by more cooperation between the major space powers." (FBIS, Moscow World Service in English, July 22/85)
At the third in a series of hearings on assured access to space NASA and Defense Department officials said today before the House Science and Technology space science and applications and Armed Services research and development subcommittees that available data did not support the need for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in the early 1990s. But the officials acknowledged that there could be a period around 1992 and beyond in which unforeseen launch demands would strain capability, Aerospace Daily reported. Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) pointed out that earlier testimony had revealed a launch demand for 26 to 33 Space Shuttle equivalent flights per year in the post-1992 timeframe, and Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, acknowledged that a flight capability of 30 per year would require a fifth orbiter. He said that NASA projected the annual launch capability of a four-orbiter fleet in the 1990s timeframe to be 24 flights, 20 from Kennedy Space Center and four from Vandenberg AFB, with the ability to surge temporarily to 28 flights per year. When asked to factor in potential extended downtime of one orbiter, Moore replied that NASA had not made a projection of lost flights because it would be directly related to the length of the downtime and when it occurred. He added that NASA could probably fly 20 to 24 flights with the three remaining orbiters if one were out of service for periods up to one year; a sustained launch capacity for three orbiters would be in the range of 15 to 20 flights per year, he said. Edward Aldridge, undersecretary of the Air Force, said that, although the Department of Defense (DOD) was committed to at least eight Space Shuttle missions per year, its current known requirements through the mid-1990s averaged 10 launches per year. Including the one-to-five Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year projected through 1995 for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research, he said the total DOD requirement became roughly 11 to 15 Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year. Those numbers excluded any mission supporting potential deployment of SDI-related systems, he added. At the same hearing, Gen. Robert Herres, commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), said he thought the "time had passed" during which the U.S. might have built a fifth orbiter. He pointed out that resources needed for it might better be devoted to new technology and options, "which afford us more flexibility and versatility." Offering an opposing view, Hans Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas System and former NASA deputy administrator, said that the argument for a fifth orbiter could not be based either on currently projected flight rates or on backup requirements. He said only the proposed space station and SDI requirements could increase space operations to the point where a fifth orbiter was necessary. (A/D, July 26/85, 137)
In its recently published "1986 Long-Range Program Plan," NASA outlined plans for an evolutionary, permanently manned space station in low-earth orbit; operation by the year 2000 of man-tended platforms in equatorial, polar, and geosynchronous orbit; and routine manned missions on the moon and later Mars by the early 21st century, Defense Daily reported. The annually updated plan, summarizing the status of NASA planning as of the end of February 1985, also detailed some 120 ongoing and planned NASA space projects and missions for approximately the next ten years, with some out to the year 2000. The plan did not discuss budget figures, but for the near-term assumed budgets with the 1% growth promised annually by President Reagan (which had since disappeared in the deficit battle in Congress). The report did not project a need for more than four Space Shuttle orbiters but did not rule out such a need, while calling for development by 1990 of an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). Beyond 1990, objectives of the NASA spaceflight program included developing an orbital transfer vehicle complementary to the Space Shuttle for transportation of payloads, to, between, and beyond earth orbits; defining, designing, and providing a second-generation space transportation system including unmanned cargo vehicles and second-generation orbiters; developing and operating on a routine basis, beginning in the mid-1990s, geosynchronous orbit space platforms that were unmanned, permanent, and multifunctional; developing and putting into routine operation by the year 2000 geosynchronous orbit facilities that were permanent, multifunction, and able to be periodically manned; developing technology and techniques to construct, deploy, or assemble such facilities in space and to test and service them in orbit; and encouraging and supporting NASA and industry development of technology to improve concepts for space boosters that significantly reduced launch costs. The NASA report noted that "achievements in the early 21st century in science, exploration, earth applications, and commercial uses would depend on two trends: first, the increasing capabilities of space systems with regard to accessibility, payloads, stay times, and variety and sophistication of operations; and second, the increasing capability of instruments with regard to detection, resolution, pointing accuracy, and data collection and management made possible by improvement of their power supplies and cooling mechanisms." In the 21st century, the NASA report said, "automated or human-tended instruments located on the lunar surface will begin complementary observations" with instruments in low-earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit. For manned transportation from the space station, "a cyrogenic version of the orbital transfer vehicle evolutionary family, currently in early stages of preliminary design, is expected to provide by the year 2000 reusability for manned and sortie flights to at least geosynchronous orbit ... It also should be able to provide the basis for transportation for longer flights to establish a lunar base and for planetary missions such as a Mars sample return . . . Routine access to the lunar surface will make possible the first intensive, systematic study of another major celestial body," the report noted. "Extensive sample collection and scientific traverses conducted by humans and long-term instrument networks installed and managed by humans will help determine the details of the moon's structure, composition, and history. They also will make accessible the record of solar and cosmic ray particle fluxes preserved in the lunar soil . . . Similar scientific activities can be carried out on Mars, either by large automated spacecraft or by a manned mission . . ." (D/D, Oct 22/85, 268)
NASA announced that it had completed with the Italian National Research Council's National Space Plan Office (PSN/CNR) selection of U.S. and Italian principal investigators for the cooperative tethered satellite system (TSS), which NASA had scheduled for a first flight in 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle. The system, using the Space Shuttle as a base of operation, would provide a unique reuseable facility remote from the orbiter for space science investigations in the upper atmosphere and in plasma-electrodynamic interactions. 101 The overall objectives of the TSS program were to demonstrate the successful operation of a tethered satellite, perform the initial electrodynamic science and plasma investigations, and develop a reusable facility capable of supporting a broad range of electrodynamic experiments in the ionosphere. On the first TSS mission, a NASA-supplied deployer mechanism would send the Italian-developed and -built satellite upward from the Space Shuttle orbiter to a distance of as much as 12 miles. The motion of the conducting tether across geomagnetic field lines would generate several thousand volts of energy to provide a broad range of electrical operating conditions. Researchers could also use the overall system to artifically generate and study field-aligned currents and associated plasma effects. On the second TSS mission, the satellite would be at the end of a nonconducting tether at 62 miles in the earth's atmosphere, an area previously explored only sporadically, mainly with sounding rocket payloads. The tethered satellite would permit investigation of the region on a global scale over several days. The TSS-3 mission would be a follow-up to the TSS-1 electrodynamics mission, with deployment from either the Space Shuttle or the proposed space station. A memorandum of understanding signed in 1984 by NASA and PSN/CNR established the TSS program. NASA's Marshall Space flight Center had responsibility for project implementation. NASA's office of space science and applications selected Peter Banks, Stanford University (Shuttle Tether Electrodynamic Tether System); Robert Estes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation of Electromagnetic Emissions by the Tether); Gordon Gullahorn, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation and Measurement of Dynamic Noise in Tethered Observatory Satellite Systems); Konstantinos Papadopoulos, Science Applications, Inc. (Theory and Modeling of the Tether); and Nobie Stone, Marshall Space Flight Center (Research on Orbital Flight Plasma-Electrodynamics). PSN/CNR selected Silvio Bergemaschi, Instituto Meccanica, Padova University (A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of TSS Dynamics); Marino Dobrowolny, Instituto Fisica Spazio (Research on Electrodynamics Tether Effects); and Franco Mariana, University of Rome (Magnetic Field Experiment for the TSS Missions). (NASA Release 85-115)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
NASA announced that it had named effective immediately John Hodge acting associate administrator for space station. Hodge became director of the Space Station Task Force on its establishment in May 1982 and was appointed deputy director of the Interim Space Station Program Office in April 1984 when the task force completed its work. He directed activities that resulted in the initial concepts definition for the space station, established program management policies, initiated advanced development programs, defined user needs, and organized potential international cooperation. In 1984 NASA appointed Hodge deputy associate administrator for Space Station, coinciding with establishment of the Office of Space Station. Hodge joined NASA in 1959, after working with Vickers-Armstrong, Ltd. and AVRO Aircraft Ltd., as chief of Flight Control, supervising a team of over 200 technical and administrative personnel and 100 aerospace contractors and serving as flight director for Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo flights. In 1970 Hodge worked for the Department of Transportation as director of transportation systems concepts at the Transportation Systems Center and later became associate administrator for Policy, Plans and Program Management before rejoining NASA. Hodge received a B.S. degree in engineering from Northampton Engineering College in London and in 1966 the honorary degree of Doctor of Science from the City University, London. (NASA anno., Dec 26/85) NASA Installations Ames Research Center
Neil Hutchinson, Johnson Space Center's (JSC) space station program manager, at a U.S. House Science and Technology space science and application subcommittee authorization hearing, said that ferrying and assembling a space station would require seven Space Shuttle flights over a period of nine months to a year, Aerospace Daily reported, and assembly would rely on automation and robotics, not Space Shuttle crew extravehicular activities. Assembly would begin with a beam of solar panels and a 90-ft. truss structure. Space Shuttle orbiters would dock with the space station structure at different points to assemble the facility, using the orbiter's remote manipulator system (RMS) arm and a remote arm operated on the space station. The 3rd and 4th Space Shuttle flights would take up habitation modules; the 5th flight would ferry two more sets of solar panels and a 3rd module, possibly for logistics. Hutchinson said current planning called for permanent manning of the station after the 5th flight; the 6th flight would carry the 1 st of two planned laboratories with the baseline configuration producing 75 kw of power, which would be completed after the 7th flight. Phil Culbertson, NASA associate administrator, said a new program plan envisioned a 21-month definition and preliminary design effort beginning in April and extending through January 1987, which reflected the lower than anticipated funding level of $230 million for space station activities in the NASA's FY 86 budget. Of the $230 million, $15 million was for utilization, $82 million for advanced development, $52 million for program manage-ment/integration, $7 million for operational readiness, and $74 million for system-definition contracts. Defense Daily noted that Culbertson said NASA would have to "stretch" to meet the $8-billion price of the space station and that it would ask its contractors to "stretch with us." (A/D, Feb 20/85, 1; D/D, Feb 20/85, 227)
In his "State of the Union" address, President Reagan commented on funding requested for activities in space, the Washington Post reported. "We have seen the success of the Space Shuttle. Now we are going to develop a permanently manned space station and new opportunities for free enterprise because, in the next decade, Americans and our friends around the world will be living and working together in space. "In the zero-gravity of space, we could manufacture in 30 days lifesaving medicines it would take 30 years to make on earth. We can make crystals of exceptional purity to produce supercomputers, creating jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs beyond anything we ever dreamed possible." (W POst, Feb 7/85, A16)
NASA announced it signed with the University of Arizona, Tucson, a memorandum of understanding to study, plan, and, if approved by Congress, develop an orbiting astrometric telescope facility, which would be mounted in the mid-1990s on the planned space station, to detect and study planetary systems around other stars. Astrometric telescopes measured with extraordinary precision positions of stars and other celestial objects. Eugene Levy, director of the University's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, and David Black, head of Ames Research Center's (ARC) Space Sciences Division, would be project principal scientists. Black described the effort as "the beginning of a new scientific discipline. The results of the search, whether positive or negative, will profoundly alter our view of the universe." The gravitational pull of planets orbiting a star causes it to wobble as seen against the sky. By measuring this wobble, an astrometric telescope could determine the presence of planets and perhaps determine the properties of such a planetary system. Although ground-based telescopes use the wobblemeasuring technique to measure properties of double stars in orbit around one another, an astrometric telescope could measure the disturbance in a star's motion caused by objects as small as planets. Until researchers find other planetary systems, they cannot fully test theoretical models used to explain the origin of our solar system or the formation of stars. The joint project would be coordinated with development of photometric and spectroscopic techniques and theoretical modeling of planetary system formation. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED ARC would clarify final telescope design and manner of mounting on the space station as well as oversee telescope and instrument construction and mounting. The University would establish operating facilities on the ground and coordinate continuing scientific investigations that would extend more than a decade. The project would include a core program of planet detection and study, and guest investigators could use the telescope for astrometric studies of other important celestial objects. Initial study and definition work would begin shortly; ultimate implementation would require Congressional approval and funding. (NASA Release 85-3; ARC Release 85-01; ARC Astro-gram, Jan. 17/85, 1; A/D, Jan 17/85, 95)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator James Beggs and Japanese Minister of State for Science and Technology, Reiichi Takeuchi, signed that day in Tokyo a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for the conduct of a cooperative program concerning detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned Space Station. Under the MOU, the U.S. and Japan would conduct and coordinate over the next two years parallel Phase B studies and exchange information. Japan would study an experimental module that had pressurized workspace and an exposed workdeck. Cooperation during the space station's development, operations, and use phases would require separate agreements. In a speech that day to the Federation of Japanese Economic Organizations, Beggs outlined initial uses of the space station and reported on specific projects undertaken by other countries participating in space station development. He then noted, ". . . in negotiating with our potential partners, NASA has emphasized that we view the space station as a potential long-term international partnership—one that should last for decades. Any nation that joins with us in such a full partnership must be prepared to make significant investments in the station, and also be prepared to help operate and use it. "We expect our partners to continue to shoulder responsibility for owning and maintaining their portions of the facility, while continuing to enjoy the overall benefits our joint efforts will make possible. And we expect their contributions to remain a permanent part of the station's infrastructure." Beggs then added, "To cement our long-term relationships, the United States will provide partners with assurance on equitable access to all of the space station's facilities. We also will protect their technology and intellectual property and ensure them suitable roles in the station's management and operation." (NASA Release 85-71, NASA Note To Editors, May 8/85)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that M. Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, and Ing. Heise, executive vice president and president of the Space Systems Group of Messerschmidt/Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno, signed a contract for the development of the European Retrievable Carrier, EURECA, a payload carrier intended for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle. MBB/Erno would serve as EURECA prime contractor with support from some 24 European industrial firms. The approximately $95 million contract called for delivery of the EURECA flight unit to NASA by the end of 1987 for launch from the Space Shuttle in March 1988 and recovery, by the Space Shuttle, six months later. The first EURECA payload, developed by European national institutes and space agencies, would consist primarily of experiments in the microgravity sciences (life and material sciences) and a limited number of experiments in space science and technology. Work on the payload would proceed in parallel with the development of the carrier, and plans called for delivery of all payload elements to MBB/Erno by spring 1987 for integration onboard EURECA before shipment to the U.S. The EURECA payload carrier incorporated the more attractive features of Spacelab and in addition provided for relatively long duration flights (up to eight months), higher power and mass capability for the payload, and lower costs compared with Spacelab and many conventional satellites because the system occupied only about 2.5 m of the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay. ESA also envisioned EURECA's eventual use in association with the proposed U.S. space station, with the EURECA operating either in a free-flying mode (co-orbiting with the space station or in polar orbit) or as a man-tended, semipermanent payload carrier with modified docking facilities. (ESA release July 1/85)
A dispute over application of U.S. laws to foreign companies apparently killed a joint U.S.-W. German project to commercialize remote sensing-equipment data and could affect negotiations over European participation in the planned U.S. space station, Science magazine reported. The joint project, known as SPARX, was to finance regular flights on the Space Shuttle of the modular optoelectronic multispectral scanner, an instrument developed by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB) under contract with the German Aerospace Research Establishment. NASA said proposals received from SPARX were unacceptable, because data would be available solely on a proprietary basis to SPARX's commercial customers, conflicting with NASA's "open skies" policy mandating nondiscriminatory access to all data obtained from U.S.-launched civilian missions. NASA and MBB were continuing discussions on the possibility of a separate venture using the German equipment that would respect licensing conditions applied to U.S. companies under the Land Remote Sensing Commercialization Act. Some members of the European space science community—particularly those with reservations about tying Europe's fortunes too closely to those of NASA's proposed space station—were using the apparent conflict as evidence of their concerns, the Science article said. The scientists noted the extent to which the regulations and other provisions contained in the legislation's licensing requirements—such as those requiring licensees to deposit any data obtained in a single central archive—would apply to foreign companies becoming NASA's commercial customers. The dilemma hinged on the conflict between companies based outside the U.S. resenting being subject to legislation over which they had no formal control and Congress and U.S.-based companies that would complain if they saw foreign companies getting an advantage by not having to meet domestic-licensing requirements. Udo Pollvogt of MBB's Washington office said the issues raised by SPARX "definitely need to be resolved over the next two years" as Europeans considered whether participation in the space station would make them unacceptably liable to U.S.-domestic laws. (Science, Feb 8/85, 617)
France turned down President Reagan's invitation to participate in the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) project because of the subordinate role France would have to play and because it was at that time promoting its own French-led European advanced technology/space research project that included some key technologies related to strategic defense, Defense Daily reported. French President Francois Mitterrand told a news conference May 4 at the close of the Bonn economic summit that President Reagan used the term "subcontractors" in reference to Europe's role in the SDI project, which confirmed his view that the U.S. would not treat France and other European countries as equal partners in SDI and that they would not get access to all research results. "The technology interests me," Mitterrand said, "but the strategic project is interesting only for the future when man becomes a master of space." Fie urged other European nations to join France in an independent advanced technology R&D program called "Eureka," which would explore civilian uses of space and other advanced technologies including high-power lasers, optics, microelectronics, and high-speed computers. Although these technologies would apply to a number of areas including strategic defense, the primary aim of Eureka would be to "explore space through advanced research in order to master new technologies," Mitterrand said. He noted that Eureka was important for Europe because of the need to "preserve their fund of intelligence, technology, and brains. All this has to be mobilized in a great project that is European." According to reports, Mitterrand told Reagan that he was concerned about actual deployment of SDI because it could alter the strategy of mutual assured destruction that had successfully prevented nuclear war. (France had its own small nuclear deterrent, but it was more vulnerable to ballistic missile defense than the large strategic forces of the U.S. and USSR.) France had agreed to support the European Space Agency's proposal to define a pressurized module called Columbus for the U.S. space station, if all parties could work out adequate arrangements. (D/D, May 7/85, 35)
Soviet scientists from the Interkosmos Institute in Moscow together with scientists from the European Space Agency (ESA), the Universities of Utrecht (Netherlands), Birmingham (Great Britain), and Tuebingen and the Max Planck Institute for Extra-terrestrial Physics in Garching, West Germany were planning to launch in spring 1986 an observatory to investigate X-rays in space, the magazine Geo reported. The observatory would carry four instruments intended to investigate the X-ray stars of the Milky Way, the remnants of dying stars (supernova), and nuclei of other active galaxies. They called the project "Salyut-Hexe," in which Salyut referred to the Soviet space station and Hexe to the English abbreviation for high-energy X-ray experiment. The magazine noted that Dr. Claus Reppin of the Max Planck Institute said it was not clear whether the observatory would be coupled to the existing Soviet Salyut 7 space station or to a new space station, Salyut 8. Reppin confirmed that the German scientists would not, for reasons of secrecy, be present at the installation and assembly of the instruments. Soviet scientists had spent two weeks in West Germany to familiarize themselves with the instruments so that they would be able to assemble and install them. Reppin also said the West European scientists did not know whether they could be present at the launch, which would probably be at Baykonur, but he indicated it was probably more important that they be at the ground control center in or near Moscow by a few days after launch, when measuring instruments would begin operation. The experiment, the magazine added, was part of the Soviet effort to set up a permanently inhabited large space station. At the beginning of 1986, the Soviets planned to launch the new station with several coupling connections for attachment of various modules. In this way, a settlement in space would grow gradually according to a building block principle; up to 30 cosmonauts were in training to serve as crew on the new station. (FBIS, Hamburg DPA in German, Dec 14/85) C UNITED KINGDOM
Under-Secretary of the U.S. Air Force E. C. Aldridge, Jr. announced in an internal information memorandum that the policy of the U.S. Air Force was to "ensure that the unique capabilities that can be derived from the presence of military man in space shall be utilized to the extent feasible and practical to enhance existing and future missions in the interest of national security objectives." The memorandum implied that U.S. Air Force would be committed to working with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in its most recent manned space undertaking to deploy in orbit a manned, permanent orbiting space station in the early 1990s. Memorandum for the Vice Chief of Staff, USAF from Under-Secretary E. C. Aldridge, Jr., August 1, 1985. August 2Ch Honeywell's Military Avionics Division would soon begin for the McDonnell Aircraft Co. full-scale development, costing about $500 million, of a tactical electronic warfare intermediate support system (TISS) for the F-15 Eagle aircraft program, Defense Daily reported. The award to Honeywell was part of a larger contract the U.S. Air Force recently awarded to McDonnell to upgrade the F—15 tactical warfare system (TEWS). The Honeywell TISS would test the F-15's electronic warfare system to minimize downtime, reduce maintenance costs, and improve overall missile effectiveness. Stanley Moeschi, Honeywell vice president, noted that, "This contract demonstrates the maturity of Honeywell's automatic test technology and a substantial advancement in state-of-the-art digital and radio frequency electronic warfare testing." (D/D, Aug 20/85, 1)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
NASA announced a new Space Shuttle manifest for 41 Space Shuttle missions through December 14, 1987 that included nine flights for the remainder of 1985, 15 flights in 1986, and 17 flights in 1987. Highlights for 1985 included the first Atlantis flight in late September for a Department of Defense mission; a Spacelab 3 flight in late April, Spacelab 2 with extensive European Space Agency participation in July, and another Spacelab flight in October dedicated to W. German scientific investigations. Also during 1985 NASA would deploy communications satellites for Hughes, AT&T, RCA, Mexico, Australia, Canada, and the Arabsat consortium. In 1986 the first launch of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base would occur. The first liquid-hydrogen-powered Shuttle Centaur upper stage would be used to deploy Ulysses (formerly the International Solar Polar Mission), and the Galileo mission to Jupiter (also using the Shuttle Centaur) and the Hubble Space Telescope flight would be launched. NASA said launch dates of missions to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and to retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF-1) were under review. Also, NASA assigned Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce McCandless as mission specialists for the Hubble Space Telescope flight on mission 61-J in August 1986. (NASA Release 8550)
President Reagan's FY 86 budget for NASA sought $7.9 billion-just under what it would take to sustain the agency's programs at current levels, the Washington Post reported. At a press conference [see NASA/ Budget, Feb. 4], NASA Administrator James Beggs had acknowledged the $230-million budget request for the space station was $50 million less than the agency had sought to keep the project on schedule. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A17)
NASA announced its Administrator James Beggs and the Director General of the European Space Agency (ESA) would sign June 3 at the ESA pavillion at the Paris Air Show a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for the conduct of a cooperative program for detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned space station [see Space Station Program, Apr. 1]. The cost of the Phase B studies carried out by European industry under ESA management, together with the corresponding technology program, amounted to 80 million accounting units or $64 million at the current rate of exchange. Cooperation during the space station's development, operations, and use phases required separate agreements. (NASA Release 85-78)
30 p.m. they had done in four hours a job given them to complete in five. NASA referred to the first activity as ACCESS (assembly concept for construction of erectable space structures), researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center explained, and the second as EASE (experimental assembly of structures in extravehicular activity). Together they were the first flight demonstration of construction of large space structures, so called because they were distinguished by different assembly methods and physical characteristics. The astronauts used no tools in the construction, rather they snapped together prefabricated components to form the EASE/ACCESS structures. EASE/ACCESS should provide NASA with valuable on-orbit construction experience as well as a comparison of assembly rates and techniques used in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tank tests. The activity should also help evaluate potential assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques for the proposed space station and identify ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. TV views at NASA Headquarters showed the astronauts trading places twice during their work and appearing in almost complete control of a job that had never been done before in space. Ross had the only complaint, saying his gloved hands were sweating and that he was using too much oxygen. When the two had finished assembling the six required pyramids, astronaut David Leetsma at mission control told them to take a break. "I'd be willing to do at least one more," Ross replied. "It feels good to do some good hard work." The two then proceeded to begin work again. Spring once hit his feet against the tower, and Ross by mistake hit a switch with his hand that turned on an outside light, the only "accidents" that occurred during the exercise, although they triggered a warning from Atlantis's commander Brewster Shaw, Jr. "You guys are going great but just remember to be careful. The way that thing shakes up there, it's not going to be easy to chase anything down if it breaks loose," he cautioned. (WPost, Nov 30/85, A1; Marshall Space Flight Center Release 85-60)
Over 700 enterprises and organizations in the Soviet Union used pictures taken from Soviet orbital Salyut space stations, helping to save the equivalent of $8 million, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. For example, the photos assisted in selecting routes of tunnels for the Baykal-Amur railway in eastern USSR. And cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinykh, then aboard Salyut 7, were working on a new program of geophysical research. (FBIS Moscow World Service in English, July 28/85)
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press conference, reported that President Reagan had requested a NASA budget of just under $7.9 billion, reflecting the President's determination to continue America's space leadership and to achieve the goal of a permanently manned space station. The budget covered some unforeseen items not addressed by 1985 budgetplanning estimates, including the Congressionally mandated development of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), scheduled for launch in 1989, and acceleration of the advanced turboprop propulsion system for FY 87 flight testing. The budget contained four major appropriations requests: a total of $2.9 billion for R&D, which included funds for previously approved space science and applications programs, development of ACTS, initiation of the orbiting maneuvering vehicle program, and promotion of commercial use of space; $3.5 billion for space flight, control, and data communications to support Space Shuttle production, operations, and tracking and data acquisition (a decrease of $92 million from FY 85's budget plan); $149 million for facilities construction (down $1 million from FY 85); and $1.3 billion for research and program management. (NASA release Feb. 4/85; NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/ 85)
The Washington Post reported that W. Germany had agreed to contribute $900 million over the next decade to participate in an American-led program to build an $8 billion permanently manned space station for initial operations in 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America. The W. Germans would negotiate detailed contracts over the next two years to ensure a fair return on their investment and access to space-based technology, as U.S. restrictions on technology transfer (ostensibly to prevent USSR acquisition of sensitive information, the W Post said) had increasingly irked European allies. W. German and Italian companies planned a special laboratory module that would plug into the U.S.-built spacecraft's main structure for experiments in zero gravity and vacuum conditions. A W. German ministerial report had said cooperation embodied in the space station program "should be welcomed in W. Germany not just for technical and economic reasons, but for political ones, as a transatlantic connecting link." However, the venture had evoked controversy, as some European scientists contended that robots could conduct the work planned for the space station, and others alleged that a $750 million European investment in 1973 to underwrite Spacelab had attained few research benefits. Heinz Riesenhuber, W. German minister for research and technology, said that Bonn would also contribute nearly $500 million to develop a more powerful and versatile Ariane rocket to achieve some European independence in space travel by the 1990s, although he admitted a major W. German investment in the French space shuttle project "Hermes" was impossible. (W Post, Jan 17/85, A1)
NASA's Inventions and Contributions Board awarded the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Dr. Robert Nathan a plaque and a check for $20,000 for his work in planetary image processing, the JPL Universe reported. Nathan received the award for his "combined technical contributions to planetary and biomedical image processing and scientific data analysis techniques." Nathan invented digital image processing, a technique in which computers remove noise, correct distortions, and enhance different images such as planetary objects or biomedical images. Nathan joined JPL in 1959 to manage scientific data analysis for the upcoming Ranger moon missions. The Ranger spacecraft used the best available cameras, but they were subject to distortion and noise contamination. Nathan devised techniques to eliminate extraneous patterns from the images. His processes and the creation of the image processing laboratory (lPL) established JPL as an important center for planetary image processing. In 1969 Nathan launched JPL into biomedical imaging with a $2 million grant from the National Institutes of Health, which later led to formation of the JPL biomedical image analysis facility. In 1976 Nathan developed a system at the IPL to handle large amounts of data by means of a large array filter using very-large scale integration (VLSI) system silicon chip technology. The microchip reduced computer time by a factor of 100. He was currently working on another microchip design that would perform high-quality geometric image manipulations and filter chips that would perform pattern recognition functions. (JPL Universe, Nov 15/85, 1) During November: NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center (LeRC) received four of Research & Development magazine's IR—100 awards to honor the 100 most significant new products developed during the past year. A panel of technical judges selected the winners from more than 1,000 entries. The award-winning products were servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, transmit module, communications traffic processor, and rotary power-transfer device, all of which LeRC and private firms under contracts to the center developed jointly. LeRC researchers Stuart Loewenthal and Bruce Steinetz with General Electric engineers developed the servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, which could accurately control the propeller blade angle of large (10,000 kw) turboprop aircraft propellers over the complete spectrum of flight operating conditions. With certain modifications, the product should be adaptable for applications as aircraft wing pivot mechanisms, tank turret aiming actuators, and other heavy mechanisms, requiring very accurate pointing and tracking control. The transmit module, developed by LeRC researchers Thomas Kascak, Godfrey Anzic, and Denis Connolly along with Rockwell Internatl. engineers, provided rf signal amplification and phase shifting at a frequency of 20 gigahertz. The device was of monolithic design in which all module functions were contained on a single 6.4 by 4.8 millimeter semiconductor chip with the smallest circuit feature about 40-millionth of an inch. This development made possible the production of weight- and cost-effective phased array antenna systems for future communications satellite systems. LeRC engineer Russel Jirberg along with electronics engineers from Motorola Corp. developed a communications traffic processor for the next generation of communications satellites. The system provided the capacity and routing flexibility needed to handle the nation's growing demands for telephone and computer message traffic. When used aboard satellites having multiple narrow beam antennas, the device enabled more than 60,000 individual voice messages, video pictures, and computer data to be routed directly to users throughout the U.S. equipped with low-cost ground terminals. LeRC engineer David Renz in cooperation with Sperry Flight Systems engineers developed a rotary power-transfer device that transferred electrical power through a rotating joint. It had a low loss space-type design capable of transferring high power (hundreds of kilowatts), AC or DC, to frequencies such as 20 kilohertz. One of its outstanding features was loss of only 22 watts per circuit while transferring 100 kilowatts. Renz and his colleagues said the roll-ring assembly device had the potential to be one of the major components of the proposed space station and other spacecraft where large amounts of power are required. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 10)
Under the agreement, NASA would provide ITA with two Space Shuttle flights to obtain data and validate the ISEM design. NASA had scheduled for late 1987 the first ISEM test that would carry a payload for the Bioprocessing and Pharmaceutical Center of the Philadelphia University City Science Center. ITA would design the ISEM to be compatible with the proposed space station with the idea that initial users of the module would progress to larger and more sophisticated payloads to fly in the future aboard the station. (NASA Release 85-94)
A C-5A aircraft carrying the German Spacelab D-1, the first payload in the history of U.S. manned spaceflight to be controlled from another country, landed May 1 at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Space Shuttle runway, Spaceport News reported. The Federal German Aerospace Research Establishment's (DFVLR) German Space Operations Center in Oberpfaf-fenhofen near Munich would have responsibility for the 80 Spacelab D-1 (D for Deutschland) experiments. During the welcoming ceremony, (KSC) Director Dick Smith said, "We are looking forward to giving your payload 'tender loving care' and seeing it launched aboard the shuttle and getting it safely returned to you after the mission." Germany's Parliamentary State Secretary Albert Probst responded, "We are pleased to take part in this event and consider the joint ventures between the Federal Republic of Germany, Europe, and the U.S. in manned space flight to be a good example of international cooperation." Spacelab D-1, scheduled to fly on the seven-day Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia mission 61-A no earlier than October 16, consisted of a long Spacelab module containing the space sled and a unique support structure. Half of the D-1 experiments were from Germany, the remainder from the U.S. and European countries. Investigations included the vestibular sled, a device driven by an electromotor and traction rope, positioned in the center aisle of the Spacelab module, in which astronauts would serve as test subjects to collect information on human reactions to the equilibrium sensing system; the Biorack for botanical and medical/physiological experiments; the navigation experiment (NAVEX) to test systems performance of clock synchronization and one-way distance measurement; the materials experiment assembly (MEA) that would use Marshall Space Flight Center furnaces and alloy, fluid physics, and crystal growth investigations. The DFVLR, the result of a merger of three organizations and employing about 3,500 people in five research centers, would also participate in the European Retrieval Carrier (EURECA), a free-flying apparatus of experiments, and project "Columbus," internationally manned space station modules. (Spaceport News, May 10/85, 5)
NASA announced it had submitted to the U.S. Congress today a report by its Advanced Technology Advisory Committee (ATAC) that said automation and robotics would be significant elements of the NASA Space Station program and that the initial Space Station design should accommodate evolution and growth in these technologies. The report, required under Public Law 98-371 that appropriated FY 85 NASA funds, noted that all Space Station elements, including the core station and associated unmanned platforms, vehicles, and ground facilities were candidates for the technologies, necessitating accelerated R&D in automation and robotics. The Automation and Robotics Panel, which assisted the Advisory Committee in a six-month study led by the California Space Institute, said that a desired level of funding for automation and robotics research would be 13% of the total Space Station costs; a minimum acceptable level was 7%. An augmented research program, the report said, would result in improved productivity from the initial station and much greater productivity from later versions of the Space Station. The report also said successful incorporation of automation and robotics into the Space Station program could lead to deployment of a new generation of flexible and adaptable space systems, which could provide the U.S. with new methods of generating and exploiting space knowledge in commercial activities and thus preserving U.S. leadership in space and industrial systems. Other report recommendations included: development of criteria for incorporating automation and robotics technology in the Space Station; verification of automated equipment performance, including terrestrial and space demonstration to validate technology for Space Station use; use of automation techniques to enhance NASA's management capability; establishment of measurements to verify inclusion of automation and robotics in the Space Station; development of a program for technology transfer to U.S. industries; and design of satellites and payloads accessible from the Space Station to accommodate service and repair by robots. NASA would incorporate report recommendations into the Phase B definition and preliminary design contracts [see Mar. 14] it was negotiating with industry teams. The Advisory Committee, made up of personnel from NASA Headquarters and centers, would continue to monitor automation and robotics developments and would report semi-annually to Congress. (NASA Release 85-46)
The Canadian government decided to join the U.S. and other allies in producing an orbiting space station, agreeing in principle to spend up to $600 million over the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. U.S. space officials had encouraged Canada for more than a year to join the U.S.-led project, which already had the participation of the European Space Agency (ESA) and Japan, together expected to spend about $4 billion. Canada's science minister Tom Siddon said that Canada's involvement in the space station could produce economic benefits valued at more than $2 billion by the year 2000. (W Times, Mar 22/85, 5A)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power said the USSR was continuing in 1984 deployment of new nuclear and conventional military weapons systems, including test firings of fifth-generation ICBMs, launchings of new classes of submarines, and installing new strategic bombers, the Washington Times reported. The book detailed several significant developments by the Soviet military, the article said, including continued test firings of the SS-24 and SS-25 intercontinental ballistic missiles, launch of two units of new Delta IV-class of strategic ballistic missile submarines to be fitted with the SS-NX-23 submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) then being flight tested, and completion of sea trials of a third 25,000-ton Typhoon-class strategic ballistic missile submarine to join the two Typhoon units already operational and fitted with 20 SS-N-20 SLBMs. The book also said the Soviets had developed a heavy-lift launch vehicle capable of putting 150-ton payloads into orbit as part of an "extremely high priority" military-related space program. The Soviet version of the U.S. Space Shuttle and manned Space Station would benefit from this heavy booster. Major emphasis in their space program was on long-duration manned missions for military research. The USSR continued research on ground- and space-based, antisatellite high-energy lasers. "The Soviets currently have the world's only deployed antisatellite weapons system that can attack satellites in near-earth orbit," the book said. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	385 L„lfllENTIQNAll.y 8LANK The Soviets also continued upgrading detection and tracking systems for ballistic missile defense and development of new early-warning and air-surveillance radars. Their work on a new, large phased-array radar at Krasnoyarsk violated the ABM treaty, the book stated, and "in addition, the Soviets are actively engaged in extensive research on advanced defenses against ballistic missiles." {W Times, Apr 1/85, 1A)
Ministers from Belgium, Denmark, France, W. Germany, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., Austria, Norway, and Canada would meet in Rome January 30 and 31 to consider proposed space projects and set the agenda for European Space Agency (ESA) through the remainder of the century, the JSC Roundup reported. Ministers would consider proposals ranging from development of a space station program, possibly in conjunction with the U.S., to eventual pursuit of manned spaceflight. ESA said it would propose a substantial increase in its activities, particularly scientific and technological programs; developments in earth observations, telecommunications, microgravity processing, and technology; and construction of a new version of Ariane 5. ESA's efforts with Spacelab and Ariane and in a wide range of other activities such as the Giotto probe to intercept Halley's Comet had required the new decisions. With Ariane 3 operational, ESA said it expected to introduce an upgraded version, Ariane 4, in March 1986, followed by the proposed Ariane 5, which would be capable of generating up to 220,000 lb. of thrust, that could be used to launch European astronauts into orbit. The ministers had to decide whether to authorize development of the large cryogenic engine to power the launcher. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 1; ESA release Jan 17/85)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that NASA's first experiments to construct large structures in space were a success [see Space Transportation System/Mission, Nov. 30 and Dec. 2]. EASE (Experimental Assembly of Structures in Extravehicular Activity) and ACCESS (Assembly Concept for Construction of Erectable Space Structures) carried out by astronauts Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring "went exactly as we had planned, and all experiment and Space Transportation System objectives were met," said Ed Valentine, mission manager for the EASE/ACCESS payload flown on Space Shuttle mission 61 -B. Those objectives included gathering data to compare assembly rates and techniques in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tests, evaluating potential space station assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques, and identifying ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. "Preliminary data obtained from live downlink TV looks very good," Valentine explained. "But we won't be able to make a complete analyses until we see the rest of the data," which was in the form of videotape and film shot while Ross and Spring performed the construction tasks. Once the data were analyzed and reported, Valentine said, it would give large space structure designers baseline data on the two construction approaches studied. "They can then determine which approach would be appropriate for a particular task," he explained. On December 11 Valentine said he would meet for a debriefing with the Space Shuttle crew and principal investigators. Then in about three weeks the principal investigators would receive the videotape and film shot during the experiments, and Valentine would publish a final report in about three months. (NASA Release 85-66)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pioneered the concept of a satellite system for mobile users and, because a U.S. mobile satellite industry was emerging, was turning its attention to developing technologies critical for future systems, the JPL Universe reported. Similar to cellular phones popular in urban areas, the mobile satellite system (MSS) would provide voice and data communications for the entire North American continent, employing one or two satellites in geosynchronous orbit to relay communications instead of depending on ground-based, line-of-sight relay towers that celluar phones used. There were four categories of MSS users: people who needed uninterrupted communications while they traveled over wide geographical areas, for example interstate truckers; those responding to unpredictable events such as medical emergencies or natural disasters; people working at planned but temporary installations such as oil or gas drilling facilities, mining camps, or archeological excavations; and those in very remote areas. The new technologies JPL was developing included mechanically steerable low-profile and electronically steerable medium-gain vehicle antennas, digital speech compression, digital modems, and multiple-access techniques for integrated voice and data. NASA was working with industry and, through a joint endeavor agreement, would exchange a Space Shuttle deployment for 15% of the channel capacity for two years to test the system. “But first," said Dr. Firouz Naderi, JPL's mobile satellite experiment project manager, "we must further develop the technology and try to squeeze as many channels as we can from a very narrow frequency allocation. That is the biggest obstacle we face." Also, JPL must design sophisticated multi-beam antennas that service "spot areas" and create techniques so frequencies could be reused to provide the most efficient use of the limited spectrum. Recently JPL sponsored a two-day briefing on the state of the industry. Attending were more than 250 representatives of 120 organizations including the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which would regulate the MSS; 11 of 12 candidate companies that petitioned the FCC for the right to operate the system; communications equipment manufacturers such as General Electric, Harris, and Motorola; Canadian government and industry representatives; banking officials; and potential users of the system. At the briefing, the FCC said it hoped by the middle of 1986 to assign a frequency to the mobile satellite industry as well as license an operator to be in charge of the system. NASA scheduled for launch in 1990 the first generation satellite with a 5 to 7 m antenna. During the program's second phase, NASA would launch from the Space Shuttle a 20m (65 ft.) antenna. NASA then planned for the program's final phase to construct on the proposed space station a 50m (180 ft.) antenna for deployment into geosynchronous orbit. (JPL Universe, Nov 29/ 85, 1) During November. Quoting from the Congressional Record, NASA reported remarks of Rep. Don Fuqua, (D-Fla.) chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, who introduced the Federal Science and Technology Revitalization Act of 1985. The act ". . . would establish an alternative personnel management system for scientific and technical people in the federal government," Fuqua said. "This is something I have been interested in for a long time, and I am hopeful that the proposal I am introducing will be able to help improve the quality of government-operated federal laboratories by encouraging the recruiting and retention of highly qualified scientific and technical individuals." Major provisions of the bill would permit agencies to include scientific and technical personnel in the new personnel management systems; simplify job evaluation and remove covered positions from the classification requirements of 5 U.S.C., Chapter 51; provide flexibility to develop a salary structure that ensured a competitive position in the labor market and that reflected the hiring and pay policies needed to attract, retain, and motivate a highly qualified scientific and technical work force; increase base pay on performance, not longevity; allow waiver of the pay cap for up to 5% of specially qualified scientific and technical personnel; provide for performance and special awards and remove the pay cap for lump-sum awards; and create a senior scientific and technical personnel service. In May 1983 the Federal Laboratory Review Panel of the White House Science Council chaired by David Packard reported that federal laboratories had several serious deficiencies and, consequently, a number of them did not meet the quality and productivity standards that might be expected, Fuqua explained. The panel reported that salaries at federal laboratories were noncompetitive with the private sector at entry and senior levels and that federal laboratories had to deal with a personnel management system that was cumbersome and had little flexibility. As a result, there existed what the panel referred to as an alarming "inability of many federal laboratories—especially those under civil service constraints—to attract, retain, and motivate qualified scientists and engineers." The panel concluded that administrative and legislative actions should be initiated to create, at government-operated laboratories, a scientific-technical personnel system that was independent of current civil service personnel systems, Fuqua continued. This "bill is the legislative attempt to deal with these very real problems," Fuqua said. "My own experience ... is that the requirements for NASA and Department of Agriculture labs may be very different, but attracting and retaining quality personnel is absolutely essential for the space program and for emerging fields in agriculture." (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 9)
NASA announced that John Young would command Space Shuttle flight 61-J scheduled for launch August 1986, Vance Brand mission 61-K scheduled for September 1986, and Donald Williams mission 61—I. Other crew for the 61-J mission, during which astronauts would deploy the Hubble Space Telescope, were pilot Charles Bolden Jr. and previously named mission specialists Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce Mc-Candless. S. David Griggs would pilot mission 61—K, and other crew would be mission specialists Robert Steward, Owen Garriott, and European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier. NASA previously assigned payload specialists Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg to the mission. Remaining mission 61-1 crew would be pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists James Bagian, Bonnie Dunbar and Manley "Sonny" Carter. NASA also announced that Norman Thagard would replace John Fabian on mission 61-G scheduled for May 1986 during which crew would deploy the Galileo interplanetary spacecraft. Fabian was leaving NASA; he had not announced his plans. James Buchli would replace Thagard on mission 61-H in June 1986. (NASA Release 85-131)
NASA announced that Acting Administrator William Graham confirmed the appointment for an indefinite period of Philip Culbertson, associate administrator for space station, to the position of NASA general manager. In that capacity he would assist Graham and have specific responsibility for the Offices of Space Science and Applications, Commercial Programs, Space Flight, Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space Station, and Space Tracking and Data Systems. Culbertson had held his current position since August 1, 1984, coinciding with the establishment of the Office of Space Station. Since November 1981 he had been associate deputy administrator, serving as senior staff advisor to the administrator and the deputy administrator and directing the formulation of policy, strategy, and planning for the space station. From 1979 to 1981 he served as assistant for the Space Transportation System (STS), providing continuous assessment of STS development, acquisition, and operations status and otherwise advising the administrator and deputy administrator on STS matters requiring policy decisions. His earlier NASA assignments included the positions of deputy associate administrator for STS/technical, assistant administrator for planning and program integration, director of advanced manned missions, and manager of the institutional assessment conducted in 1977. He also served as the NASA representative in the 1979 antisatellite treaty negotiations and in 1976 and 1977 was detailed to the Executive Office for a five-month period as Executive Director of the President's Committee on Science and Technology. Culbertson received a B.S. in aeronautical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology and served as a commissioned officer in the U.S. Navy, after which he spent four years as a research associate at the University of Michigan, where he received his M.S. degree in aeronautical engineering. (NASA anno., Dec 6/85)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that July 1 marked the center's 25th anniversary. MSFC currently managed a budget of about $2 billion annually and employed some 3,300 people, while thousands more worked with numerous aerospace and other high-tech organizations in the Huntsville, Alabama, area to support the center's projects. During the 25 years, MSFC had moved beyond its initial role as NASA's developer of launch vehicles and propulsion systems to that of a scientific and engineering organization also responsible for spacecraft and scientific experiments. The center was currently responsible for a number of NASA programs including the Space Shuttle's engines, propellant tank, and booster rockets; the Hubble Space Telescope; Spacelab orbiting research laboratories; the Space Shuttle upper stage systems; and a significant portion of the proposed space station. (MSFC Release 85-31)
NASA announced it had selected six industry teams for negotiations leading to 21-month fixed-price contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements for a permanently manned space station. Four NASA centers previously did this work. The responsible centers and the industry teams selected for negotiations were: Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) with Boeing Aerospace Co., Seattle, and Martin Marietta Aerospace, Denver; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) with RCA Astro Electronics, Princeton, New Jersey, and General Electric Co., Space Systems Division, Philadelphia; and Lewis Research Center (LeRC) with Rockwell Internatl., Rocketdyne Division, Canoga Park, California, and TRW Federal Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif. In addition, NASA would negotiate with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale, California; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, California; and Rockwell Internatl., Space Station Systems Division, Downey California, the proposers for work to be performed under the management of Johnson Space Center (JSC). Negotiators would present a report to the NASA Administrator who would then award one or more contracts. Although negotiations would determine values of the contracts, the September 14, 1984, Request for Proposal (RFP) indicated that the approximate value of contracts could be $24 million at MSFC, $27 million at JSC, $10 million at GSFC, and $6 million at LeRC. In addition to Phase B work, NASA required the contractors to study how those elements of the space station would change depending on whether the station was man-tended rather than permanently manned and to pay particular attention to the recommendations of the NASA advanced technology advisory committee that was identifying automation and robotic technologies that could be used in the space station. Following completion of the contracts, NASA planned to move into final design and development (Phase C/D) of the space station. A major objective of the space station program was to involve international partners as builders, users, and operators of the space station. The European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan had indicated interest in participating. They would provide their own funding and award definition and preliminary design contracts in coordination with NASA activities. NASA, through JSC management, would retain responsibility for overall program definition and for systems engineering and integration throughout the program. (NASA Release 85-38)
Tom Rogers, project director of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment's (OTA) space station study, said in testimony before the U.S. House space subcommittee that OTA in its controversial November 1984 space station report [see Space Station Program, Mar. 13] never meant to oppose development of a space station but only to suggest that its elements might be altered for more adequate attainment of space goals, Defense Daily reported. "I want to make it clear that OTA remains convinced that there is a strong rationale for some long-term habitable infrastructure in a low earth orbit. . . In other words, OTA is very positive about the principle behind the President's call for a 'space station' and Congress's decision to fund a 'space station' line item in NASA's budget," Rogers said. However, he pointed out that OTA's concerns about the space station centered on its cost and the fact that there was no proper assessment of long-range U.S. space goals, which made it infeasible to determine what elements should make up the station. "To be more certain that the facilities actually constructed are the ones most likely to lead to optimum space development, they must be constructed with an eye to the nation's long-range civilian space goals and objectives," Rogers testified. "Unfortunately, the only space goals discussed to date are those formulated by the space community itself; there has been little broad-based discussion and agreement on a set of long-range goals for the United States." He recommended particularly that, in parallel with NASA's Phase B station studies, "Congress seek independent studies suggesting goals and specific objectives for the nation's future activities in space, studies conducted primarily by people outside the space community." Rogers then outlined OTA's alternatives for the space station program. These included using the $3 billion in foreign funding as part of the $8 billion station cost, not as an addition; using private investment to pay for elements of the station; increasing use of the human-tended approach and automation/robotics to reduce station costs; examining alternative station designs costing less than “the canonical $8 billion"; developing the orbital maneuvering vehicle and any reusable orbital transfer vehicle "in close concert with those in the private sector who look forward to using them to provide satellite support services," thus reducing NASA's costs; and having contractors work to performance specifications rather than to detailed engineering specifications for other than "cutting edge" technologies. (D/D, Mar 29/85, 162)
A prime time TV series for the first time would offer a comprehensive look at the history of manned U.S. and USSR space flight, the Ames Research Center's Astrogram reported. SPACEFLIGHT, a series of four one-hour programs sponsored by the Public Broadcasting System and the Du Pont Co., would chronicle man's achievements in space from the rocket plane that first broke the sound barrier to the touchdown of the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The series' executive producer, Blaine Baggett, said his staff interviewed some 40 key participants in space activities—astronauts, people on the ground, scientists, and historians. In addition, the Soviet science attache in Washington provided about 10 hours of film footage. Among those interviewed for the series were Chuck Yaeger, first man to break the sound barrier; Scott Crossfield, first to travel twice the speed of sound and to pilot the X-15; Werner von Braun, who worked on the U.S. rocket program; Alan Shepard and John Glenn, first American in space and first American to orbit the globe, respectively; and Sally Ride, first American woman in space. From the point of view of the USSR, the series sought answers to such questions as who the chief designer was of the Soviet space program and why the Soviets were first in the early days of space activities. SPACEFLIGHT also examined future space plans such as space colonies, space stations, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 11/ 85,4) PRECEDING PAGE SLAJ^K ftQT FILMED PAfilA.{0 INTENTlOHAtlT BUN*
I. V. Franklin, manager of future projects at British Aerospace Dynamics Group's Space and Communications Division, said at a recent international space meeting in Italy that British Aerospace had completed preliminary definition of a 50- by 60-foot-long, 24,250-lb. unmanned platform that Europe could develop as part of its Columbus space station program, Aviation Week reported. The platform would use a long beam as a common backbone that would contain docking ports for standardized plugin payload and resources modules. A single Space Shuttle flight would carry the basic platform into orbit, and the company envisioned that astronauts could assemble it in six hours of extravehicular activity. Franklin said the company would submit the platform proposal to the European Space Agency as one of the work packages in Europe's Columbus program. "The space platform is of particular interest to Europe, following President Reagan's invitation for international participation in the space station program," Franklin continued, "because it represents an element with relatively few direct interfaces to the rest of the program. Although it is not a 'core' component, it would be an important component of the space station complex and [a component] in which there would be substantial European user interest. The platform provides a point for reducing space operation costs at a price that Europe could afford." In addition to evaluating the platform in low earth orbit in conjunction with the U.S. manned Space Station, British Aerospace also considered the platform in a polar, sun synchronous orbit. The polar-orbiting platform offered possibilities for earth observation and earth resources missions. U.S. officials had encouraged European development of the polar platform to supplement low earth orbit activities performed on board the manned Space Station and its associated free-flying elements. "The polar platform does not need to work with a manned space station— and indeed, it cannot until a station facility is available in polar orbit," Franklin said. "The platform can be man-tended by a polar orbiting shuttle, although the shuttle's altitude is well below that of the platform." This problem could be overcome by using the platform's on-board propulsion to deorbit and dock with the Space Shuttle for payload replacement, repair, and maintenance and then return to the operational altitude. Franklin concluded that the concept of a polar space platform was justified by the level of user interest in both Europe and the U.S. and by the relatively favorable economics when compared with other systems. "The polar platform does not require use of a manned space station, and it therefore is not paced by development of the space station," he noted. (AvWk, Apr 8/85, 60)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that a December 1985 experiment, EASE or the experimental assembly of structures in EVA (extravehicular activity), aboard Space Shuttle flight 61-C would provide information about humans working in space. In the experiment, two crew members would move six aluminum beams, each 12 feet long and four inches in diameter, into space from the Space Shuttle payload bay and assemble them into a tetrahedron shape and then disassemble them. This experiment would demonstrate human ability to build strong, practical structures in space. During the experiment videotape and still photographs would record crew member movements to link beams by special connectors at the beam tips. This building approach was a technique in the Large Space Structures program called an "erectible" method, as opposed to a "deployable" method that would not be demonstrated until 1986 or 1987 when NASA would orbit a structural-assembly demonstration experiment. MSFC had conducted tests similar to EASE in its neutral buoyancy simulator, a million-gallon water tank that gave a sense of weightlessness to submerged people working in space suits. Researchers would compare assembly and disassembly times recorded in the space test with results found in the neutral buoyancy tank. However, MSFC's Ed Valentine, experiment manager, noted, "We'd like to be able to measure a human's productivity in space scientifically, and we're not really sure if time measurements are all that are needed to guage that, so we'll be examining other possible criteria to use in the future." A Langley Research Center structural assembly experiment would accompany the MSFC experiment. (MSFC Release 85-3) During April: NASA announced it awarded to Howard University's School of Engineering Large Space Structure Institute (LSSI), Washington, D.C., an ongoing grant expected to total $1.9 million to develop theoretical knowledge supporting the design and construction of very large space systems. NASA expected the knowledge to make a significant contribution to the establishment of large space stations and space settlements. The LSSI research project would help demonstrate the practical benefits of U.S. space capabilities, including construction of a solar power satellite that would convert the sun's energy into electricity for transmission back to earth and construction of large platforms that would allow scientists to observe the earth for improved understanding of the weather and the ground water table. The LSSI team would consist of Dr. Taft Broome, chief project investigator and chairman of the Department of Civil Engineering, and other Howard University faculty members; and one faculty member each from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge University, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Graduate students from the latter institutions would also participate. NASA was primarily interested in LSSI doing the concept development and the research and demonstration analysis. Once Broome and his team provided the agency with the needed data, NASA could turn the project over to private industry for implementation. (NASA Activities, Apr 85, 8) Launch Vehicles
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) opened the Microgravity Materials Science Laboratory (MMSL) to aid scientists on earth in determining what was and was not feasible for science experiments in space [see NASA Installations/Lewis Research Center, Aug. 26]. "The MMLS will permit U.S. government, university, and industry researchers to conduct scientific experiments using equipment that functionally duplicates equipment aboard the Space Shuttle," explained Salvatore Grisaffe, chief of the LeRC materials division. "Access to such a laboratory will give U.S. companies a competitive advantage in developing better materials through microgravity research." Other microgravity research facilities at LeRC included two drop towers in which experiment packages could free-fall up to 500 feet, achieving a weightless condition for up to five seconds, and the Lewis Lear jet, which could fly parabolic trajectories to achieve a microgravity environment inside the plane for up to 22 seconds. The MMSL was one part of NASA's microgravity science and applications program, which fostered research in the science and technology of processing materials in low gravity. The aims of the program were to obtain a clearer understanding of the factors controlling earth-based processes to guide their improvement and development of new materials that could not be made on earth and procedures to support long-term space operations. The Space Shuttle then offered up to seven days for microgravity experimentation; the proposed space station eventually would provide a very longterm microgravity research and materials processing capability. However, the most efficient use of such space resources demanded that experimental procedures be based on a firm scientific understanding with extensive prior ground-based examination. (NASA Release 85-123)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
In a commentary in the Washington Times in response to a U.S. Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) study that had asserted NASA's plans for a permanent space station were not scientifically, economically, or militarily justified, Robert Melton, assistant professor at Pennsylvania State University, wrote that the study missed the point of NASA's current efforts to define better what should go into the station before proceeding with actual design and construction. He wrote that NASA had entered Phase B, the definition study of the project, in which contractors would provide NASA with thorough analyses of exactly what missions would be carried out in what time schedule and with descriptions of necessary equipment and technology together with a breakdown of costs. Such a detailed study was necessary to avoid premature overemphasis on design and to avert technical problems as the program progressed. Melton argued that the permanent space station was a logical next step after the Space Shuttle program and could serve as both a laboratory and base of operations for scientific, commercial, and security purposes. The space station could also serve as a permanent base for repairing and routinely servicing satellites, as a depot for permanently, space-based orbital transfer vehicles capable of delivering and retrieving high-orbit payloads, and as a base for building other large structures that would remain in orbit. Melton noted that the benefits of a permanent space station would make the $8 billion expenditure spread over several years seem a fairly small amount, especially when compared to other items in the federal budget. However, Melton acknowledged that the OTA study proved NASA had to do a better job of defining its space station goals and of impressing upon the public the importance of the project. (W Times, Mar 13/85, 2D)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with Space Industries, Inc. (Sll) for the company to construct and operate an industrial space facility (ISF), the first habitable privately owned commercial platform in space, which NASA would deploy from the Space Shuttle. Sll also signed a separate agreement with NASA's space station office that would provide for exchange of information during the definition and preliminary design phase of the space station. The agreement laid the groundwork for subsequent discussions and negotiations during the space station development period to begin in mid-1987. Sll was the first private company to sign an agreement with NASA's space station office to share information that could result in a commercial facility capable of compatible operations with the space station. The modular ISF would initially measure 35 by 14.5 feet. Although not intended to be permanently manned, it would be habitable and provide a shirt sleeve work environment for astronauts when docked with either the Space Shuttle or space station. NASA Administrator James Beggs said, "We hope the ISF will be the first of many such platforms to be funded and built by private industry that will complement the permanently manned space station and lead eventually to an industrial park in space." Max Faget, president of Sll, said, "The facility is scheduled to be deployed in 1989 and will respond to a variety of private research and manufacturing needs. Industry could take advantage of the unique gravity-free environment of space to conduct experiments that cannot be effectively duplicated here on earth." Sll considered the cost of building the ISF to be proprietary. Under the novel agreement, a provision stipulated that Sll would reimburse NASA for all costs incurred by the government associated with the deployment of the ISF when it became operational and was revenue generating. (NASA Release 85119)
European Space Agency (ESA), Japanese, and Canadian officials the previous week expressed concern about NASA's expectations of how the costs of operating the proposed space station should be shared, as fears increased that the U.S. Congress or the Office of Management and Budget might slip the planned 1993 operational date for the $10 to $13 billion facility, Aviation Week reported. The officials were meeting with NASA managers to lay the groundwork for critical space station decisions due by December that would determine what type of contribution they would make to the basic $8 billion U.S. investment. The international space officials were unanimous in their view that the non-U.S. contribution to the station's operational costs should be largely amortized through open access and use of their respective portions of the station system—not through funding transferred to the U.S. As the discussions progressed, the possibility of a space station schedule delay to help cut the U.S. budget deficit in FY 87 became a growing factor. Sen. Slade Gorton (R-Wash.), chairman of the Senate science subcommittee, and Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, both influential space supporters, were cautioning that congressional action on the FY 87 NASA budget could trim space station funding and delay the project's 1993 planned operational date by a year or more. Fuqua told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable, a group formed to foster space commercialization, that a slip now, while undesirable and likely to drive up costs later, could be absorbed by the program more easily than one later when the hardware phase was underway. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 18)
NASA announced it selected the first participants in a program to assimilate discoveries from space astronomy experiments into a comprehensive modern astrophysical theory in order to use more effectively future experiments such as the Hubble Space Telescope, the Gamma-ray Observatory, the Solar Optical Telescope, and similar planned projects. After evaluating 49 proposals from 300 individuals at 80 institutions, NASA selected seven groups to participate in the astrophysical theory program. Dr. Richard McCray and a scientific team from the University of Colorado would study detailed ways in which spectra form in a variety of astrophysical sources such as stars, supernovae, and active galactic nuclei. Dr. Jeremiah Ostriker and colleagues from Princeton University would analyze the most distant observable parts of the universe to determine possible effects of the theoretical "big bang". Dr. Pierre DeMarque and a team from Yale University would develop computer models of the sun to examine the internal motions and magnetic fields that caused sunspots, solar flares, and solar wind. Dr. Roger Chevalier and his team from the University of Virginia would study the hot gases that appeared to surround clusters of galaxies, individual galaxies, and supernova remnants to determine the origin and motion of the gases as well as their effect on the development of galaxies. Dr. Ronald Taam and colleagues from Northwestern University would study the origin of rapid bursts of high-energy radiation from neutron stars and globular clusters in order to model the ignition, nuclear evolution, and propagation of burning fronts on surfaces of neutron stars and to understand the nature of hot plasma confinement in magnetic fields near such subjects. Dr. David Black, heading a team from Ames Research Center and the University of California, Santa Cruz and Berkeley campuses, would investigate various physical and chemical processes taking place in the formation of stars, concentrating particularly on the stars' origins in giant molecular clouds in interstellar space and the protostellar/protoplanetary disk-shaped nebulae surrounding fledgling stars. And Dr. Simon White and a team of scientists from the University of Arizona would study questions regarding star and planet formation, including properties of star-forming regions, galaxy formation, and evolution. NASA would bring the researchers together in 1986 to exchange information and to encourage a better understanding of the advances that science has made with data acquired from space research. (NASA Release 85-59)
Ames Research Center (ARC) announced that Dr. David Black would become chief scientist for the office of space station at NASA Headquarters, leaving a position he held as research scientist in the theoretical studies branch at ARC since 1972. In his new job, Black would ensure that the space station would accomodate the needs of the scientists who would use it, advising Phillip Culbertson, associate administrator for space station, about steps to make the space station an accessible research facility for scientists from many disciplines. Black's appointment coincided with selection of contractors who would spend 21 months working out details of space station design [see Mar. 14]. Since other countries intended to cooperate with NASA in the space station project, Black would work with the agencies representing the interests of European and Japanese scientists to coordinate their plans with those of NASA. Black had been studying scientists' needs for the space station since April 1984, when he had joined the task force on scientific uses of the space station. That committee brought together 30 scientists from various universities and represented the disciplines that were interested in using the space station. Also, Black was serving on a National Academy of Sciences study group called "space sciences, 1995-2015," which was attempting to identify the future directions for research in the space sciences, thus identifying which technologies would be needed to support future research. (ARC Release 85-14)
NASA announced that its Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded a research grant to Tuskegee University to research possibilities of growing food in outer space. In the project, the researchers would select several sweet potato varieties that looked promising and research nutrient delivery and hydroponic systems that appeared best suited to development of the crop. The sweet potato project was part of NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support Systems (CELSS) program to search for methods to supply a continuous food source and to regenerate waste during long-duration spaceflights or for proposed lunar colonies. Dr. William Knott, manager of KSC's Life Science Support Facility and technical monitor for the project, said that, if the sweet potato could deliver enough energy conversion efficiency and productivity, NASA would incorporate it into a nearly full-scale "breadboard" of a working CELSS that it was developing. Other plants previously chosen for the CELSS breadboard project included sugar beets, lettuce, snap beans, wheat, soy beans, and white potatoes. The sweet potato research would focus on three systems: plant growth, food processing, and waste management. The program would begin by studying the plants in a sealed 24 by 12-foot growth chamber with controlled light, food, water, and temperature. Plants would receive food in the chamber by recycling the atmosphere and water that passed through the nutrient system. NASA expected the chamber, once used to test the Mercury spacecraft for flight, might produce enough food for two to three people. A waste management system would treat leftovers from the recycling process, converting the waste products into a nutrient source for the plants. Knott said a major challenge of the project was to harvest the highest yields possible while using a minimum of space and water to deliver nutrients to the plants. "We will take the edible seeds and fruit out of the chamber for processing and storage. The leaves, stems, and parts of the plant normally not consumed also would be converted into a food material." Calling the CELSS program "a beyond the year 2000 endeavor," Knott said NASA would test some of the concepts of the program on the proposed space station "just to see if they work." However, he pointed out, "resupply on a long-duration spaceflight, a lunar base, or on a Mars mission . . . would make the 'space farm' . . . much more attractive." (NASA Release 85-180)
NASA announced that its National Space Technology Laboratories, working with the University of Colorado at Boulder, uncovered information using remote sensing techniques suggesting a civilization existed before the Incas in subtropical Peruvian jungles. The university's anthropology department requested NSTL collaboration on the investigation because of the laboratories' expertise in satellite remote sensing and image analysis. After remote sensing by satellites and aircraft permitted mapping and determining priorities for field investigation sites, Tom Sever, NASA principal investigator, and Tom Lennon, an archaeologist and co-director of the university's Rio Abiseo National Park project, completed a five-day expedition into the jungles of Peru's Rio Abiseo National Park. Remote sensing had discovered Cerro Central, a site including more than 350 buildings. The previous major point of interest was the ancient site Gran Pajaten, which included only 30 buildings. "We now know that Pajaten is probably the smallest and least important of the sites," Sever explained. "We are fairly confident that we have approached the very edges of a new civilization, and we believe that the farther in we go, the higher and more complicated the elevation and architecture and civilization will be." Sever added that the investigation represented in his opinion the best example of a remote sensing application to archaeology and perhaps the only known means by which to obtain his project's objectives. (NASA Release 85-160) During November. Gene Gilbert, a technician in Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Laboratory for Oceans was searching for a way to measure rainfall at sea by using an oil rig, Goddard News reported, in order to assist in the development of a system called the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM). TRMM could take the form of a satellite or space station attachment operational in the mid-1990s to improve upon rainfall sensors that flew aboard Nimbus satellites. But developing better sensing capabilities first required accurate ground truth measurements to test the accuracy of remote observations. Over the years, meteorologists had developed a good picture of weather over land masses. But they still needed to know what happened over the remaining two-thirds of earth. When putting a collection bucket on a ship, Gilbert explained, different locations on deck gave differing results depending on whether the bucket was sheltered from the wind. In addition, the ship's movement gave angular measurement of the rain, not a true vertical one. And a buoy was not an improvement. "It may look stationary" Gilbert said, "but it really is not." Even the largest ones, which were 50 feet across, tossed in a storm, splashing and spraying and negating results. "What is needed," Gilbert pointed out, "is a surface that is stationary, vibration free, and splash-proof. I think oil platforms could satisfy all those conditions." GSFC's Microwave Sensors and Data Acquisition Systems Branch in July placed the first rain gauge on a oil producing platform in the Gulf of Mexico off Lafayette, Louisiana. "The very next month a hurricane knocked out our data transmission antenna," Gilbert recalled. "But we repaired the damage easily, and we have been getting good data since then." The rain gauge was a teeter-totter with a shot-glass sized cup at each end. The cups filled successively with 1/100th of an inch of rain and then dropped the measure back into the ocean. Each count was transmitted to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) and then back to GSFC via NOAA's data processing facility in Suitland, Maryland. "The goal is to demonstrate that using a gauge on an oil rig gives us our most accurate ocean rainfall data to date," Gilbert said. "If it does, we may expand to include other oil rigs. Then we will finally have good ground truth data for measuring rainfall over the ocean by satellite, at least for those oceans that include oil rigs." (Goddard News, Nov 85/ 2) SPACE STATION PROGRAM
NASA earmarked about $3.2 million in FY 86 funding for continuing work on the proposed space station at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to define processing requirements, evaluate maintenance and resupply activities, and assess facility needs, the Spaceport News reported. The funding, an increase over the previous year, would pay for studies to further the Phase B definition and preliminary design effort expected to continue through early 1987. NASA planned for the early 1990s the first launch of a space station element. KSC studies were intended to identify ground processing options and launch preparation concepts. In addition, KSC contractors were evaluating what facilities were needed for processing the station elements and payloads. KSC was also studying how NASA should approach the ongoing maintenance and resupply activities that would support continuous on-orbit operations. KSC space station activity in FY 86 was expected to require the equivalent of about 180 NASA and contractor workers. (Spaceport News, Oct 25/85, 2)
NASA overcame the final obstacle to achieving four-way international cooperation (the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Canada) on the U.S. manned space station when NASA and The European Space Agency (ESA) compromised in a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on wording in three areas: technology transfer, nondiscriminatory access for European users to the Space Station, and station elements that would be candidates for European participation, Aviation Week reported. NASA Administrator James Beggs and ESA Director General Reimer Lust resolved at an early March meeting the differences over wording concerning technology transfer and European user access. A compromise formulated by W. Germany and approved in late March by ESA members resolved the issue of which components would be open to European development. "The final step for Europe is approval of the MOU by ESA's council, which has its next meeting at the end of April," Michel Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, said. "I don't foresee any difficulties there because the ESA member delegates have been informed of the negotiations and are aware of the final wording." Bignier went on to say NASA accepted "certain small nuances" concerning nondiscriminatory access for Europe to the station and that both sides made compromises on the issue of which elements would be included for European cooperation. And he added that ESA "basically accepted NASA's proposed text" on technology transfer for the Phase B memorandum but said the wording would not apply to follow-on agreements covering hardware development. "We felt this was not as critical an issue in Phase B as it will be in the later Phase C/D," Bignier explained. Philip Culbertson, NASA associate administrator for the Space Station, said international participation in the station was essential to overall U.S. planning for the facility. "The investment of our potential partners from around the world will give the station a significantly greater capability than we in the U.S. could provide alone," Culbertson said. "We believe we will end up with a capable Space Station for all of us to use." (AvWk, Apr 1/85, 16)
In his "National Security Launch Strategy" directive, President Reagan told NASA and the U.S. Air Force to begin a study leading to joint development of a bigger and more powerful space shuttle that could begin flying missions just before the year 2000, the Washington Post reported. In a major policy change, the Reagan Administration indicated that the Air Force should share with NASA the cost of designing and acquiring the second-generation space shuttle; NASA had borne the $10 billion cost of developing the current Space Shuttle, although the Air Force used it one third of the time. The directive also covered an agreement by the Air Force to use NASA's Space Shuttle at least eight times a year for the 10 years after 1988 and approved an Air Force decision to buy an improved version of its Titan rocket to supplement the Space Shuttle for military launches starting in 1988 and ending in 1993 [see Feb. 27]. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in the directive that the Air Force had decided to buy 10 Titan 34D7 single-use rockets for $2.09 billion between then and September 1993 from Martin Marietta Corp. The directive did not resolve the dispute between NASA and the Air Force over Air Force plans to sell at bargain rates obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch three weather satellites for NOAA [see Feb 25]. NASA was disappointed in the Air Force decision to buy the Titans, as it had tried to persuade the Air Force to buy an upgraded version of the solid-fuel rocket booster that helped put the Space Shuttle into orbit. Present rocket power limited Space Shuttle cargo weight, flying height, and its crossrange (limiting landings to Kennedy Space Center, Edwards AFB, and the White Sands Missile Range). The permanently manned space station planned for 1993 would require loads up to 75,000 lb. carried into polar orbit and at least 100,000-lb. loads into near-equatorial orbit at altitudes of at least 500 miles. (W Post, Mar 3/85, A12)
The Washington Post reported that Britain would accept a Reagan administration invitation to contribute an expected $300 million to build a permanent space station scheduled for launch in 1992, making Britain along with W. Germany [see Jan. 17] the first noncommunist industrialized nations to participate in the space station program. Geoffrey Pattie, British minister of state for industry and information technology who was in Washington to consult with lawmakers and Reagan Administration officials about scientific cooperation, technology transfer, and telecommunications policies, said Britain would announce the contribution at the European Space Agency's (ESA) Rome meeting [see European Space Agency, Jan. 18]. President Reagan had invited Australia, Canada, Japan, and the U.S.'s Western European allies to join in funding and building the modular space station and expected France, Italy, and Japan to announce soon their intention to PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Pattie said Britain wanted access to technologies to design and build space stations as well as the results of research carried out in space laboratories; initial space station plans called for biological and physical sciences labs. While France and Germany were interested in rocketry research, Britain had focused its space expenditures on improving data transmission and expected the space station to enhance these technical capabilities. Pattie did note, however, that Britain feared the U.S. would impose export controls on some of this technology and that technology transfer questions required resolution during two years of space station feasibility studies. He emphasized the U.S. had to fashion "sensible" restrictions "instead of saying no to [exports of| everything, which is counterproductive to U.S. as well as European interests." (NYT, Jan 18/85, A1)
NASA announced that Robert Nunamaker, formerly chief engineer at Ames Research Center (ARC), became Langley Research Center's (LaRC) space director with responsibility for advanced space transportation, planetary entry, space station and large space antenna research, and for LaRC's atmospheric science program. Nunamaker began his NASA career at Lewis Research Center in 1958, where he acquired extensive experience with Project Mercury; he joined ARC in 1963. Nunamaker received a B.S. degree in mechanical engineering in 1957, followed by graduate work at Case Institute of Technology and the University of California at Los Angeles. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/85; LaRC Release 85-8)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press briefing, noted that the fourth Space Shuttle orbiter, Atlantis, would join the fleet in the spring to fly its first mission in 1985 and that, despite being well into the Space Shuttle's operational phase, NASA would continue to improve performance, procure space parts, and enhance reliability. In support of Presidential efforts to cut government spending, NASA would slow space station definition and development efforts, cancel the advanced composite structures program in aeronautics, and not initiate any new projects in the space science and applications program. (NASA release Feb. 4/ 85, NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/85)
The Lewis News reported that NASA had completed conceptual designs for its space station and that industry had submitted proposals for definition studies and preliminary designs of various station components for which NASA expected to award 18-month contracts in April. NASA would award contracts in April 1987 for the next phase of the program—the final design, development, launch, and assembly of the station. Contrary to most large NASA projects, for which an industrial prime contractor coordinated various aspects of a project, NASA would oversee the entire space station program because the station's operational life would extend over a long and indefinite period. Johnson Space Center (JSC) would manage the system engineering and integration function; Lewis Research Center (LeRC) was responsible for the power system. The space station power system was vital for two major reasons: the quantity of electrical power available to governed station capabilities and, since the power system required large areas of solars cells or mirrors, the size of these areas affected station configuration and operation. Plans called for initial power demands of 25 kw for housekeeping needs of a crew of six and 50 kw for experiments and customer applications. Comparing this power system to the largest previously in space—the Skylab manned-mission system, which generated 16 kw—the magnitude of the power station challenge became evident. LeRC personnel would consider a variety of power system technologies, making selections based on detailed studies of the tradeoffs among options. Studies would examine how the options influenced the performance, risk, and cost of the power system and space station, with consideration given to station growth and satisfaction of later needs. In addition, LeRC had to design a system that would be available on schedule, function reliably for an indefinite life with only on-orbit maintenance, be user-friendly, and remain within cost limits. (LeRC News, Feb 8/85, 2)
NASA announced that effective January 24, Dr. Dale Compton became deputy director of Ames Research Center (ARC), where he had been director for engineering and computer systems since February 1983. Compton joined NASA in June 1957, serving as deputy director of astronautics, then chief of the space science division and manager of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). Recipient of the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal, Compton earned a B.S. degree in 1957 and an M.S. degree in 1958, both in aeronautical engineering, and a Ph.D. degree in aeronautical and astronautical engineering in 1969. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/ 85) During February. Ames Research Center (ARC) announced it had formed the information sciences office to do basic and applied research in artificial intelligence (Al), automation sciences, and space-related computer science technology, with emphasis on applications to the NASA space station. NASA had designated ARC as the lead center in Al research, and the new office's research would cover Al programming languages, expert-systems development, knowledge representation and information understanding, machine vision and learning, sensor fusion, and optical processing. Space-related computer-science research would focus on symbolic-processing and data-flow architectures; network design, protocols, and simulation; and optical read/write information-storage technology. ARC would combine in-house studies, primarily on applied research and development of flight experiments to validate and demonstrate the technologies being developed, with the work of outside research organizations, such as SRI International, Symbolics Inc., Innovative Optics, Inc., Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, MIT, University of Texas, and University of Michigan, on basic research issues to accomplish project objectives. ARC would orient research toward the user community, particularly other NASA centers, focusing on both technology development for user applications and help to users during implementation. Space station automation would be the primary application, and ARC had signed agreements with Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center to work together on this implementation. ARC would also advise on space station automation through participation on NASA advisory groups such as the space station automation study team, space station automation and robotics panel, advanced-technology automation committee, and NASA headquarters space station data systems steering committee. (ARC Release 85-6)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
USA Today reported that its debate for that day would explore the pros and cons of U.S. manned space missions. In its editorial, USA Today said, "Human brains can adapt to change. Machines cannot. Without men and women in space, there would be no one to even try to fix the Navy's stranded satellite" [Navy communications satellite carried on the Discovery 51-D mission], ". . . Space is our last frontier. Without humans aboard to ride rockets to the stars and beyond, man will never embrace what he has envisioned," the editorial concluded. USA Today guest columnist Geoffrey Keller, a professor of astronomy at Ohio State University, wrote that one of the values of the manned space program was that it would help to lengthen the useful life of expensive space telescopes (for example, the Hubble Space Telescope), by permitting astronauts to replace worn-out telescope parts and to make telescopes more powerful as new and more efficient cameras were invented and installed. In an opposing view, James Van Allen, a professor of physics at the University of Iowa, wrote that nearly all of what he considered the really important and durable products of space technology were "achieved by much-less-expensive unmanned spacecraft, operating automatically and under cornmand control from ground stations, often for many years in earth orbit or in the far reaches of the solar system. ". . . The public acclaim for the Apollo program has left a permanent imprint on NASA and has, in effect, committed it to an overriding emphasis on further development of manned space flight," Van Allen continued. "This emphasis is simultaneously NASA's greatest strength and its greatest weakness. Manned space flight, with all its mythological foundations, has assumed the aura of a religion. The space shuttle and the proposed permanently manned space station are primarily embodiments of this religion," he wrote. But, he added, "the relevant results to date are far too meager to justify such hyperbolic expectations and such enormous expenditures. Meanwhile, the proven applications of space technology are languishing for lack of resources." (USA Today, Apr 16/85, 8A)
NASA Administrator James Beggs today took an indefinite leave of absence from the agency to fight fraud charges against him [see NASA/ Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], the Washington Post reported. With White House approval, associate administrator Philip Culbertson became general manager. Although Beggs had refused to resign, White House spokesman Larry Speakes said that President Reagan, "while reluctantly acceding to his request for a leave of absence," asked Beggs to assist in an "orderly transition of his responsibilities to his colleagues at NASA to facilitate continuity of management at this critically important agency. Mr. Beggs has agreed to do so." Speakes added that the space program "has been revitalized" under Begg's leadership and "this important record must continue." Putting Culbertson in charge of day-to-day operations put Begg's stamp on the transition, the Post said. Culbertson was a 20-year NASA veteran, well-known to the House and Senate committees that dealt with the agency, and responsible for planning the agency's next big project, construction of an $8 billion permanent space station. William Graham, a former planning analyst at the Rand Corp. and chairman for the previous three years of the White House Advisory Commission on Arms Control and Disarmament, had been with NASA eight working days. Reagan appointed Graham acting administrator, so that Graham could create the job of general manager and name Culbertson to the post. "Whoever is running the space agency in 1986 has to know where the space station stands, what money it needs and who to talk to to keep it on track," said a congressional aide who dealt with NASA. "That's why Phil Culbertson is getting the job of running the agency day-to-day. He knows the issues." In his statement, Beggs reiterated that he is innocent of the fraud charges resulting from a Justice Department investigation. "I have concluded there was nothing I did then that I would not do again," Begg's statement said. "I have not been involved in any criminal wrongdoing or, in fact, of wrongdoing of any kind. I am totally confident I will be exonerated." (W Post, Dec 5/85, A3)
NASA announced that its Administrator, James Beggs, and Canadian Minister of Science and Technology, The Honorable Tom Sidden, signed on April 16 a memorandum of understanding to conduct a cooperative program for detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned Space Station. Under the memorandum, the countries for the next two years would conduct parallel Phase B studies and exchange information on their work. Canada, which had approved $8.8 million for the first year of Phase B, would study a space construction and servicing system, a solar array for a platform or as a potential auxiliary power source for the Space Station, and a remote sensing facility. At the signing, Administrator Beggs said that "we are pleased Canada has become an international partner in [this] phase of the Space Station's development. We look forward to working with our friends in Canada, Europe, and Japan in building a firm foundation for future cooperation on a permanently manned Space Station to serve the needs of the free world in developing the peaceful uses of space well into the next century." Separate agreements would cover cooperative efforts during development, operation, and use phases of the Space Station. (NASA Release 85-58)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to industry to develop a space platform providing five years of on-orbit services to NASA payloads while allowing the developer to market it to commercial users, an innovative approach considered a first step toward creating a closer partnership between government and industry in space. Industry would finance, develop, own, and operate the platform with first use planned in late 1988 and would be free to market the platform (totally separate from NASA's plans for a government-developed, permanently manned space station) for materials processing or other manufacturing activities. NASA stipulated that the platform be capable of providing services for four future projects: the extreme ultraviolet explorer (EUVE), the x-ray timing explorer (XTE), a zero-gravity payload, and an as yet unidentified project. The Space Shuttle or other launch vehicle would place the commercial platform in orbit. Commercial payloads would reimburse the government for use of the orbiter and facilities. (NASA Release 85-7) Johnson Space Center
Western European cabinet ministers in a two-day meeting in Rome agreed to participate in the 1992 U.S. launch of a permanently manned space station, the European Space Agency (ESA) announced. The ministers also increased the ESA budget and approved funding for Ariane 5, making clear their intent to pursue independent European space activities, but failed to decide on a French-sponsored plan for a small space shuttle (called Hermes). ESA would base its participation in the U.S. space station on an Italo-German project called Columbus, with an estimated $2-billion project cost. Although W. Germany, Britain, and Italy had made funding commitments, France had not announced its project share. The ministers' decision ended controversy over European cooperation with the U.S., which had resulted from an earlier U.S./European cooperative effort that ended negatively when a $750 million investment in the 1973 Spacelab produced little significant research or technological spinoffs, the Washington Post reported. ESA also announced its annual expenditures would increase 70% to almost $1.3 billion by 1990. (ESA release Feb 4/85, Jan 31/85; W Post, Feb 1/85, A23) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED PMI \3 lf INTENTlONAtlT BIAN*
Reiichi Takeuchi, chief of Japan's science and technology agency, said Japan had decided to take part in the U.S. space station beginning with the preliminary design stage, FBIS, KYODO in English reported. He said the Japanese would sign with NASA Administrator James Beggs a memorandum on the decision when Beggs visited Tokyo early in May. The agreement would cover two years of work, at which time, Takeuchi said, the two countries would probably sign a similar document for later stages of the project. Takeuchi noted he expected the U.S. would ask Japan to design the laboratory room of the Space Station, scheduled for operation in 1992. He estimated the cost at 200 to 300 billion yen. Under the memorandum, the U.S. would provide Japan with technical information on how the Space Station would be used. (FBIS, KYODO in English, Apr 12/85)
The U.S. Senate passed by voice vote H.R. 1714, the NASA Authorization Bill for FY 86, NASA's Legislative Activities Report noted. As passed, the bill embraced the concept of a budget freeze at the FY 85 level of $7,510 billion; however, it also provided for three specific augmentations that totalled $142 million, accounting for a FY 86 growth of 1.9%. Among the authorizations for research and development were $200,000,000 for the space station, $477,200,000 for space transportation capability development, and $608,400,000 for physics and astronomy. Spaceflight, control, and data communications authorizations included $941,500,000 for Space Shuttle production and operational capability; $1,700,100,000 for space transportation operations; and $745,300,000 for space and ground network, communications, and data systems. Among the authorizations for space transportation facilities were $14,000,000 for construction of an orbiter modification and refurbishment facility at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), $3,600,000 for construction of a thermal protection system facility at KSC, and $6,500,000 for modification of enhanced life support systems testing at Marshall Space Flight Center. (NASA Legislative Activities Report, June 27/85, 1)
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced preliminary scientific results from Spacelab 3 flown on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-B launched April 29, 1985. Researchers and participants in the seven-day flight gathered in December at the Center to present their initial findings. "The mission has made some major contributions in the physical and life sciences," said Dr. George Fichtl of MSFC's Systems Dynamics Laboratory. "We have gained a lot of insight for future Spacelab and space station research. And I think we can now say that space research is becoming routine." Initial results from the three Spacelab 3 crystal growth experiments were very promising, Ficthl noted. The two triglycine sulfate crystals and the single mercuric iodide crystal grown in the space laboratory were at least as good as the best crystals grown to date on earth. And they might actually be better, although additional testing was necessary to confirm this, Fichtl said. "This is of major significance, because normally we must grow between one and two thousand crystals on earth to get just one crystal that is equal to the quality of those grown on Spacelab 3. Mercuric iodide crystals have application in X-ray detectors, and triglycine sulfate crystals are used in infrared detectors," he said. In addition, the flight proved the reliability of the methods used to grow the crystals. Triglycine sulfate crystals were grown from a solution as part of an experiment provided by Alabama A&M University. The mercuric iodide crystal grew using a vapor transport process in an experiment provided by EG&G Energy Measurements Inc. The third crystal growth experiment, provided by France and which also used mercuric iodide, performed as expected and added to researchers knowledge about the process of crystal nucleation, a process difficult to study on earth because of gravity-induced convection. The Drop Dynamics Module, a fluid physics experiment developed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, enabled researchers to do some experiments not possible on earth. Results confirmed some of the theories on how drops behaved when rotated, the first opportunity to test theories posed centuries ago including those by Isaac Newton. The experiment also proved that using sound waves was a viable technique for manipulating liquids in a microgravity environment, which had direct application to containerless materials processing in space. The technique allowed processing of materials without incurring the contaminating effects of the container. The experiment showed that the "acoustic bottle" or "crucible of sound" containing the droplet had much better characteristics than originally theorized. Drop dynamics experiments confirmed theories on how drops behaved when rotated slowly; however, experiment data showed violation of some basic theories relating to the behavior of drops rotated at higher rates. It was found, for example, that drops tended to transition (change) to a new shape at rotation rates lower than predicted. "All this tends to indicate that some of our theories may need to be modified," Fichtl said. Researchers for the Geophysical Fluid Flow Cell Experiment reported that all 102 hours of data looked good, confirming existing theories of convection, and were expected to lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of stellar interiors and planetary atmosphere. However, the research team noted that at higher heating rates—such as those that might be found on the sun— the data showed some significant departures from that anticipated. After the mission, researchers developed computer models of some of this new information. The Atmospheric Trace Molecules Spectroscopy (ATMOS) experiment, sponsored by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, for the first time simultaneously measured the concentrations of chemical compounds associated with carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and other chemical cycles in the atmosphere. This would provide better insight into the chemical processes that governed the distribution of minor and trace gases in the atmosphere between 10 and 100 kilometers. The instrument recorded concentrations of gases as low as parts per 100 billion, the first time such sensitive measurements were made, and detected and measured traces of nitrogen pentoxide, a compound previously undetected in the atmosphere. Results from the Research Animal Holding Facility showed that the apparent case of space adaptation syndrome in one of the monkeys supported the contention that this species would be a good model for future studies of vestibular adaptation in microgravity. Results from studies of the largest group of rats flown aboard a single spacecraft showed their hind muscles became 11 to 36% smaller and the bones were less strong after their flight. (MSFC Release 85-73) UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
Scientists at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory's (AFGL) Space Physics Div. developed a computer program that predicted the electrical effects of the highly charged polar space environment on spacecraft. These effects could range from the production of noise in circuits to system failure in extreme cases, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Called Potential of a Large Object in the Auroral Region (POLAR), the code simulated in three dimensions the electrical interaction of the Space Shuttle or any other space vehicle with the polar space environment in the region from 100 to 600 miles above earth. Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base would orbit through the polar region, and the polar charging code could provide important data for the design of large space structures such as space stations. Lockheed Corp. used POLAR to predict the effect of charging on the Space Shuttle in low-altitude polar orbits with payloads funded by the Air Force Space Test Program Directorate and other Air Force and NASA programs. RCA performed calculations with POLAR for the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program vehicles. NASA's Spacelab 2 mission scientists used POLAR to predict the electrified gaseous environment, or plasma, of the Space Shuttle when the Plasma Diagnostics Package, a free-flying satellite, deployed. And NASA's LAGEOS Satellite Project Office would use POLAR to study charged particle drag on this laser reflecting satellite. POLAR was a successor to NASCAP (NASA Charging Analyzer Program), the computer code AFGL developed with NASA to model charging of Air Force satellites at geosynchronous altitude. The European Space Agency (ESA) had used that code to design weather and TV relay spacecraft, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used it to design the Galileo satellite. POLAR would incorporate data derived from future spacecraft flights and would become a computer-aided design tool for the construction of the advanced extravehicular mobility unit, the manned maneuvering unit, the NASA-proposed space station, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 7) Transatmospheric Vehicle
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
The 16th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, March 11-16 at Johnson Space Center (JSC), would highlight exploration programs planned by the U.S. and the USSR, including a discussion of major trends in space science and the possible role of the space station in planetary exploration, JSC announced. Speakers at the special session would include Dr. Geoffrey Briggs, director of the Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Headquarters; Dr. V. L. Barsukov, Vernadsky Institute of Sciences; Dr. Eugene Levey, chairman of the Planetary Sciences Department, University of Arizona; and Dr. Ronald Greely, a planetary scientist from Arizona State University. Other sessions of major significance would be the Florensky Memorial Symposium on Venus, possibly including results from the Soviet Venusian probes, and the Shergotty Consortium, focusing on the debate concerning meteorites that may have originated from Mars's surface. Planners had scheduled 27 regular session with 315 oral presentations taken from 497 abstracts published in the official conference proceedings. (JSC Release 85-11)
NASA announced that, during mission 51 —L scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986, it would release from the Space Shuttle a free-flying payload called Spartan-Halley to observe Halley's Comet. Scientists believed that comet exploration was a search for the beginnings of earth, because comets were the most unaltered samples of the early solar system. Spartan-Halley was the only NASA satellite dedicated solely to observing Comet Halley. During these observations, January 24 through 31, the comet would be in its most active period as it headed towards its closest approach to the sun on February 9. The objective of the Spartan-Halley mission was to measure from earth orbit the ultraviolet spectrum of Comet Halley using twin spectrographs designed and built by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. Spartan-Halley's cameras and instruments would analyze the active comet, looking for hydrogen and oxygen atoms and carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur molecules. If the spacecraft detected these elements, it might indicate more complex compounds could be present in the ice and dust that made up the comet's nucleus. Goddard Space Flight Center developed Spartan-Halley, a modified Spartan-2 spacecraft, to be a research carrier. The spacecraft consisted of the spectrographic instrumentation, attitude control cameras (which also provided science photography), a microprocessor, associated electronics, a sunlight baffling system, and a service module. The January mission would be the first for the Spartan-2 type carrier, a completely reusable spacecraft to be reflown later on several other missions. Following completion of the January mission, the Space Shuttle's robot arm would retrieve Spartan-Halley and store it in the cargo bay. (NASA Release 85-161)
NASA announced that 1986 would be its most productive year ever in space science activities, including a variety of "space firsts" and several major scientific studies that would be started or continued. To increase the public's knowledge and understanding of NASA's scientific programs, NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications and the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum would work together in a yearlong program entitled "1986—A Year for Space Science." The two organizations planned exhibits, audio-visual presentations, publications, and a lecture series at the Air and Space Museum and several other locations throughout the U.S. In addition, the National Air and Space Museum would carry NASA mission events on TV at designated locations in the museum. Major space science activities in 1986 would include the Voyager 2 encounter in January with Uranus; the culmination of several scientific investigations of Comet Halley; launch in May from the Space Shuttle of Galileo toward Jupiter; and also in May launch from the Space Shuttle Challenger of the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft to conduct comparative studies of the sun and its heliosphere. In addition, NASA scheduled for launch in late summer the Hubble Space Telescope, the largest telescope to be placed in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-159)
At a news conference to discuss the recent flights of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgiy Grechko, Soviet space officials said today that they expected to have a permanently manned space station by 1990, but that the Salyut 7 orbital laboratory would not be the spacecraft that hosted the rotating crews, the NY Times reported. Oleg Gazenko, head of the health ministry's Biomedical Problems Institute, which oversaw space medicine, said no unresolved problems remained to block development of the permanent station and that the crew rotation on Salyut 7 showed that incoming cosmonauts performed their research work better when they were spared the start-up operations needed to reactivate the space laboratory. At about the same time, Soviet officials told a U.S. Congressional delegation headed by Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) [see U.S. Space Policy/International, Oct. 10] that it was building a new space station that would be ready for launch in 1986, Defense Daily reported. Because the Soviets did not want to have two space stations in orbit at the same time, timing of the launch depended on the condition of the orbiting Salyut 7station, which was nearly doubled in size in September by the orbiting and deployment of a large new module. Nelson said the Soviets gave no details of the new station, which, if it is designed to be permanently manned, would beat the planned U.S. space station by seven or eight years. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C11; D/D, Oct 21/85, 259) October31: The Soviet Union, which had kept its space program under tight military control since it launched in 1957 the first satellite, announced creation of a civilian space agency, the NY Times reported. The agency would be responsible for the design, construction, and use of spacecraft for scientific research, remote sensing applications such as surveys of resources and crops, and joint space programs with other countries. In making the announcement, the government newspaper Izvestia identified the new agency as the Main Administration for the Creation and Use of Space Technology for the Economy and for Scientific Research, the Post said. It would be known as Glavkosmos, an acronym for the Russian terms "main" and "space." Izvestia did not specify the position of the agency in the Soviet government's table of organization but did identify the head of the agency as A. I. Dunayev. The only other publicly disclosed space-related agency in the Soviet Union was the Space Research Institute, founded in 1965 and a unit of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Western officials generally regarded that institute as performing some civilian space coordinating functions. However, in announcing Glavkosmos, Izvestia said, "It goes without saying that the effective use of space technology is of interest to many government ministries and agencies and to scientific organizations. The space program has reached such scope as to require the creation of a special coordinating agency." According to the announcement, the new agency would consider proposals for projects, work out long-term plans, and administer programs. It would also be responsible for launching satellites on vehicles expected to be supplied by the military and for collection and dissemination of satellite information. Izvestia said the agency would administer the Intercosmos program and the search and rescue satellite program, an international effort of the Soviet Union, the U.S., Canada, and France. The announcement did not make clear whether the new agency would administer any manned flights; but the emphasis seemed to be on automated space vehicles concerned with remote sensing, which until then had been part of the Cosmos series, a mixture of nearly 1700 civilian and military satellites launched since 1962. (NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13)
Geoffrey Perry of the United Kingdom's Kettering Group said the radio aboard the Soviet Salyut 7 space station came on the air June 12, indicating the two cosmonauts who entered it had been successful in repair efforts, Aerospace Daily reported. Perry said he had received no radio signals from the Salyut for some time, supporting the belief of Western observers that the space station experienced some kind of electrical problem since the last cosmonauts had left it in October 1984. Perry noted the cosmonauts were transmitting on June 12 from 7:09 a.m. to 7:16 a.m. GMT on the Soyuz frequency, but by 8:46 a.m. GMT, the next time they were within his radio range, they had switched to the Salyut frequency. (A/D, June 13/85, 2)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
Astronauts Maj. Jerry Ross of the Air Force and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring of the Army today stepped outside the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B for the second construction exercise in the weightlessness of space [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Nov. 30], the NY Times reported. To TV viewers on earth, the two appeared to manipulate with ease the heavy structures they were building, although both were sweating and breathing heavily after the first 20 minutes of work. Two hours into the spacewalk, they reported that though their hands, feet, and backs were moist with sweat, they were working comfortably. The purpose of today's spacewalk was the same as previously, to test the efficiency of techniques to build a 45-foot-high aluminum tower. However, the astronauts changed the way they worked and had the assistance of astronaut Dr. Mary Cleave, who was operating the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm. She moved the men from place to place as their work required. Later in the exercise, the Washington Post reported, Ross and Spring took turns stringing cable along the four-story metal frame they had constructed, just as future crews might lay cable for a space station. They also removed parts of the tower and replaced them with other parts, simulating a space repair. NASA officials commented after the first spacewalk on November 30 that the work had proved more taxing than expected, perhaps because the astronauts' gloves, unlike the rest of their spacesuits, were not air-conditioned and could not carry away excess heat. Most of the work had entailed repeated squeezing and twisting with the hands. Ross and Spring said after the exercise that they would not want to repeat it before having a day of rest. They indicated that the activity had left their hands so numb and fatigued that they had trouble fastening the airlock of the Space Shuttle as they reentered it. NASA officials did note they were favorably surprised by the astronauts' rapid improvement in performance as they learned from successive repetitions of the exercise. (NYT, Dec 2/85, B6; W Post, Dec 2/85, A3)
NASA announced that the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the launch of the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the new schedule, the Space Telescope would be launched on October 27, 1986, and the Earth Observation Mission would lift off on August 18, 1986. The change was made to provide additional time for delivery of the Space Telescope from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space Telescope would be deployed into orbit from Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was expected to see 7 times farther and 10 times more clearly than any telescope on Earth. (NASA Release 862)
The Soviet Union launched what it said was a "third generation" Space Station named Mir, the Russian word for peace. The Mir was larger than their Salyut7 Space Station and had six docking ports for habitable modules. With the addition of Salyut laboratories, Russia would have an orbiting complex large enough for permanent crew habitation. (B Sun, Feb 21/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; W Times, Mar 4/86; CSM Mar 7/86)
Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney announced Canada's decision to proceed with Space Station participation when he visited with President Ronald Reagan. Canada agreed to perform preliminary design of a Mobile Servicing Center during Phase B of the Space Station definition and preliminary design study that would consist of a base structure with accommodations for payloads, orbital replacement units, utilities and thermal control. It would function as a multipurpose structure equipped with manipulator arms that would be used to help assemble and maintain the Space Station, as well as help keep instruments and experiments mounted on the Station's framework. (NASA Release 8633)
Representative Edward P. Bolland, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, advised NASA that it needed to make some difficult choices in its bigticket items. The Congressman specifically asked Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher how he would choose between a new Shuttle and the Space Station, to which he responded that the two projects were inseparable. Fletcher further pointed out that a fourth Shuttle was necessary because another accident would leave the Nation with only two, crippling the space program. The subcommittee, said Bolland, was most concerned about the cost of the Space Station. (B Sun, May
NASA announced the formation of an operations task force for the Space Station, cochaired by Carl B. Shelly and Dr. Peter T. Lyman. The task force was to explore alternative approaches to operating and managing a deployed Space Station that had to integrate a diverse set of U.S. and International hardware elements to accommodate a wide range of tended and untended user activities and to recommend an effective concept for operating the system. (NASA Release 86129)
Having examined NASA's 1986 schedule of launches, missions into space, and other space science events, U.S. media predicted that 1986 would "open an extensive new chapter in space exploration," and would rival the era of space exploration "that began with Galileo's first peak through a telescope 400 years ago." Predicting 1986 to be "a banner year," the Christian Science Monitor pictured an expanding role for the United States in space exploration because the year promised to put NASA on the cutting edge. Although theLos Angeles Times predicted "a year of spectaculars," it warned that no new starts for planetary missions beyond 1986 were on the horizon. The Times also noted that the projected $8 billion orbiting Space Station would likely take a big bite out of NASA funds and that increased military applications equated to less sharing of knowledge with the public. (CSM, Jan 2/86; LA Times, Jan 2/8)
Leaders from the 11membernation European Space Agency (ESA) met with NASA officials to discuss their $2 billion contribution to the Space Station project and to seek a greater management role and benefits from it. One European official noted, "NASA must realize that ESA is a mature space agency that can manage manned space flight alone if necessary." Although the statement appeared to be a threat to withdraw, Richard Barnes, NASA Director of International Affairs, saw no intent on the part of Europe to pull out. Leaders from both sides, however, agreed to a joint statement saying, "While recognizing that differences currently exist, Professor Luest and Dr. Fletcher jointly concluded that these differences are not irreconcilable." (NY Times, Nov 22/86; AvWk, Nov 24/86)
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)
Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said at a Board of'#0*Governors meeting that he expected President Ronald Reagan's approval for a replacement Shuttle. He reiterated what he told the President earlier and averred, "We need a fourth orbiter right away, as soon as we can build it." Fletcher also warned that if it were not built and if we do not begin operating the Space Station by 1994, "that could be very dire, indeed, for the future of American science and technology and the American economy." (Remarks prepared for Delivery: Aerospace Industries Association of America, Board of Governors Meeting, Williamsburg, Virginia, May 22/86; P Inq, May 23/86; W Times, May 23/86; B Sun, May 23/86)
NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting debris left from nuclear powered satellites and wreckage from antisatellite weapons testing. Considering the high speed of orbiting craft, scientists reported that even a fleck of paint could be dangerous, the probable culprit that caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S. Shuttle flight. Because slightly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct 13/86)
NASA announced a sevenyear schedule of tasks for the Shuttle fleet, and that Shuttles would resume flying in early 1988. The schedule reflected President Ronald Reagan's directive to phase out commercial and foreign launches, inasmuch as 24 of the 44 contracts had been voided. This left only 12 percent of the Shuttle missions devoted to commercial and foreign launches. An increase to 41 percent of the payloads, as opposed to 31 percent, would be given to Department of Defense missions. The remaining 47 percent of the schedule was reserved for the space agency's own missions, 33 percent for scientific studies and other needs, and 14 percent for the Space Station. The first year, said NASA, would see only 5 flights; that number would, it was hoped, increase to 16 flights per year by the 1990s. (WSJ, Oct 6/86; W Post, Oct 4/86; P Inq, Oct 4/86; B Sun, Oct 4/86; NY Times, Oct 4/86)
NASA announced the termination of a contract with TRW to design a baseline hybrid power system for the Phase B Space Station electrical power system. TRW expressed their wish not to pursue the project, but remained a major contributor to three other work packages. (NASA Release 8655)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, responding to negotiations with the White House budget office earlier in the week, warned that the planned $8 billion Space Station and a new'G0*replacement Shuttle were in jeopardy of not meeting scheduled completions. He stated that the 35 percent increased budget for fiscal year 1987 was earmarked only for costs resulting from the Challenger crash and could not be benchmarked for future budgets. The strict budget, he added, could afford no new projects. In a separate statement, Fletcher agreed to remove himself from any future Shuttle booster rocket contracts. Senators called for an investigation of the contract awarded to Morton Thiokol in 1973, a decision in which Fletcher had considerable influence. (W Times, Dec 8/86; NY Times, Dec 8/86)
A House panel, the Science and Technology Committee's subcommittee on space science and applications, approved a $7.6 billion NASA budget request. The authorization bill still needed review by the full Committee before being sent to the House floor. No funds were allotted for a new Shuttle, but supporters in Congress hoped that NASA would request a supplemental $500 million as first payment for "Challenger II." The physics and astronomy portion of NASA's budget, including $27.9 million for the Hubble Space Telescope, had not yet been reviewed. (B Sun, Apr 18/86)
Soviet cosmonauts made a historic trip between Space Stations as they traveled 1,800 miles in their Soyus T15 transport module from the recently launched Mir to the Salyut7 station. The mission was broadcast on state television. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), May 6/86; B Sun, May 7/86; NY Times, May 8/86)
NASA looked ahead to the launching of four new generation space observatories that promised a new era for astronomy. The Gamma Ray Observatory, providing a greater wavelength range, could determine if arriving gamma radiation originated in quasars and pulsars or from other sources. The Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility would study highly energetic environments found in nearly every object in the universe, including stars, planets, neutron stars, black holes, quasars, and cores of active galaxies. The Space Infrared Telescope Facility could span the infrared part of the spectrum with a 1000fold increase in sensitivity, enabling it to search for planets around stars. The Hubble Space Telescope, penetrating the universe in visible and ultraviolet light, was predicted to expand the observable universe by hundreds of times, see objects with ten times the clarity of ground observatories, and detect objects 1,000 times dimmer than those observed by previous spacecraft. (NASA Release 86168)
NASA considered both a crewtended station and one that would be permanently tended. The Phase B study period for the Space Station identified and evaluated alternative systems, components and philosophies that would result in a configuration responsive to the needs of potential users, be costeffective to operate and maintain, and flexible in terms of growth, size, and capabilities. A crewtended station could have people aboard only when a Shuttle orbiter docked to it; the orbiter would provide the habitable facilities. While Congress directed NASA to examine an option "which phases in permanent crew features of the Station," NASA pointed out that the "phased approach would force postponement of experiments important to advancement of manned spaceflight and would increase the total cost of developing the permanently manned Space Station." NASA went on to argue that the savings achieved by the phased approach would be offset by the cost of operating the Station in a crewtended mode for several years and by the cost of maintaining the industrial base during the delay period before resuming assembly of the permanently tended station. Savings of the crewtended phase were estimated at $284 million in 1984 dollars and total cost prior to permanently crewtended capability at $1 billion. (NASA Release 8659)
Analysis conducted by the Office of Space Station in the areas of Space Station management, use of expendable launch vehicles, and cost impacts resulting from design changes was accepted by NASA. Changes included replacing the nodes and tunnels that connected pressurized modules with larger resource nodes, revising the assembly sequence to provide early scientific return and reduce extravehicular activity, achieving an initial power level of 37.5 kilowatts, achieving permanent human capability, and placing fixed servicing capabilities closer to the modules. Realignment of certain work package responsibilities was also recommended; the total cost increase would be around $49 million. (NASA Release 86180; 86181)
A Presidential panel report was to be released April 11, but details that aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by 1994, called for establishing a lunar base after the year 2000 for mining and production of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially0*useful asteroids, and a "network of spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian colony by the year 2027." (W Post, Mar 24/86; NY Times, Mar 25/86; CSM May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a Senate subcommittee and testified that the $7.7 billion budget for NASA was "barely adequate" and could further delay Shuttle flights while possibly stripping the private sector of some 25,000 jobs. He also said that the currently designed Space Station was intended to be built using four Shuttles. With only three Shuttles, the Station would need to go back to the drawing board. The Senate appeared to be looking at a civilian sponsored space program for commercial launches as a way to reduce costs. (W Post, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
NASA and the Space Telescope Science Institute announced that U.S. amateur astronomers would be given a small'20*amount of observing time with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Amateur astronomers have made significant contributions to astronomy, and, at this point, there are at least a quarter million of these astronomers. With a 941/2inch mirror, the HST would be the largest astronomical telescope ever placed in space; it serves as an example of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 86108)
After more than a year of study by NASA centers and contract teams, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced a baseline configuration for the permanently crewtended Space Station that would guide preliminary design activities for the remaining eight months of the Phase B studies. The contract called for development of the Space Station to begin in October 1986, ending with a permanently tended habitable station in 1994. A total of 14 Space Shuttle flights were thought to be required for Major features of the design included two vertical keels 361 feet long and connected by upper and lower horizontal booms 146 feet long (the Space Station measured 503 feet at its widest point); two 44.5foot long, 13.8foot interior diameter U.S. supplied modules, with external interconnects for laboratory functions and crew quarters for eight members and two smaller logistics modules to alternate between the ground and the station; modules located near the station's center of gravity to provide the best possible microgravity environment for experiments, with raft patterns having four nodes and two tunnels to serve as module interconnects; internal module pressure of 14.7 per square inch and 80/20 nitrogen/oxygen mixture ratio to approximate sea level Earth atmospheric conditions, with a closed loop environmental control and life support system where oxygen and water could be recycled and nitrogen and food could be resupplied; hybrid solar power system with 75 kilowatts of power, where 25 kilowatts would be provided by photovoltaic system and the remaining 50 by the solar dynamics system; five locations on the structure for placing attached payloads and a facility for servicing free flying spacecraft and platforms with a telerobotic servicer; polar platform with useful payload on single Shuttle launch and a coorbiting platform to support astrophysics and materials processing; gaseous hydrogen/oxygen propulsion system for altitude control (assembly would be at 220 nautical miles and operational altitude at 250 nautical miles minimum); metric as standard unit of measurement; and inclusion of international elements into the overall design, including the Canadian Mobile Servicing Center and hardware provided by Japan and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 8661; NY Times, May 15/86; W Times, May 15/86)'!0*May 15: NASA and Boeing Aerospace Company entered into an agreement concerning materials processing experiments. Crystals of a size and quality impossible to create on Earth would be attempted aboard three Space Shuttle flights. Working with the University of Alabama, Boeing agreed to fund the experiments, including a chemical vapor transport crystal growth furnace installed in the galley area. These crystals were expected to be of the type valuable in the commercial production of semiconductor and electrooptic devices. The experiments would underscore NASA's commitment to the development of commercial endeavors in space, and would continue with the Space Station. (NASA Release 8662)
Dr. James C. Fletcher acknowledged that NASA did not sufficiently consult Congress on decisions pertaining to Space Station management prior to the June 30 announcement and said he would postpone plans for moving Space Station management from Houston to the Washington, D.C. headquarters. Because "considerable misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the'00*intent of the decision on the Space Station work package realignment has resulted," said Fletcher "I intend to conduct a thorough review of all aspects of Space Station design, work package assignments and functions, and conduct extensive conversations with members of Congress." (NASA Release 86103; USA Today, Aug 1/86)
TRW, Inc. was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for design and delivery of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV's primary uses would be spacecraft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and close proximity visual observation beyond the operating range of a Space Shuttle. The OMV, "space tug," was also to be made to adapt for use in Space Station activities. (NASA Release 8681; WSJ, Jun 26/86; LA Times, Jun 27/86)')0** The first flight of an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility with a modified F15. The integration of engine and flight control (Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control) between the system's computers could increase performance 2 to 10 percent. (NASA Release 8682)
The Pentagon, which had previously voiced objection to the Space Station, asked for a postponement in negotiations between NASA and foreign participants because the Department of Defense (DoD) hoped to use the orbiting laboratory for some of its Strategic Defense Initiative experiments. The DoD envisioned only a very limited need for the facility, but other countries would no doubt vehemently object because the project was intended only for peaceful purposes. (WSJ, Dec 22/86; NY Times, Dec 20/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher released to members of Congress a statement indicating that employment at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, would increase from 12,600 to 14,000 employees during Space Station development, with a potential for another 1,000 jobs should JSC take on additional Space Station tasks. "Another way to look at this," he warned "is that without the Space Station program, JSC's employment level likely will not grow significantly over the next few years." The projected increase notwithstanding, officials at the JSC were concerned with their status because of the recent decision to move the habitation module's development to the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville Alabama. They were assured, however, that the move had to do with coordinating the habitation module and the module structure and that "the Johnson Space Center's role as NASA's preeminent center of excellence in manned spacecraft systems is not changing." (NASA Release 8698; NY `"Times, Jul 26/86; W Post, Jul 26/86)
Ground testing of auxiliary thrusters designed to allow the Space Station to maintain a proper orbit and altitude demonstrated that the thrusters can operate for long periods of time with no hardware degradation. Fueled by water broken down into hydrogen and oxygen, the thrusters ran for as long as 22,000 seconds, and, with a target of 10 years of Space Station life, the goal was for them to run 40,000 to 60,000 seconds. Bell Aerospace Textron and Aerojet TechSystem Corporation conducted the tests for NASA. (NASA Release 8665)
With a request for proposals issued to approximately 250 firms, NASA planned to implement a Technical and Management Information System (TMIS) to support overall functions of the Space Station, including design, development, and operation. The TMIS would link the various NASA centers involved with the program and would automate the generation and interchange of documents, correspondence, schedules, engineering data and drawing, budget data, and other management information. Carried out in implements, the first would be operational less than one year after the contract award date. (NASA Release 8688)
As of this date, two companies (Boeing Aerospace Operations and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company) had submitted proposals for the Payload Ground Operations Contract, a threeyear costplusawardfee contract with optional extensions of up to 15 years. The selected contractor would be responsible for preparing all payload for launch aboard Space Shuttles and expendable launch vehicles, as well as operations, maintenance, and engineering of the related processing facilities. The contract would consolidate work that was performed under separate, onsite contracts involving about 900 people. Space Station components requiring launch from the Kennedy Space Center and preparation of NASA payloads at the Vandenberg Launch Site in California were to be included. (NASA Release 86109)
In Space Station Phase B Program Level Agreement, NASA and the ESA announced agreement on hardware elements for a preliminary design of a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module and a polar orbiting platform, the latter for conducting Earth observations. Under the agreement, ESA would conduct research on a preliminary design of a mantended freeflyer (pressurized module and resource module) for international utilization, primarily in the fields of material and life sciences and fluid physics, that would require both a longduration and undisturbed microgravity environment. (NASA Release 86104) '10*August 5: Preliminary data from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE), a threesatellite project that began in October 1984, indicated that clouds reflect more heat than they retain and appear to cool Earth's climate, possibly offsetting the "greenhouse effect." Incomplete coverage and sporadic observations have limited decades of study on global heat flows done with sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites. In a broader attempt, the ERBE instruments measured the average monthly heat budget on regional, zonal, and global scales; tracked the seasonal movement of heat from the tropics to the poles; and determined the average daily variation in heat on a 620mile regional monthly scale. An ERBE package contained two radiometer instruments. One, a scanner, was used for narrow fieldofview scanning with shortwave measurements of reflected solar energy and longwave measurements of Earthemitted energy. The other, a nonscanner, was used for wide fieldofview of the entire disc of the Earth, a 10degree region of Earth, and the total output of the sun's radiant energy. (NASA Release 86105)
NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station, established in March 1984 and chaired by Stanford University Professor Peter M. Banks, released its second major report for planning the scientific utility of the Space Station. The report pointed out that spacebased scientific progress had been slower than planned because of short time in orbit, rigid time lines, long periods between flights, and that the Space Station had the obvious potential of overcoming these Two major conclusions noted that Space Station facilities must be operated with the goal of producing outstanding scientific results; the station would be judged with respect to cost and research capability and the need for wellequipped, permanently habitable laboratories able to support a broad range of fundamental research in space. 0*The task force recommended that the Space Station emulate the adaptive science methodology used in terrestrial laboratories, introduce "telescience" (the ability to conduct research remotely), review safety standards to achieve a reasonable state of personal and system security, work with a crew size of 10, and develop "space mail" for delivering small samples of materials to ground laboratories. Other recommendations: (1) Attached payloads are an important part of the core Space Station, and NASA needs a more productive plan for converting observation experiments developed for Spacelab to Space Station; (2) freeflying platforms are essential for conducting many important scientific endeavors for the Space Station era (i.e. several platforms operating in different orbits); (3) NASA should enhance biological research activities in the preinitial orbit configuration period using Spacelabs and other attached payloads on the Space Shuttle to gain experience for conducting biological science research programs; (4) development of a humantended mode of scientific activity aboard a Space Station would be of little value and a need exists for a truly longterm, human capability; (5) it is essential that NASA look ahead to the activities that are anticipated over the 2530 year life span of the core facility and its associated elements; (6) the Space Station will facilitate development of a new type of research termed "science in space"; (7) the science operations of the Space Station should be separated from the operational management of the overall facilities; (8) and NASA must be prepared to change many of its nationally oriented selection, funding, and management procedures because of the important hardware and scientific contributions that will be made by international partners. (Written Statement to the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Committee on Science and Technology from Peter M. Banks, Apr 9/90; NASA Release 8643)
The former Soviet Union launched two veteran cosmonauts into orbit, scheduled to arrive at the Mir Space Station after two days. The launch, contrary to former Soviet practice, was both announced and televised. The launch, said James Oberg, author of several books about the Soviet space program, was done "with great propaganda benefit." In an effort to demonstrate their achievements, he stated further, "They have a greater selfconfidence in their program [and] it helps concentrate world attention on the benign part of their space program." U.S. experts acknowledged that Soviet Space Station technology was years ahead of us and that the mission might well begin man's permanent occupation of space. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), Mar 12/86; B Sun, Mar 14/86; P Inq, Mar 14/86; W Times, Mar 14/86; NY Times, Mar 14/86; W Post, Mar 14/86; C Trib, Mar 14/86)
The European Space Agency announced that it planned to fly four missions relating to the Space Station project. The maiden flight for the Spaceplane Hermes, said Director General Dr. Reimer Lust, would be launched between 1996 and 1998, by a new Ariane 5 rocket. (NY Times, Oct 6/86)
Thomas L. Moser was named Director of the Space Station Program Office in Washington, D.C., a position created to conduct a longrange assessment of overall NASA capabilities and requirements. Moser began his career with NASA in 1963 as a mechanical systems design and analysis engineer, and served further as a structural subsystem manager for the Apollo command module; project manager for the Shuttle Structures and Mechanics Division; head of structural design and manager for the orbiter structure and thermal protection system; technical assistant to the director and deputy manager for the Orbiter Project Office; Director of Engineering at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 86152)
Following the release of the Presidential Commission's report, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would adopt most of the recommendations. He stated, "The whole agency needs a major reexamination." He further said that he still expected the Shuttle fleet to resume operation by July 1987, that the President will opt for a replacement Shuttle, and that he remained committed to the Teacher in Space Program. Congress, however, pointed out that fiscal restraints would render it nearly impossible to make all the Committee's suggested repairs while building a new orbiter and pursuing the Space Station and the aerospace plane. (NASA Release: Statement of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, Jun 9/86; W Post, Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 10/86)
Martin Marietta, in competition for a contract to build the Space Station, unveiled a fullscale model depicting its plans at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. The intended crew module has eight sleeping quarters, each with a video recorder and a computer giving crew members direct access to home and the Space Station's main computer. (C Trib, Nov
NASA and the Science and Technology Agency of Japan announced an agreement reached on the hardware that Japan will carry into Phase B Space Station definition and preliminary design. According to the agreement, the preliminary design activities were to include: (1) a pressurized module to provide shirtsleeve work space for station crews; (2) an exposed work deck; (3) a scientific/equipment airlock; (4) a local remote manipulator arm; (5) and an experiment logistics model. The multipurpose laboratory called for accommodation of general scientific and technology development research, including microgravity research, as well as control panels for operating the Space Station's mobil remote manipulator system and attached payloads. (NASA Release 8631)
NASA ruled out a recommendation to supplement its Shuttle flights with untended launch vehicles for building the Space Station. The combination would accelerate assembly by up to nine months, said Space Station manager John Dunning, but the time savings would be offset by a 10 to 40 percent increase in potentially dangerous space walks. Using expendable launch vehicles, he went on, would also require an orbital maneuvering rocket to keep the parts in place. (NY Times, Dec 28/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced that Andrew J. Stofan had been appointed Associate Administrator for the Space Station. He also announced a number of organizational and management structural changes for the program and transfer of its supervision from the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to Washington, D.C. The changes followed recommendations from a committee headed by former Apollo Program Manager Samuel C. Phillips that were consistent with findings from the Rogers Commission, which investigated the Challenger accident. Phillips examined the Space Station program from both a technical and management perspective and Dr. Fletcher, in turn, made changes that assured the flow of important information to'*0*proper decisionmaking levels. Another result was the procurement of a versatile computerbased information network to link NASA and contractor facilities and to provide engineering services. (NASA Release 8684; W Post Jul 1/86; NY Times, Jul 1/86; W Times, Jul 1/86; C Trib, Jul 2/86)
In a statement released by the White House Press Secretary, President Ronald Reagan announced "two steps that will ensure America's leadership in space exploration and utilization." His first target was the building of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary for accomplishments in space (especially the Space Station). He also announced that NASA would ease out of the business of launching commercial satellites by allowing the private sector to assume the responsibility, which, he said, would eventually be done "better and cheaper." NASA, he stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of space. (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President, Aug 15/86)
NASA announced that it would cease implementation of work package realignment for a period of up to 90 days while two teams composed of NASA personnel, Phase B contractors, and representatives from user groups and international partners reviewed Space Station design and work package assignments and functions. The task force, headed by W. Ray Hook, Manager, Space Station Office, would critically examine all aspects of the current Space Station baseline configuration in terms of the amount of extravehicular activity required for assembly and maintenance, launch capacity of the Shuttle fleet, assembly sequence of the baseline configuration, resultant impact to the utilization of the station, potential impact on international partners, and overall technical performance and integrity of the Station. The Executive Technical Committee, headed by NASA Associate Administrator Andrew J. Stofan, would approve the assumptions, engineering, and technical constraints identified by'50*the task force and oversee their activities. (NASA Release 86116)
NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space Station that Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher predicted would be finished by 1994. The new design cut the amount of space walks during construction in half, increased the amount of living and laboratory space, and kept all human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The Space Station, according to plans for assembly, would need 17 Space Shuttle flights between 1993 and 1994. In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Dr. Lew Allen selected a Virginia site for a Space Station Program office. The 110,000 square feet of leased space in Reston, Virginia, would house NASA's Space Station Program director and some 400 JPL and NASA personnel. Initial occupancy was planned for summer 1987. (NASA Release 8749)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Lew Allen announced that Richard P. Laeser had been appointed to manage JPL's new support office in Washington, D.C., for NASA's Space Station Program. Laesar, who until his new appointment had been the manager of the Voyager mission to outer planets, would also serve as Director of the Office of Requisitions and Assessments for the Space Station. Norman R. Haynes was appointed the new manager of the Voyager mission. He formerly was manager of JPL's Systems Division. StarNews, Jan 5/87)
NASA and the ESA announced solicitation of scientific investigation from the United States, European Space Agency member states, and Canada, for two missions. The four spacecraft CLUSTER mission would study basic plasma processes in the Earth's magnetosphere. The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission consisted of a spacecraft studying solar processes and solarterrestrial relationships. (NASA Release 8722)
NASA officials declared that Space Station deployment, scheduled for 1994, could be delayed up to two years or the Station could be scaled down. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher said that the cost of the Space Station, once estimated at $8 billion, was now estimated at between $13 and $14.5 billion. Fletcher, who said that the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union in human space flight, predicted that a U.S. crewtended Space Station would help the country catch up to the Soviets. Testifying before the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Dr. Fletcher stressed that the Space Station program retained high priority with the Reagan administration. (LA Times, Feb 4/87; USA `"Today, Feb 4/87; NY Times, Feb 5/8)
The Soviet Union launched a 20ton, selfcontained astrophysical observatory whose mission was to dock with the orbiting Mir Space Station. Viktor Blagov, the deputy mission director, said that the observatory would "open a new chapter" in human space flight and would become a key building block of a permanently habitable scientific space complex. When docked with the Mir Space Station, the 19footlong observatory, with a 13.6 foot diameter, would double the working space available and would create a sort of a "high rise" structure in space. (P Inq, Apr 1/87; W Times, Apr 1/87) h)0*0*0*During March: India failed to launch an augmented satellite launch vehicle, developed by the Indian Space Research Organization, when the vehicle malfunctioned and fell into the Indian Ocean. The launch from Sriharikota, India, was the first of four such planned launches, and was to have placed a stretched Rohini series scientific satellite into a low Earth orbit. (AvWk, Mar 30/87)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin left their space station and successfully tightened the seal between the research module Kvant and the space station. Kvant had failed to dock on two previous tries. (NY Times, Apr 13/87)
NASA agreed with most of the findings and recommendations listed in the report by the National Research Council Committee on Space Station. Agency officials disagreed, however, with the findings that the deployment of the Space Station with the current Space Transportation System was risky. NASA also found the Committee's cost estimate for backup hardware and test program enhancements to be too high. (NASA Release 87135; NY Times, Sept 15/87; LA Times, Sept 15/87; H Post, Sept 15/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
NASA announced that the longdelayed mission to Jupiter, originally scheduled for 1982, would be launched in 1989. The 5,870pound untended Galileo spacecraft was to be launched from the Shuttle Discovery. After the Challenger accident, NASA decided to use less powerful rockets than the originally planned Centaur rockets, which are fueled with volative hydrogen. The substitution required an "audacious" rerouting of the spacecraft in order to use the gravitational force of Venus and Earth to propel Galileo toward The Galileo mission was expected to reach Jupiter in 1995. Upon reaching Jupiter, the spacecraft was to release a 737pound probe that would penetrate the atmosphere of the giant gaseous planet. h)&0*0*0*In addition, the spacecraft was to spend two years orbiting Jupiter and making flybys of its four largest moons. (CSM, Dec 3/87; LA Times, Dec 3/87; USA Today, Dec 3/87; W Post, Dec 3/87)
NASA granted the Space Station Program Support Division, of Grumman Aerospace Corporation in Bethpage, New York, a contract to provide systems engineering and integration for the Space Station. The contract also called for Grumman to provide a broad base of management support to the Space Station Program Office in the areas of program control and management; information systems; operations; program requirements and assessment; and safety, reliability, and quality assurance. (NASA Release 87110; WSJ, July 3/87; B Sun, July 3/87)
A NASA report, titled "Space Science Operations Management Concepts Study," was submitted to the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. The report, prepared by a 60member study team of personnel from NASA Headquarters, field centers, other Federal agencies, and university officials, examined options for the management of Space Station science. (NASA Note to Editors, Oct 1/1987)
NASA announced formation of a group of scientists to examine potential Space Station activities, with the aim ofh)0*0*0*reducing the time between experiment concept development and publishable results. Chaired by Dr. David C. Black, NASA Headquarters Space Station chief scientist, the group was made up of scientists and researchers from NASA, the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, universities, and the private sector. (NASA Release 8727)
NASA issued Requests for Proposals to U.S. industry for a detailed design and construction of a permanently habitable Space Station. The two options proposals were due by July 21, 1987. Option one was for a phased program calling for a permanentlyh)0*0*0*tended Space Station to be operational by 1996. Option two was the enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. (NASA Release 8765; LA Times, Apr 25/87; NY Times, Apr 25/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
NASA announced that it, together with the Universities Space Research Association, in Columbia, Maryland, and the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence in Space Data and Information Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new research facility would serve as the nerve center for a network of researchers from leading universities and from industry computer science departments. The emphasis would be on research in areas of potential longterm application to NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 8770)
The Soviet Union launched another cargo ship with supplies for the space station Mir. According to Tass, the cargo ship Progress 30, the third supply ship launched since cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Alexander Laveikin had occupied the space station in February `"1987, was functioning normally after the launch. (LA Times, May
NASA issued a request for proposal to U.S. industry for a program support contractor to assist the NASA Space Station Program Office, in Washington, D.C., with development of the Space Station. (NASA Release 878)
The Christian Science Monitor cited Soviet news agency TASS as reporting that the two Soviet cosmonauts aboard Soyuz TM2 had successfully linked up with the Soviet space station Mir. CSM, Feb 9/87)
The United States and potential foreign partners agreed to resume negotiations aimed at building a Space Station in the 1990s. After a twoday meeting between representatives from the United States, Canada, Japan, and the 11nation European Space Agency, agreement was reached that the project would remain a civilian endeavor. NASA negotiators emphasized, however, that they saw no conflict between the "peaceful purposes" of Space Station and potential use by the Pentagon for "nonaggressive" activities. h)0*0*0*NY Times, Feb 13/87; USA Today, Feb 13/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and European Space Agency (ESA) Director General Reimar Luest announced that the Space Shuttle would be used for the launch of the joint NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the Sun in October 1990. At the same time, they announced that the launch, also from the Space Shuttle, of the Galileo mission to Jupiter had been moved up to October/November 1989. Since the distance to the Sun is considerably shorter than to Jupiter, the Ulysses spacecraft would begin to transmit data in 1994, a year earlier than the Galileo spacecraft. (NASA Release 8751) 0*0*0*April 6: NASA selected Boeing Computer Services Company, Seattle, Washington, for negotiating a technical and management information system contract in support of the Space Station program. (NASA Release 8752)
NASA released a report, requested by the U.S. Congress, on the extendedduration Space Shuttle orbiter. The report examined key aspects of a program that would allow the Space Shuttle to perform Earthorbital missions for as long as 16 days. An extendedduration orbiter, according to the report, would be of great benefit for space science and technology. It also could prove useful in developing experiments and crew procedures in preparation for the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87174)
NASA announced selection of the Astronautics Division of the Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, in Sunnyvale, California, for the design, development and implementation of the Software Support Environment (SSE) for the Space Station. The SSE contract was to be managed by the Space Station Program Office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 87107)
NASA announced plans to study the feasibility of building an untended rocket to carry heavy materials for use in Space Station construction. The proposed concept calls for a space freighter capable of carrying more than three times as much cargo as the Space Shuttle. The vehicle would use the same type of solid fuel boosters as the Space Shuttle. NASA surmised that such a vehicle, whose estimated costs were put at $1.5 billion, could be delivered in 1993. (H Chron, Aug 6/87; H Post, Aug 6/87; W Times, Aug 6/87; USA Today, Aug 6/87)
President Ronald Reagan signed into law a $9.6 billion authorization bill that provided NASA full funding to begin work on the Space Station. (W Post, Oct 31/87)
A Soyuz TM3, carrying Colonel Yuri V. Romanenko and two fellow Soviet cosmonauts, Aleksander P. Aleksandrov and Anatoly Levchenko, parachuted to Earth about 50 miles from the town of Arkalyk in Soviet Kazakhstan. The three returned from the Soviet space station Mir, where Romanenko had set a new record of 326 days in orbit. (NY Times, Dec 30/87)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Canadian Science Minister Frank Oberle approved the agreement on Canadian participation in the U.S. Space Station program. The terms of the preliminary agreement were spelled out in a memorandum of understanding worked out by negotiators from NASA and the Canadian Ministry of State for Science and Technology. The agreement called for cooperation between the two nations in the detailed design, development, operation, and use of the Space Station. The agreement would then be submitted for approval to the governments of the two countries. (NASA Release 87182; NY Times, Dec 12/87)
The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz TM4 from Baikonur Space Center in Soviet Central Asia. The spacecraft, scheduled to dock with the Soviet space station Mir on December 23, 1987, carried three Soviet cosmonauts: mission commander Vladimir Titov, flight engineer Musakhi Manarov, and research scientist Anatoly Levchenko. They were expected to work together with the crew already aboard Mir for about a week, then Levchenko would return to Earth with Yuri Romanenko, who had been in the space station for 322 days. The new crew aboard Mir was expected to remain for a year, breaking Romanenko's record. (B Sun, Dec 22/87 & Dec 29/87; CSM, Dec 30/87; LA Times, Dec 26/87; NY Times, Dec 22/87, Dec 27/87, Dec 29/87; P Inq, Dec 22/87, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87)
NASA awarded contracts to the four aerospace firms it had selected on December 1, 1987, to design, develop, test, evaluate, and deliver the components and systems comprising the proposed crewtended Space Station, planned for orbit in the mid1990s. The contracts issued covered Phase I, the already approved elements of the Space Station program. Phase II would cover any potentially needed enhancements of the Space Station's capabilities. The four companies selected, each to perform a unique but interdependent portion of the total program, were Boeing Aerospace Company, Huntsville, Alabama; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, with locations in Huntington Beach, California and Houston, Texas; General Electric Company, AstroSpace Division, with locations in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania and East Windsor, New Jersey; and Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California. (NASA Release 87177; NASAh)(0*0*0*Release 87187; C Trib, Dec 2/87; LA Times, Dec 2/87; NY Times, Dec 2/87; WSJ, Dec 2/87; W Post, Dec 2/87)
NASA announced that it was proceeding toward design and development of a Space Station that would establish a permanent U.S. human presence in space by the mid1990's. It would seek proposals from industry for a phased development of the Space Station, including estimates for an enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. NASA reported that the first phase of the Space Station development, the revised baseline configuration, which would provide an initial, permanently habitable research capability by 1996, had been approved by the President. It would include a laboratory and habitation modules, four resource nodes, a polar orbiting platform, and experiment provisions outside of the pressurized modules. (NASA Release 8750; LA Times, Apr 4/87)
The Soviet Union launched into orbit a Soyuz TM3 with two Soviet cosmonauts and a Syrian space traveler aboard. The liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome, in Soviet Kazakhstan, was the Soviet Union's third crewtended space launch since the U.S. Space Shuttle explosion on January 28, 1986. The Soyuz TM3, piloted by Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Alexandrov, was scheduled to dock with the Soviet Mir space station after two days of orbiting around the Earth. The Syrian space traveler, Lieutenant Colonel Mohammed Faris, was the second Arab in space. The first was the Saudi Prince Sultan bin Salman, a nephew of Saudi Arabia's King Fahd. Prince Sultan bin Salman was a payload specialist aboard the (#U.S. Shuttle Discovery in 1985. (H Chron, July 22/87)
NASA announced that in the next three years it would reduce Shuttle use by launching only 19 space flights. During the same time, it would launch 49 satellites on untended rockets. About 30 nonmilitary payloads originally planned to be carried into orbit by the Shuttle through 1995, will now be carried on untended rockets. NASA said that it would launch five science missions in 1989, some with international cooperation. Four of these missionsthe Magellan, to map Venus; the Hubble Space Telescope, in cooperation with the European Space Agency; and the ASTRO1 ultraviolet observatory and Galileo, in cooperation with Germany to make a comprehensive survey of Jupiter and its moonswould fly on the Shuttle. A fifth mission, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) toh)"0*0*0*investigate cosmic background noise, was to launch on a Delta. Another scheduled Shuttle launch was the cooperative ESA/NASA Ulysses mission to observe the polar region of the Sun. From 1990 through 1995, NASA expected to accelerate deployment of other space science missions by fully utilizing expendable launch vehicles. For example, NASA anticipated Delta launches of a Roentgen Satellite in February 1990 and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer in August 1991. (NASA Release 87158; LA Times, Oct 23/87; NY Times, Oct 23/87; W Times, Oct 23/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
NASA began a threeday ground system test of the scientific instruments to be carried on the Hubble Space Telescopeh) 0*0*0*(HST). The five scientific instruments to be carried aboard the HST were the widefield and planetary camera, the high resolution spectrograph, the faint object spectrograph, the high speed photometer, and a faint object camera. (NASA Release 8735)
Despite the efforts of Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin, who had tended the space station since February 7, 1987, the first attempts to dock the Soviet Union's Kvant space module with the space station Mir failed. The Kvant, a selfcontained astronomical observatory, was to be the first experimental module to link with Mir. (NY Times, Apr 10/87; W Times, Apr 9/87)
NASA announced that on June 15, 1987, Dr. JohnDavid F. Bartoe began a 2year appointment as Chief Scientist of the Space Station program, advising the Associate Administrator on program plans, policies, and userrelated requirements. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Bartoe served with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in a variety of positions, most recently as Head of the Solar Spectroscopy section, Space Science Division. He expected to return to the NRL at the end of the Chief Scientist appointment. (NASA Release 87103)
Appearing before the Los Angeles World Affairs Council, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that building the Space Station was critical to the United States regaining initiative in space. "It is no longer a question of whether we should have longterm goals in space," Fletcher said. "The question is can we afford not to lead." (LA Times, Nov 7/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
A Soviet Proton launch vehicle carrying a Soyuz TM6 spacecraft, with three cosmonauts on board, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The threeman Soyuz crew, which included an Afghan and a Soviet physician, was scheduled to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station on the weeklong mission. The physician, Valery Polyakov, was to remain aboard Mir after the departure of his Soyuz crewmates and continue monitoring the health of the Mir cosmonauts, who were in the eighth month of a recordbreaking yearlong endurance mission. (FBISSov88168, Aug 30/88; SSR 1988 075A; UPI, Aug 30/88; W Post, Aug 30/88; CSM, Aug 30/88; P Inq, Aug 30/88)
Margaret G. Finarelli was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective December 12. Finarelli had been serving as Director of the Policy Division in the Office of Space Station. (NASA Release 88164)
NASA concluded negotiations with the ESA on a bilateral memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the design, development, operation, and use of the permanently crewtended civil international Space Station complex. Under the terms of the new MOU, ESA would provide the Columbus laboratory module to the international Space Station complex. This permanently attached, pressurized module would support approximately 40 single equipped racks for payloads and storage. ESA would also provide an untended, freeflying polar platform for Earth observation experiments, complementing the polar platform under development by the United States. As a third element, ESA would provide a mantended free flyer (MTFF) designed to accommodate longduration microgravity applications in the fields of fluid physics, life, and material sciences. (NASA Release 8844)
NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project with Germany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescope also maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro1, a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the study of Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS35 in November 1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights for September 1990a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and the first Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS1)0*mission. The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the projected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to study the Sun and its environment remained at the projected
The Canadian government announced that it would become an active partner in the international Space Station Program and would provide equipment worth $1.2 billion to the project. Canada's main equipment contribution to the Space Station would be a roving space robot that would serve as the "arms and legs" of the Station. The robot, which would be comparable to but more advanced than the "Canadarm" currently carried on U.S. Space Shuttles, would be a critical tool in Station construction and docking activities. In return for Canada's contribution, Canadian astronauts would be entitled to sixmonth tours of duty on the Station every two years. Canadian space officials announced plans to expand their astronaut corps in anticipation of the Canadian presence on the Space Station. (Tor Star, Apr 22/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received the International Technology Institute's (ITI) William F. Rockwell, Jr. Medal at the International Congress on Technology and Technology Exchange banquet, in Pittsburgh. The Rockwell Medal, awarded annually to a maximum of three individuals from different continents, recognizes contributions toward the generation, transfer, and application of technology for the betterment of mankind. (NASA Release 88139)'%0*October 20: Two of the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station took a fourhour spacewalk to replace a faulty component on an xray telescope attached to the station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, on a yearlong endurance mission aboard Mir, wore a new spacesuit design intended to increase flexibility. C Trib, Oct 21/88)
An untended Soviet spacecraft carrying fuel, food, equipment, and mail, docked with the Mir space station. Two Soviet0*cosmonauts, on a long duration mission, tended Mir. The cosmonauts, Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, arrived at the space station in December and were expected to stay in space for about a year, breaking the 325day endurance record set the previous year by Yuri Romanenko. (FBISSov88108, Jun 6/88; SSR 1988 038A; AP, May
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher voiced alarm over the House of Representative's resolution for funding of NASA's fiscal year 1989 budget. Speaking in Washington before a symposium on "Science Education: A Challenge for Excellence in America's Future," Dr. Fletcher issued his toughest warning yet about the consequences of reducing the NASA funding levels proposed by the Administration. The Administrator warned that "the civil space program will be stopped in its tracks" if the House funding figure of $10.2 billioncut by over $1 billion from the Administration proposalwere to be passed. More specifically, Dr. Fletcher predicted the reduced budget would kill the Space Station program and lead to the abrogation of several international commitments in space science and applications. (NASA Release 8860).
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
A Soyuz TM7 spacecraft, carrying a joint SovietFrench crew, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, for a monthlong tour in the Mir space station. With French President Franois Mitterand in attendance, the threeman crew, which included French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, lifted off from Baikonur on the second FrenchSoviet crewtended mission. '(0*Chretien had also been aboard the first joint mission in July 1983. The threeman Soyuz crew planned to join the twoman crew, aboard Mir since January, to perform a series of scientific experiments. Additionally, Chretien was scheduled to become the first West European to perform a spacewalk. (FBISSov88228; SSR 1988 104A; NY Times, Nov 27/88; W Post, Nov 27/88; CSM, Nov 28/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
NASA issued the newest update of its mixedfleet manifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launch vehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changes made to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launch windows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be a crucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" the Nation's space program. The proposed budget included funds to increase the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off" the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up of funding for Space Station hardware development was also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandment of development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation of that program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technology were not approved, the necessary technological foundation for future achievements would not be built, and the goal of longterm U.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream." (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 8831; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times Mar 23/88; LA Times Mar 23/88)
E. Ray Tanner was appointed Director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tanner had been serving as Manager of the Space Station Projects Office, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August 1988. Prior to that he was Deputy Director for Space Systems in the Science and Engineering Directorate. (NASA Release 88175; MSFC Release 88178)
NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date of December 1989. The earlier date was made possible following reassessment of a variety of factors, including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the period. (NASA Release 88143)
NASA and the ESA announced the selection of scientific investigations to be conducted on two spacecraft as part of a joint NASAESA solar terrestrial research program. More than 130 U.S. scientists were scheduled to participate in the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster missions. Two spacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instruments supplied by both ESA and NASA. The Cluster mission, involving a set of four satellites, was planned for launch on an ESA Ariane launch vehicle in December 1995. The Cluster would investigate the space plasma threedimensional microphysics phenomena in Earth's0*magnetic field environment, using four identical spacecraft in polar orbits. SOHO, planned for launch by NASA on the Shuttle or on an expendable launch vehicle in March 1995, would be placed at the EarthSun La Grangian point and investigate the physical processes that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to the solar wind. The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of the International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a major international program in solar and space physics organized in 1985 by NASA, the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 8848)
An untended Soviet Progress38 supply spacecraft, bound for the Mir space station, was launched from the Baikonur launch facility. The Tass News Agency reported the Progress38 ferried "expendable materials and various loads" for use by the Mir threeman crew. (SSR 1988 083A; C Trib, Sep 11/88;
The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
President Ronald Reagan christened the planned international Space Station "Freedom," to symbolize the values shared by the U.S. and its allies. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the name "Freedom" was recommended by NASA officials and representatives of Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency, project participants. (WH Release, Jul 18/88; UPI, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88)
Negotiations were completed among the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan on the framework for international cooperation in the Space Station program. Under the agreements, the United States would provide the overall Space Station framework: operating subsystems, including life support and 75 kilowatts of power; laboratory and habitat modules; and a freeflying platform that would be placed in polar orbit for Earth observation. Canada would provide a Mobile Servicing System, which would be used in conjunction with the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of Space Station elements. Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module, a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The European Space Agency would provide a pressurized laboratory module, which would be permanently attached to the crewtended base; a freeflying polar platform to work together with the U.S. polar platform; and an astronauttended free flyer to be serviced at the crewtended base. The United States anticipated spending approximately $16 billion (fiscal year 1989 dollars) to develop Space Station hardware. The total foreign commitment to the Space Station was in excess of $7 billion. Furthermore, the partners would cover more than 25 percent of the Space Station's expected annual operating costs throughout the 2030 year life of the program. Signature of the agreements was expected later in the summer. (NASA Release 8874)
Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reached agreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the permanently crew tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency would serve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU. Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)a permanently attached, pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The pressurized portion of the JEM would provide a shirtsleeve environment for the Space Station crew to perform research activities. The JEM's exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth observation, communications, advanced technology development and other activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experiment logistics module, which would provide transportation and storage of logistics items, would be transported to the Station by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8870)
A Soviet Proton launch vehicle, carrying a Soyuz TM5 spacecraft with a threeman SovietBulgarian crew, took off from the Baikonur launch facility. The Soyuz TM5 crew was to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station. The launch, which occurred at 10:04 a.m. EDT, was the first Soviet crewtended launch in 1988. The Mir visit was to be a 10day mission in which the visiting astronauts would perform over 40 experiments aboard the station. The two astronauts aboard Mir were to remain after the departure of their colleagues and continue a yearlong endurance0*mission that was expected to break the record established by Yuri Romanenko in 1987. (FBISSov88110, Jun 8/88; SSR 1988 048B; NY Times, Jun 8/88; B Sun, Jun 8/88)
After a tense 24hour delay of deorbit burn, a Soviet Soyuz TM5 capsule carrying two cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia. The Soyuz TM5, returning to Earth from a weeklong visit to the Mir space station, experienced premature shutdowns of its reentry motor during the first two deorbit burn attempts. The first shutdown had been caused by a malfunction in the automatic guidance system, whereas the second failure resulted from improper resetting of the flight computer. The problem was considered by some U.S. space experts as potentially life threatening because the Soyuz was estimated to have only 24 to 48 hours of oxygen left and a limited amount of fuel with which to attempt a third deorbit'"0*burn. The mission had been noted for the participation of an Afghani cosmonaut and the transfer to the Mir space station of a physician crew member. (FBISSOV88175, Sep 9/88; AP, Sep 7/88; NY Times, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 7/88; WSJ, Sep 7/88; W Times, Sep 7/88; B Sun, Sep 7/88)
In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
Thomas L. Moser was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Station by the head of the Space Station Office, James B. Odom. Moser had been serving as Director of the Space Station Freedom program in Reston, Virginia, since October 1986. (NASA Release 88163) During November: NASA continued its multifaceted program of observation of Supernova 1987a, using untended scientific balloons and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO): NASA launched two heavylift balloons from Australia in November to continue scientific studies of Supernova 1987a. A 28.4 million cubic foot balloon was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 1100 pounds, to measure gammaray and hard xray emissions. A second, 29.47 million cubic foot balloon also was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 3700 pounds, that would measure gammaray emissions, but over a different energy band. These scientific missions were part of the overall NASA Balloon Program managed by the Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 88154; MSFC Release 88160) ')0*NASA deployed the C141 Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), to observe Supernova 1987a. KAO completed a fiveweek deployment to New Zealand to conduct high altitude observations of charged particle and heavy metals emissions produced in the explosion of the giant blue star, first detected in February 1987. The
NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
NASA announced that Andrew J. Stofan, Associate Administrator for the Space Station, would retire from the Agency on April 1. Stofan's career with NASA spanned nearly 30 years. He had directed the Space Station program since June 1986. During his tenure, the program underwent a major cost review which culminated in an Administrationapproved plan to develop the Space Station in two phases. Stofan also oversaw the establishment of the Space Station program office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 8816)
NASA unveiled plans for an ambitious program to study the Earth as a single ecological system, the Los Angeles Times reported. Called the Earth Observing System, the U.S. portion of the multinational project would cost well above $2 billion and would use a wide range of orbiting laboratories, including free flying platforms and facilities aboard the international space station. The heart of the program would include four platformstwo from the United States, one from Europe, and one from Japanthat would be launched into polar orbit around the Earth by the participating countries. The program, which was still in the planning stage, was described by NASA science division spokesman Charles Redmond as "a critical element in NASA's strategic plan." LA Times, Mar 23/88)
Two Soviet cosmonauts and a French astronaut returned to Earth aboard a Soyuz TM6 capsule, following the completion by the Soviets of a record breaking yearlong endurance mission aboard the Mir space station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, launched into space on December 21, 1987, and French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, successfully landed their capsule in Kazakhstan. Titov and Manarov were to undergo extensive medical tests to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness. (FBISSov88245, Dec 21/88; NY Times, Dec 22/88; W Post, Dec 22/88; WSJ, Dec 22/88; CSM, Dec 22/88; B Sun, Dec 22/88; P Inq, Dec 22/88)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
Three Soviet cosmonauts who had been occupying the Mir Space Station returned to Earth aboard a Soyuz TM7 capsule. The three cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia near the city of Dzheskazgan. The departure of the Mir crew marked the first time that the station has been left untended since crew rotations began in February 1987. Soviet space program officials announced that two new experiment modules would be attached to the station in anticipation of the arrival in August of the next crew. (FBISSov89080, Apr 27/89; UPI, Apr 27/89; P Inq, Apr 28/89; B Sun, Apr
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
The Soviet Union announced that it would suspend occupation of the Mir Space Station for at least three months following the return to Earth of its current crew in late April. The reason given by the Soviets for the abandonment of the station, which had been continuously occupied since February 1987, was a delay in the manufacture of additional pressurized modules to be attached to the facility. Western experts were interpreting the temporary shutdown of the station as a possible costcutting measure and another setback to the Soviet space program following the loss of its twin Mars probes during the last several months. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine was also reporting that degradation of the station's solar power arrays was causing an electrical shortage. (NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89, 15/89; LA Times, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 14/89; W Times, Apr 14/89; P Inq, Apr 19/89)
NASA director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, Ray Tanner, announced his resignation from the space agency, citing new ethics rules on contract work by former Federal employees as the reason for his departure. Tanner was a 30year NASA veteran.(Wash Tech, Jul/89)
Thomas L. Moser, acting Associate Administrator for the Space Station Freedom program, announced he was leaving NASA0*effective May 13. Moser, appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for the Freedom program in December, had been serving as the acting Associate Administrator since April 30. (NASA Release 8972, May
Two Soviet astronauts were successfully launched aboard a Soyuz TM8 capsule for a rendezvous with the Mir Space Station. The Soyuz TM8 capsule was launched aboard a Proton launch vehicle emblazoned with several commercial advertisements. Cosmonauts Alexander S. Viktorenko and Alexander A. Serebrov were scheduled to reoccupy the Mir station during a sixmonth tour and supervise the attachment of two new modules to the facility. Mir had been left unoccupied since April 27 because of funding constraints and delays in manufacturing of the new modules. (FBISSov89171, Sep 6/89; SSR 1989 071A; W Post, Sep 6/89; WSJ, Sep 6/89; C Trib, Sep 6/89; P Inq, Sep 6/89)
Great Britain and the Soviet Union signed an agreement to send a British astronaut to the Mir Space Station aboard a Soviet crew rotation flight in 1991. (USA Today, Jun 30/89; W Times, Jun 30/89; LA Times, Jun 30/89)
NASA rolled out a fullscale mockup of the proposed ShuttleC, a new heavy lift launch vehicle based on Space Shuttle technology. The 115foot mockup, constructed in a Hangar at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was put on display in an effort to gain support for funding of the $1.5 billion ShuttleC development program in the fiscal year 1991 Federal budget. The ShuttleC would be an untended launch vehicle that would fly "piggyback" on the standard Shuttle SRM and external tank assembly and would have a greater payload capacity than the current Shuttles. ShuttleC could substitute for the crewtended0*Shuttles in the launching of components for Space Station Freedom. AP, Apr 18/89; LA Times, Apr 19;/89)
NASA issued a request for proposals to design and build a groundbased radar that would quantify and characterize debris orbiting between 180 to 360 miles above Earth. The radar would have the capability of detecting debris as small as 1 centimeter in diameter, contrasted with the 10centimeter capability of current radar systems. The data gathered by the orbital debris radar would be used in designing the permanently crewtended Space Station Freedom, which would be built to withstand as much orbital debris damage as possible. (NASA Release 898, Jan 19/89; W Times, Jan 23/89; NY Times, Jan 24/89; P Inq, Jan 29/89)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and the Ambassador of Japan to the United States H.E. Nobuo Matsunaga signed a Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the government of Japan on cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the Space Station Freedom. The agreement was signed at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. Under the agreement, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM) to the Freedom program. The JEM, to be permanently attached to the Space Station base, would consist of a pressurized laboratory module, at least two experiment0*logistics modules, and an exposed facility. (NASA Release 8932, Mar 14/89)
The Soviet Union successfully launched an untended Proton launch vehicle carrying an attachment module bound for the Mir Space Station from the Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan. The pressurized module, known as the Kvant2, contained additional crew living space as well as experiments and a "space motorcycle" intended for use in extravehicular spacewalks. (FBISSov89226, Nov 27/89; SSR 1989 093 A; NY Times, Nov 27/89; C Trib, Nov 27/89)
A report by the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) entitled "Round Trip to Orbit: Human Space Flight Alternatives" recommended construction of a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter or a Shuttlederived launch vehicle in preparation for the Space Station assembly missions of the late 1990s. Citing estimates of Space Shuttle reliability of 97 to 99 percent, OTA warned that there was an 88 percent likelihood that another Shuttle orbiter would be lost before Space Station construction is completed. The OTA report stated: "Buying more orbiters would increase the resiliency of the Space Shuttle system...[and] its ability to recover rapidly from loss of another orbiter or any other event that delays launches. The Shuttle orbiter fleet is likely to continue to suffer occasional attrition." (AP, Aug 2/89; UPI, Aug 2/89; W Post, Aug
NASA announced it had awarded Ford Aerospace a $500 million contract to modernize its Mission Control Center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, and build a new control center for future Space Station operations. (NASA Release, Sep 7/89; Reuters, Sep 7/89; NY Times, Sep 7/89; W Post, Sep 7/89)
An untended Soviet Progress M2 module bound for the Mir Space Station was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Central Asia. In addition to ferrying supplies to the Mir crew, the Progress also carried a U.S. experiment designed to test crystal growth in weightlessness. (FBISSov89243, Dec 20/89; SSR 1989 099 A; W Post, Dec 21/89; WSJ, Dec 21/89; P Inq, Dec 21/89; W Times, Dec 21/89; CSM, Dec 22/89)
Two Soviet cosmonauts successfully docked with the Mir Space Station and began activating the facility's systems after a fourmonth hiatus. (FBISSov89173, Sep 8/89; SSR 1989 071A; AP, Sep 8/89; UPI, Sep 8/89)
Acting NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of former Space Shuttle astronaut William B. Lenoir as Associate Administrator for Space Station. Lenoir replaced James B. Odom, who was retiring. Truly also announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs as Director, Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 8877, May 18/89; UPI, May 18/89; AP, May 19/89; NY Times, May 19/89; W Post, May 19/89; WSJ, May 19/89; LA Times, May 19/89; W Times, May 23/89)
NASA announced that Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, had won a $297 million contract to develop the Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS), a space robot that would help construct and maintain the Space Station Freedom. Development of the robot was expected to take nine years and would include flight testing of a prototype aboard the Space Shuttle. Once deployed during an early Space Station construction mission, the mobile robot would be controlled remotely by astronauts from within the station, thereby minimizing the amount of "spacewalk" activity that astronauts would need to perform. (W Times, Apr 21/89; B Sun, Apr 21/89)
The National Research Council (NRC) recommended that NASA abandon plans to participate in development of a commercial orbiting space laboratory that had been promoted by the Reagan administration and some members of Congress. In recommending against the development of the Industrial Space Facility, the NRC argued that experiments foreseen for the space laboratory could be performed aboard the Space Shuttle and on Shuttlebased facilities during the period leading to the completion of Space Station Freedom. (NY Times, Apr 12/89; W Post, Apr 12/89)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced his resignation, effective April 8. Dr. Fletcher had served as NASA Administrator for a total of nine years, from April 1971 to May 1977, and again since May 1986, following the Challenger accident. Dr. Fletcher, who reluctantly agreed to return to the Agency at the request of President Ronald Reagan, supervised the adoption of a new management system that put greater emphasis on quality control and safety for the Shuttle program. During his second term, Dr. Fletcher had oversight of the redesign of the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters and successfully lobbied Congress for continuation of the Space Station program. In his resignation announcement, Dr. Fletcher said he now felt that he could "safely place the leadership of NASA in another's hands." NASA Deputy Administrator Dale Myers served as Acting Administrator until a successor was named by President George Bush. (NASA Release 8936, Mar 21/89; AP, Mar 21/89; UPI, Mar 21/89; NY Times, Mar 22/89; WSJ, Mar 22/89; USA Today, Mar 22/89; B Sun, Mar 22/89; LA Times, Mar 22/89)
Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope for the first time had observed a faint object, a quasar billions of light years from Earth. Officials hoped that study of the image, known to astronomers as UM675, would give clues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe was born. (W Times, Nov 5/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
NASA released a call for proposals to lease a commercially developed and owned space module, the Commercial Middeck Augmentation Module, which would ride in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle and add about 50 lockers to the orbiter's capacity. The need for greater capacity resulted from NASA's Commercial Development of Space Program, which was designed to enlarge research opportunities for private use by conducting experiments in materials processing, protein crystal growth, `"biotechnology, and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 9046; Sp News, Mar 1218/90) During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed that designs for the planned Space Station Freedom needed significant changes that would drive up the initial cost. The study found an elaborate program of preventative maintenance that would require about 2,200 hours each year for space walks by astronauts and0*begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutions included use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designed spacesuits to ease space walks, and a redesign of Space Station parts that would make them easier to repair. (NY Times, Mar 19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
NASA named William W.L. Taylor of TRW Corporation as the Chief Scientist for the Space Station Freedom Program. Taylor, who was with NASA until 1978 when he joined TRW, was the third person chosen for the twoyear assignment and the first from industry. (NASA Release 9061)
NASA announced its Integrated System Preliminary Design Review for Space Station Freedom was completed. Preliminary figures for June 1990 showed Freedom's weight to be 143,000 pounds lighter than the allocated limit of 512,000 pounds and that the housekeeping power limit of 45 kilowatts was exceeded by 15 kilowatts. A summerlong resources scrub reduced weight estimates by 130,000 pounds and housekeeping power by 13 kilowatts. "What this means," said Deputy Manager Marc Bensimon, "is that the design is maturing and converging." (NASA Release During December: NASA awarded contracts to Centennial Contractors, SPACEHAB, and Dyncorp. Centennial was given a '(0*year $5 million contract for various minor constructions, modifications, and rehabilitation projects at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, SPACEHAB received a 5year $184,236,000 contract for providing commercial middeck augmentation module services: physical and operational integration of the module and the experiments; power, cooling, data management; and crew training in six Space Shuttle flights at sixmonth intervals. Dyncorp procured a $30 million contract for technical services that included operation and maintenance of radar, telecommunications, and optical services. (NASA Release C90gg; 90157; W Times, Dec 4/90)
NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science and Technology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during a meeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environment monitoring (realtime solar wind data), Space Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle. Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for building and utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in xray and infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph, reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, and satellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90106)
NASA said that the Hubble Space Telescope, which had been plagued with problems, was discovered to have a flawed mirror, causing the $1.5 billion instrument to be "near sighted." The mirrors, which were ground into the wrong shape, rendered useless the telescope's most important scientific instrument, a widefield planetary camera designed to explore the farthest reaches of the universe. Engineers said that instruments scheduled to be attached to the telescope in 1993, 1996, and 1997 could compensate for the flaw and added that these flight schedules might be advanced. Tests were not done on the effectiveness of the mirrors before the telescope was launched because engineers felt that the checks were cost prohibitive. (P Inq, Jun 28/90; NY Times, June 28/90; W Post, Jun 28/90)
detail of a young star system known as 30 Doradus, 160,000 light years from Earth. After scientists corrected the flawed mirror problem with computer enhancement, the telescope revealed 60 of what were yet the youngest and heaviest stars known. The "star nursery," was once thought to have only one large star; the most advanced telescope prior to the Hubble telescope had raised that number to 27. (W Post, Aug 14/90; W Times, Aug 14/90; P Inq, Aug 14/90; NASA Release 90111)
NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule for Space Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of the previously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged0*on a threeweek delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. This delay threatened the highpriority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward the Sun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite. Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
Astronauts who retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility in early January said, in a press briefing, that the satellite was in worse shape than engineers had expected after its nearly 6year orbit. The conclusion was that materials used for the planned Space Station would require greater scrutiny. (W Times, Jan 31/90)
NASA's Chief Scientist William Lenoir told a Senate committee that the Agency should have performed tests on the Hubble Space Telescope's mirrors. He said that the problem could have been caught by simpler, less costly tests than the "endtoend" test, rejected because of its high cost. (Hearing before the Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Jul 10/90; B Sun, Jul 11/90; W Post, Jul 11/90; NY Times, Jul 11/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly told a panel created by President George Bush that the Agency was facing serious problems, but not what most people believed them to be. The two obstacles standing in front of the Agency, he said, were "Governmentwide practices" that encumbered connections between programs and resources and the public's misunderstanding of the proposed Space Station Freedom. The Space Station's design flaws, he added, were either solved or close to a solution, "yet public understanding is to the contrary." In a related matter, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA planned to spend $1.9 billion over the next five years on its seven centers of excellence in the area of highperformance computing. The Centers would focus on training college and graduatelevel students, thereby educating the next generation of scientists in the field. Truly, who spoke at a conference on supercomputing in September noted, "NASA needs highperformance computing. Some of our missions depend on it." (W Post, Sep 14/90; Fed CoWk, Sep 10/90)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
The Senate, in a rush to agree on the 1991 spending plan, compromised on a $1.9 billion allocation for NASA's Space Station. Said Senator Barbara Mikulski, "The space program has been increased by 13 percent so it's not as if we gouged them." W Post, Oct 17/90; AvWk, Oct 22/90)
Charles Pellerin, director of astrophysics for NASA, announced that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope mirrors could easily be fixed in a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for mid1993. The mission would require replacing the telescope's widefield planetary camera with one designed to correct the flawed mirrors. (P Inq, Aug 17/90; W Times, Aug 17/90)
In an unreleased report, NASA determined that the proposed untended ShuttleC would prove too costly for use in building the Space Station. The original plan called for 18 Shuttle flights at a cost of $1.5 billion to erect the $25 billion station. Although using the ShuttleC would reduce the number of required flights to 10 because of its more than doubled cargo space, the price tag would jump to $3.7 billion, not including the $2 billion needed to develop the vehicle. (Sp News, Feb 26Mar 4/90)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee recommended an increase of NASA's budget from $12.3 billion to $17 billion for the next year, including the $2.9 billion earmarked for continued development of the Space Station. Committee members acknowledged that the final spending plan would probably be lower but wanted to show their support despite NASA's recent problems. (P Inq, Sep 20/90)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
NASA's 1991 budget would be cut by $1 billion dollars, warned Congress. The Space Station, planned explorations of the Moon and Mars, and the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle were slated to be trimmed. Money for the Earth Observation System was earmarked for an increase. (Sp News, Mar 26Apr 1/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of Investigation created by NASA met for the first time in Washington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for the telescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allen said, "The board now has a good base of information from which to0*proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)
The Hubble Telescope failed a test on this date as scientists attempted to direct it toward stars emanating a common brightness; the telescope was able to find none. It was later discovered that the problem originated from an error in the telescopes computer guidance system, and a new program with an updated star chart was sent up. (NY Times, May 10/90; W Post, May
NASA selected investigators and science teams from 11 U.S. universities, 3 NASA centers, 3 other U.S. laboratories, and 13 foreign countries for the Saturn orbiter portion of the Cassini mission scheduled for launch in 1996. The mission would include 62 investigations for analysis of Saturn's atmosphere, its ring particles, and moons within them. The orbiter would also send a probe to Saturn's moon, Titan, and later map it. (NASA Release
NASA considered a proposal for a major repair of the Hubble Space Telescope that would include the reinstating of full observation abilities. In addition to replacing the telescope's main camera in 1993, as already planned, astronauts would also replace another device with corrective optics for light that reached other important scientific instruments. The plan called for repairing or replacing the craft's solar panels, as well, because their vibrations had interfered with many sensitive observations. (NY Times, Oct 27/90)
Soviet cosmonauts ended a 22week mission when their Soyus TM8 capsule touched down on the Kazakhstan Steppe, southeast of Moscow. The fifth mission involving a crew living aboard the 20ton Mir Space Station included dozens of scientific experiments and testing of a "space motorcycle," a oneman vehicle designed for servicing satellites. (FBIS Moscow, Tass (Eng trans) Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90; P Inq, Feb 20/90)
Scientists, after taking their first long look at the Long Duration Exposure Facility recovered by Space Shuttle Columbia in January, said the varied surfaces of the satellite showed signs of pits, scars, and discoloration in some areas while being strangely unscathed in others. The surfaces revealed no "showstoppers" however. The satellite was an experiment meant to test materials for use in building spacecraft and the Space Station. (W Post, Feb 13/86; NASA Release 9023)
Rockwell Space Operations was selected by NASA for a $814 million, 10year station operation support contract. The contract would provide support for mission, flight crew, and facility operations for the Space Station and other flight programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Mar 7/90)
NASA engineers revealed that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope were even more difficult to correct than first expected. The most vexing problem was a 20minute vibration from the solar panels every 90 minutes as the craft passed from night to day. The onboard computer's attempt to compensate for the vibration only made the problem worse. Another problem was the telescope's frequent inability to lock onto the stars that it was commanded to seek. In addition, the reaction of the spacecraft to radiation over the South Atlantic, where the Van Allen belt dips closer than usual to the Earth, was more acute than expected; numerous data were lost and false computer signals were given. It was hoped that all three problems could be remedied via modifications to the telescope's computer. (NY Times, Jun 15/90; P Inq, Jun 15/90; B Sun, Jun 15/90)
The first scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view of the heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of a supernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in a distant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole. Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been offandon. The navigation problem had been0*narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus would be delayed two or three weeks. (NY Times, Aug 30/90; W Times, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90117; 90118) During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing and directing untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, and spacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire from the Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and be involved with daytoday processing of Space Shuttle vehicles. (NASA Release 90116; 90119)
The Galileo spacecraft, launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis October 18, 1989, fired its thrusters so it could come closer to Earth and use our planet's gravity to slingshot in December toward the Sun for a 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. The'$0*flyby would mark the first time Earth had been approached by a spacecraft from Venus, or anywhere inside Earth's orbit. The craft was scheduled to study Earth during the maneuver, slingshot the Sun and study our planet again on the return trip in 1992, and then study Jupiter's atmosphere for 2 more years after reaching the planet. The loop around the solar system was necessary because the rocket that launched the craft was too weak to propel Galileo directly on its 2year trip to Jupiter. (Fla Today, Nov 14/90; P Inq, Nov 14/90)
The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA's 1991 budget. The bill drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiative and cut $863.6 million from the planned Space Station. The measure was to go to a conference committee to iron out differences with the House appropriations bill before being sent to President George Bush. (WSJ Oct 4/90)
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
Engineers located two leaks in the Space Shuttle's fuel line that they determined could easily be fixed and stated that flights would resume soon. The problems, said William Lenoir, NASA's flight director, did not appear to be a result of any design flaw; he added that eight of the nine scheduled missions would likely be flown this year. In the meantime, investigators from a sixmember board of investigation created by NASA July 2 were seeking to find what had gone wrong with the Hubble Space Telescope. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who headed the board, promised a congressional committee that they would pinpoint the problem and fix responsibility. The investigation, he said, would be "very embarrassing to someone or some group." (W Post, Jul 14/90; NY Times, Jul 14/90)
The Galileo spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on October 18, 1989, looped 10,000 miles above the planet Venus in what NASA engineers termed a "gravity assisted maneuver" that increased its speed by almost 5,000 mph for its trek to Jupiter. After taking 16 pictures of Venusian cloud and wind patterns while searching for lightning, the craft was scheduled to take more pictures of the planet during its return journey. The second set of photographs, which were to be coupled with sensors, were to detect dust, infrared and visible light, and electrically charged particles. Scientists determined that the spacecraft would be within range of the Earth and able to send back data, in October, using its small antenna. It was expected to reach Jupiter in December 1995. (P Inq, Feb 12/90; B Sun, Feb 11/90; NY Times, Feb 11/90)
NASA canceled a contract with TRW Corporation for the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, aka Space Tug, a spacecraft intended to lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and a proposed Xray telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for the cancellation was recent budget pressure facing NASA. (WSJ, `"Jun 8/90; W Times, Jun 8/90; Sp News, Jun 1117/90; NASA Release
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
NASA scientists reported that despite its flaws, the Hubble Space Telescope was sending back some clear pictures, better than any a ground telescope could produce. The latest photographs of Jupiter and Pluto were better than any ever taken, but until the telescope's "near sightedness" was corrected images of distant, faint objects would continue to be unclear. (W Post, Oct 5/90; NY Times, Oct 5/90)
The Galileo spacecraft came to within 590 miles of Earth and received a push from Earth's gravity that increased its speed from 67,000 m.p.h. to 78,000 m.p.h. This was the first of two gravity assisted passes by Earth that were planned for the craft, enabling it to reach Jupiter in December 1995. It collected numerous data from Earth, as it would again on its second pass. (CSM Dec 10/90; NY Times, Dec 9/90)
Engineers at NASA ran tests of the Hubble Space Telescope to determine if vibrations were interfering with precise pointing at specific stars. The problem had been discovered two days earlier when sensors locked on to a "guide star" to orient the0*spacecraft. Engineers noticed a slight wobble, one sixhundredth of a degree up and down every minute, that interfered with both fine pointing mechanisms and star observations. (NY Times, May
A report released by NASA, concerning plans for the Space Station Freedom, said that 3,700 hours of maintenance would be required annually to keep it running. The final figure from the 6month study was up from the 2,200 hours that a preliminary version had given in March and dwarfed the original goal of 130 hours. The most alarming statistic was that 6,200 hours of maintenance would be needed before the station could even be habitable. "The significance is that there's no one up there to do this," said Dr. William J. Fisher, an astronaut who headed the 12member panel that did the estimate. (NY Times, Jul 21/90; W Post, Jul 21/90; WSJ, Jul 23/90)
Ground controllers adjusted commands on the Hubble Space Telescope for focusing on stars. Although other problems existed wobble from solar panels on the telescope and vibration as it went through spacethe first pictures were taken and sent to Earth on this day. (NY Times, May 21/90; W Times, May 21/90; W `"Post, May 21/90)
NASA's Office of Commercial Programs sponsored plans to develop a system for launching and recovering commercial spaceborne experiments. Assisted by numerous universities, the Commercial Experiment Transporter would be launched on an expendable rocket and contain both a recovery system and a service module. The two would then separate so that the experiments aboard the recovery system could land in the United States while those not requiring recovery could remain in orbit. (NASA Release 9083)
NASA announced the selection of 84 proposals for Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Aiming to stimulate technological innovation from small business, the contracts were allowed to reach $500,000 over a twoyear period. (NASA Release 90152) '%0*November 27: The sixmember Hubble Optical Systems Board of Investigation, formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena, California, released its final report, cumulating a 5month study. The report stated that both NASA and the PerkinElmer Corporation, then known as Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirror that prevented the Hubble Space Telescope from distinguishing very faint objects. Lower management at the Corporation discounted any information that conflicted with certified procedures for testing the mirror with newly designed equipment. Upper management at PerkinElmer and at NASA, the report went on, were left unaware of potential problems the mirror might have had in 1981. Dr. Allen and Leonard Fisk, NASA's Chief Scientist, agreed that NASA management operated under different procedures then and would have caught the problem in 1990. (NY Times, Nov 28/90; W Post, Nov 28/90) During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation held their first "Technology 2000" conference in Washington, D.C., to encourage marketing of space technology. Among the innovations showcased were an implant device for releasing insulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument called the "Video Harp"; a system to allow the hearing impaired to locate loud noises such as sirens; a digital audio signal processing system for fuller, more realistic sound called the "Convolvotron"; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System; and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with stepbystep instructions to a student. Hightech gear only a few years away, said USA Today, included a spaceage washer and dryer, refrigerator, and gloves. USA Today, Nov 29/90)
NASA responded to a request issued August 7 by the Office of Management and Budget asking for various Federal agencies to outline the effects of a $100 billion cut in the 1991 budget. The report submitted by NASA warned of a halt in Space Shuttle flights, suspended development of the Space Station, and delayed launch of the Mars Observer spacecraft. Although not expected, cuts acrosstheboard were a possible result of the GrammRudman deficit control law. (Sp News, Sep 913/90)
NASA launched the first of 10 expected Shuttle flights in 1990 (flight STS32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 10day mission to orbit a Navy communications satellite and to retrieve another. The liftoff, originally scheduled for December 18, had been delayed three times because of problems with the renovated launch pad and once because of low clouds. The Navy satellite was deployed January 10. On January 12, the spacecraft closed in on and retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), an 11ton satellite, into the cargo bay, using a 50foot robotic arm. The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April 1984 to provide vital information on the design of spacecraft and NASA's Space Station, as well as other experiments. The orbiting laboratory was scheduled to be recovered 10 months after its deployment, but the nearly 5year postponement caused by scheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in a decaying orbit that was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere by March of 1990. The 57 experiments aboard the 30footlong cylindrical satellite included an array of potential space building materials being tested for reactions to radiation, extreme temperature changes, and collisions with space matter. Also tested for prolonged space exposure were optical fibers, pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experiment involving tomato seeds. Interstellar gases and cosmic radiation were also trapped in an attempt to find clues into the formation of the Milky Way and the evolution of heavier elements. For the remainder of the mission, astronauts carried out other scientific and engineering work. Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning on
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
Officials announced that an advisory committee created by Vice President Dan Quayle and the National Space Council was set up to examine how to manage future efforts in space. The committee, made up of two former congressmen, a former astronaut, and several top industry executives, was to report to the National Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that he had urged the committee's creation because of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, grounding of the Shuttle fleet, and design flaws in the proposed Space Station. (NY Times, Aug 3/90)
In an editorial entitled "Fiscal Realism at NASA," NASA was commended for its reported readiness to stress smaller, less costly missions. In this connection, the paper believed that Space Station Freedom should be scrapped as well as the Earth Observing System platforms. (CSM, Oct 1/91)
Charles A. Bowsher, comptroller general of the General Accounting Office, estimated that NASA had underestimated by $10 billion the construction cost of the Space Station because it did not include the costs of flying the Shuttle during station construction, developing the crew lifeboat, conducting scientific projects, and installing certain equipment. NASA underestimated operations costs by $24 billion because it omitted Shuttle flight costs, salaries of ground-based personnel, the cost of research, and added electrical power. (AP, Apr 30/91)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
In an article written for the Houston Post, Republican Congressman Jack Fields strongly advocated Senate support of NASA's Space Station. Referring to various uses of the Space Station program in the fields of medicine, industrial production, and basic science, he stressed the United States commitment to space exploration. (H Post, Jun 20/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that NASA engineers were trying to fix an intermittent power failure in the Hubble Space Telescope affecting one of the two ultraviolet detectors housed in the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph. As a result, some 30 percent of research planned for the spectrograph must be postponed. (B Sun, Sep 4/91; LA Times, Sep 9/91)
NASA announced that the Italian Space Agency (ASI) would design and develop two Mini Pressurized Logistics Modules for Space Station Freedom under a memorandum of understanding signed with NASA in Washington. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly signed on behalf of NASA and Luciano Guerriero, President of ASI, signed on its behalf. The two agencies also agreed to work toward expanding their relationship, including the provision of a Mini Laboratory. (NASA Release 91-200)
The media covered extensively NASA's receiving $2 billion for the planned Space Station in the House budget action but having a new launch system and the National Aerospace Plane cut drastically. The House voted to give NASA 14.3 billion in FY 1992 and the Senate later approved the compromise bill. (UPI, Oct 2/91; AP, Oct 3/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; NY Times, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 3/91; LA Times, Oct 3/91; USA Today, Oct 3/91; CSM, Oct 4/91)
An editorial in the Christian Science Monitor commended the "modest, sober plan" of NASA for the revised Space Station, saying that it would enable the United States to make progress in space and should not be judged simply on its cost. (CSM, May 7/91)
NASA announced that its Galileo spacecraft would turn and fire its on-board thrusters on July 2 to set its course for an encounter with the asteroid Gaspra in October 1991. This would be the first flyby of an asteroid. (NASA Release 91-99)
AP reported that House-Senate legislators agreed to provide $26 billion in 1992 for NASA's planned Space Station. (AP, Sep 26/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 28/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 29/91)
The Soviet bank, Moscow Narodny, financing the May Anglo-Soviet mission aboard the Soviet Mir Space Station, announced that Helen Sharman, a chemist, would be Britain's first astronaut. (AP, Feb 22/91; LA Times, Feb 23/91)
In an article on the budget proces, the Christian Science Monitor stated that despite it being a Bush Administration priority, the Space Station may go in the budget because of the deal to bring the federal deficit under control. (CSM, May 31/91)
An editorial commended NASA for being more realistic in its revised plans for a Space Station and particularly for decreasing its emphasis on the role of humans in space. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 8/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that Boeing's top space scientist, Harvey Willenberg, who had returned from a trip to the Soviet Union, was convinced from the Mir experiments he saw that NASA needed to build Space Station Freedom. The experiments in the area of microgravity were especially impressive. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 11/91)
Robert Brown and Riccardo Giacconi of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore wrote an article favoring NASA's shift toward a more balanced program of small, intermediate, and large missions. The reason was that important research goals must be pursued with appropriate tools, including large spacecraft. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope, which was proving so valuable, needed a larger spacecraft as was to be the case with the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility under development. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
An editorial in a trade journal commended Rockwell International for completing Space Shuttle Endeavour on time and under budget, stating that NASA should expect the same standards of performance with regard to the Space Station. (SP News, May 6-12/91)
Soviet media reported that two Soviet cosmonauts spent six hours on a spacewalk outside their Mir Space Station, completing the installation of two telescopic booms that would enable the transfer of solar batteries from one part of the Space Station to another. They also installed laser reflectors that could be used as beacons for unmanned space ferries and Space Shuttles arriving at Mir. (AP, Jan 26/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that volunteers in a water taste test at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center had difficulty or were unable to distinguish recycled from regular water. The recycled water came from perspiration collected in a test chamber, and in which the salts, oils, and microorganisms were subsequently removed. The recycling process was designed to be used on the Space Station to minimize need for additional water. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 10/91; W Times, Jul 19/91)
Daniel S. Greenberg, editor of Science and Government Report, a Washington newsletter, questioned the redesigned Space Station and expenditures to date on the station, citing the views of the Space Studies Board of the National Academy of Sciences. (P Inq, Apr 3/91)
The media reported that President Bush had informed two senators, Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, both on the Senate space subcommittee, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly that he would actively campaign to reverse the congressional panel's decision to scuttle the Space Station. (AP, May 23/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91)
An article by Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic  discussed arguments by foes of the Space Station and concluded that a bold new initiative in the form of a moon base was a preferable next step in space. (P Inq, Jun 18/91)
AP reported that astronaut John Blaha, commander of the Atlantis mission, said he used the post-flight news conference to express his views on the space program and the importance of the Space Station, after reading criticism of the latter. (AP, Aug 21/91)
NASA General Counsel Edward Frankle announced that Johnson Space Center's Leo Monford was NASA's Inventor of the Year. The award, to be presented March 28, was for a docking alignment system called Targeting and Reflective Alignment Concept, or TRAC. Used in combination with another of Monford's inventions, a Magnetic End Effector, it could change the shape of future robot arms, satellites, and Space Stations.
NASA revised its Space Station plan to include a centrifuge. The absence of a centrifuge in the scaled-down plan was criticized by a number of scientists, who considered it essential for the study of the effects of weightlessness. (NY Times, Apr 11/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, Boeing donated $300,000 on September 26 toward building a full-size mockup of Space Station Freedom at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, NASA's Advisory Council met following the House of Representatives vote to discuss plans for the Space Station and how to put the "A" for aeronautics back into NASA. Edward Starke Jr., chairman of the ad hoc committee on the High Speed Research Program reported on plans for a new supersonic jet to be used by the commercial aviation industry. (Htsvl Tms, Jun 8/91)
George Rhee, an astronomer at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, in an article in Nature, discussed the observed rate at which space is expanding in all directions, known as the Hubble constant. Rhee stated that new measurement had produced the relatively low value of 50 kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light-years) for the Hubble constant, agreeing with the estimate of Allan R. Sandage of the Carnegie Institution's observatories in Pasadena, California. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
The Bush Administration proposed $14.7 billion for NASA for FY1972, an increase of $1.2 billion. The proposal would allow starting a new family of rockets to lift heavy payloads. The budget would also authorize NASA and the Air Force to spend $175 million each to develop a new launching system by the end of the 1990s. The Administration also proposed almost $2 billion to continue development of a Space Station and almost $1 billion for NASA's "Mission to Planet Earth" as part of the study of global environmental change. (NY Times, Feb 5/91; USA Today, Feb 5/91; WSJ, Feb 5/91; UPI, Feb 4/91; UPI, Feb 5/91; Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
The Hubble Space Telescope proved more useful than expected despite the flaw in its mirror. The congressional appropriation of an additional $30 million in NASA's 1991 budget allowed some repairs to be made from the ground using computer processing and radio control. NASA plans additional repairs by astronauts in 1993, attaching new mirrors to the outside of the telescope. (W Times, Apr 11/91)
The press cited concern over "millions of pieces of trash zooming around in space" and the fear that they might hit the Hubbell Space Telescope or some orbiting astronauts. The concern caused work on new debris-monitoring devices and a system to warn astronauts of impending collisions with space junk so they could take evasive action. The U.S. Space Command's space surveillance network already kept track of about 6,700 pieces of larger litter at least four inches in diameter that might damage a Space Station. (AP, May 10/91; W Times, May 24/91)
UPI reported that ground had been broken for the $70 million Space Center Houston being built just outside Johnson Space Center. The center is to be an "experience center" providing visitors with a sense of daily Space Station life. (UPI, May 28/91)
Business, county, and NASA officials met in Reston, Virginia, to announce a new hotline for anyone who wanted to keep the NASA Space Station Program in Reston. The Coalition for Space Station Continuity set up the hotline, following reports that the Texas Congressional delegation urged that NASA move to Houston. (McLean/Great Falls Connection, Apr 18/91)
Resigning astronaut Dr. William F. Fisher warned that the planned $37 billion NASA Space Station could be canceled if its redesign is superficial. He stated that the Space Station needed total rethinking, adding that both Congress and a White House panel also indicated such a need. (NY Times, Jan 9/91)
NASA announced that as part of the agreement between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev during the July 30-31 Summit in Moscow, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had agreed to expand space cooperation. This is to consist of flying a U.S. astronaut on a long-duration Soviet Space Station Mir mission and a Soviet cosmonaut on a U.S. Space Shuttle mission, increasing cooperation in monitoring the global environment from space, and initiating annual consultations between the two governments on civil space issues. (NASA Release 91-122; P Inq, Aug 1/91; NY Times, Aug 1/91; AP, Aug 1/91; W Post, Aug 1/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA researchers produced various vegetables in their imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The experiment, designed to prepare for Space Station existence, could not, however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Times, Aug 18/91)
NASA announced that contrary to a news report that appeared, NASA was not planning a mission to visit the Hubble Space Telescope any earlier than late 1993. The science community had discussed this possibility because of some observed erratic behavior of the Hubble in one of the maneuvering gyros. Alternative servicing strategies were being evaluated. The announcement contradicted a Washington Post article. (NASA Release 91-121; W Post, Jul 31/91; AP, Jul 31/91; UPI, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91; P Inq, Aug 1/91; USA Today, Aug 1/91)
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
The Washington Times carried an article on Baikonur, the rocket workers' town in the Soviet Union founded by the military in the same year as the Cosmodrome, 1955. No permanent residents were registered in Baikonur, known as Leninsk, but the city had 100,000 inhabitants crammed into a 4.5 square mile area. Tables of Soviet "space firsts" and "space endurance records" were included. Another article in the same issue described Soviet efforts to sell or rent space gear, including parts of the orbiting Mir Space Station, to ease the financial situation of the space program.
According to the press, the Japanese government was angry that its participation in the proposed Space Station was threatened by congressional budget cuts. Reportedly, it issued a warning that it might refuse to contribute to U.S.-led major scientific projects in the future unless plans to build the Space Station remain intact. (NYT, May 28/91; UPI, May 28/91)
Stephanie E. Meyers, Director of the Office of Commercial Space Transportation in the Office of Transportation, set forth the role of her office and the goals for commercial space. She saw the goals as the creation of space and ground systems essential to space operations in low Earth orbit. These ground systems needed to be adequate to support launches. Second, there must be government-owned and privately-owned launch vehicles to carry freight and passengers to the Space Station. In addition, commercial space companies faced obstacles in pursuing business in this very competitive industry and fair-trade relationships needed to be established. (Washington Technology, Dec 19/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)
The media covered the House vote of 240 to 173 overturning the House Appropriations Committee action halting the Space Station program and authorizing $1.9 billion to keep the program going. The role of the White House in pressuring Congress to support the project was stressed. Several articles also commented that the action was a boon to aerospace firms. The importance of the United States maintaining its space leadership and having a permanent presence in space, despite the high costs entailed, also were emphasized. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; WSJ, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; USA Today, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; C Trin, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; Htsvl Tms, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; Birmingham News, Jun 10/91)
Nature magazine contained an article by its associate editor David Lindley that was extremely laudatory of the findings of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its flaws. He referred specifically to data obtained from the two spectrometers, designed to operate primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths to which the Earth's atmosphere is opaque. (Nature, Jun 6/91)
The Washington Post, quoting Edward Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble Space Telescope scientist, said that a computer programming error caused the Hubble to shut itself down temporarily on December 9. The problem was not considered serious and should result in losing only two days of scientific observations. NASA announced on December 12 that the Hubble resumed science data collection as of that morning and returned safely from its standby condition or safe mode, a capability built into all NASA spacecraft. In connection with the Hubble, the Baltimore Sun reported a problem with its spectrograph, which NASA believed it solved by leaving the power supply units for both ultraviolet detectors on all the time. (W Post, Dec 11/91; UPI, Dec 11/91; AP, Dec 11/91; W Times, Dec 12/91; NASA Release 91-204; C Trin, Dec 12/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; B Sun, Dec 13/91)
An article in the Washington Post commented that the House Appropriations Committee's decision to delete funding for NASA's Space Station from the 1992 budget represented a setback for a number of defense and space-related contractor companies that were counting on the project. (W Post, Jun 6/91)
Two Soviet cosmonauts who were running low on food and water left Space Station Mir in their Soyuz TM-11 capsule and flew to the port of their astrophysics lab, Kvant. Their cargo ship, Progress M-7, had failed twice to dock with Kvant. They linked their capsule with the port when the balky antenna was located. Another attempt will be made to attach Progress to Mir. (AP, Mar 26/91; W Times, Mar 27/91)
AP reported that the Council of Engineers and Scientists Organization, whose member unions represent 80,000 scientists, engineers, technical, and professional staff sent a letter to each senator endorsing the Space Station. (AP, Jul 16/91)
Grumman Corporation announced a cut of 110 more employees at its Space Station Program Support Division in Reston, Virginia. The cuts resulted from NASA's decision to reduce the scope of the Space Station project. (PR Newswire, Mar 13/91; W Times, Mar 14/91; NY Times, Mar 14/91)
Tass announced that the first British astronaut and two Soviet cosmonauts had returned safely from Mir Space Station, landing on the steppes of Kazakhstan. Soviet space officials considered British participation valuable in terms of Soviet-British cooperation, although commercially the mission failed to gain British sponsorship. (UPI, May 27/91)
The Los Angeles Times reported that in order to minimize the impact on California's economy of job losses in the aerospace industry, Governor Pete Wilson sent letters to Congress supporting the B-2 bomber and NASA's Space Station project. (LA Times, Sep 1/91)
The Houston Chronicle interviewed a number of experts concerning NASA's Space Station redesign, based on a congressional instruction that the design be reviewed. The consensus was that as much of the existing design would be kept as possible, with some experts fearing that the changes may be too timid. (H Chron, Jan 27/91)
Time published an interview with NASA Administrator Richard Truly in which various questions were asked about the Space Station. Truly justified proposed expenditures by stressing the payoff in such areas as environmental control, life-support research, power generation, and health care technologies as well as the discoveries themselves. He also stated that Mission to Planet Earth was poorly understood but promised "unbelievable benefits." (Time, Jul 1/91)
A British woman, Helen Sharman, was tentatively selected for the next international space flight with two Soviet cosmonauts to the Mir Space Station. (UPI, Apr 23/91)
Atlantis made six passes by Soviet Space Station Mir as it prepared to land. The astronauts finished experiments and tested a manual system for chasing down targets in orbit. (P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Times, Apr 10/91; B Sun, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; NY Times, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 10/91; C Trin, Apr 10/91; AP, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it was building a $337 million space robot, technically a Flight Telerobotic Servicer, to be used in constructing Space Station Freedom. The robot was to have artificial computer intelligence and video cameras on each wrist and the top of its body. (B Sun, Mar 15/91)
In their column, Jack Anderson and Dale van Atta commented on the strong efforts of Texas congressmen to have NASA move Space Station Freedom headquarters from Reston, Virginia to Houston. The headquarters were moved from Houston to Reston in 1987. The cost of such a move would be at least $26 million, and it would probably delay NASA's program at least a year. (W Post, Mar 12/91)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, awarded a $112 million contract to General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc. in San Diego, California, for launch services connected with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). SOHO is part of a cooperative effort among NASA, the European Space Agency, and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science to conduct an examination of the sun and various solar phenomena through launches in 1992 through 1995. (NASA Release C91-m)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)
In an article entitled "Freedom's Wobbly Flight," Mark L. Goldstein criticized NASA's large spending on the Space Station at the expense of other NASA programs. He gave a history of the Freedom program, its costs, and its relationship to Congress as well as the criticisms by the scientific community. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
NASA selected Ball Corporation of Muncie, Indiana, to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. (C Trin, Apr 18/91)
Major articles in the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times raised questions about NASA's proposed Space Station with regard to its cost, the functions it was supposed to perform, and the need for such space ventures in relation to other needed expenditures. The Los Angeles Times stated that Soviet Space Station experience showed that "at current levels of technology, reusable spaceships were more expensive than throwaway models." (NYT, May 26/91; LA Times, May 26/91)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
Fairfax County Board Chairman Audrey Moore argued that if NASA's Space Station management facility were moved from its Reston, Virginia headquarters, at least half of its highly skilled workers would quit, delaying the Space Station program for months or years. The questioning about the status of the Reston facility resulted from a congressional order to NASA in 1990 that it overhaul the management structure for the Space Station project. (W Post, Mar 14/91)
Eugene Kranz, Director of the Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) at Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the establishment of a Space Station Mission Operation Project Office within MOD. The new office, headed by Charles R. Lewis, was to have responsibility for the development and implementation of Space Station Freedom flight operations. (NASA Release 91-35)
The media carried the discovery, announced on August 23, by three astronomers, Donald P. Schneider of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Maarten Schmidt of the California Institute of Technology, and James E. Gunn of Princeton University of the oldest and most distant object yet found, a 900 million year-old quasar. The discovery resulted from the use of a supersensitive digital camera, developed by Gunn for the Hubble telescope. The camera was attached to Mount Palomar's Hale telescope and special filters were used. (B Sun, Aug 26/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91)
William B. Lenoir said NASA's manned space flight division must cut expenses by 3 percent each year in the next five years to save $1 billion. The last alternative would be to reduce the number of space flights but that would be "a couple of years away." Later media comments indicated that NASA's budgetary discipline and the slimming down of the Space Station plans appeared to be paying off for NASA in relation to Congress. (AP, Oct 5/91; AvWk, Oct 21/91; W Post, Oct 28/91)
According to the media, the Bush Administration was pressuring Congress to retain the appropriation for the Space Station. (NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91; USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; UPI, Jun 5/91)
An article on the Hubble Space Telescope commented that despite its flawed main mirror, the teamwork of the Hubble operational team combined with elaborate computer processing had enabled a rich scientific harvest. (CSM, Feb 20/91)
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)
The newspaper summarized the controversy over the revised NASA plans for Space Station Freedom between NASA and the National  Research Council, which maintained that the scaling back had gone too far to be valuable. (San Jose Mercury-News, Apr 2/91)
UPI quoted Krasnaya Zvesda (Red Star), the official Soviet armed forces daily, as saying that the Soviet Union would cancel one manned space mission, launch another without a flight engineer, and leave a cosmonaut on the Mir Space Station beyond his planned six-month stay to save money. (UPI, Jul 18/91)
NASA's exhibit at the 39th Paris Air Show, June 13-23, was to feature a full-scale mockup of a Space Station Freedom module. The exhibit would also feature NASA programs Mission to Planet Earth and aeronautics research. (NASA Release 91-47)
NASA planners discovered that despite the problems it encountered, Astro-1 brought back much valuable data on December 10, 1990. However, there was no money in the FY 1992 budget for Astro-2. Instead, NASA appeared to be concentrating on such priorities as the Space Station program. The Astro program is Shuttle-dependent, with the assumption that the Shuttle would provide cheap and reliable space transportation. The Astro program needs to be reexamined. (CSM, Jan 9/91)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had completed one year of operation on April 25. Joseph H. Rothenberg, Associate Director of Flight Projects for Hubble Space Telescope at Goddard, summarized the Hubble's achievements. These included the taking of various images and presentation of data from observations at key scientific meetings. Scientists planned to compensate for the spherical aberration by modifying the telescope's replacement instruments. These included the placement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II in 1993 and further servicing plans during astronaut space walks. (NASA Release - Hubble Space Telescope; LA Times, Apr 29/91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled the most detailed images of Mars ever taken. Scientists said the telescope made possible a long-term program to monitor seasonal climate and surface changes on Mars that previously had been impossible. According to the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore, the images revealed Martian features as small as 31 miles across. (W Post, Mar 18/91; UPI, Mar 18/91; CSM, Mar 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
Soviet space program experts announced that the 40-ton Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 would break up and fall to earth in February. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had lost control of the station when it said the authorities would issue a "timely warning" to all countries on whose territory station "parts are likely to fall." Salyut 7 was launched in 1982 and last inhabited in 1986, holding up to six astronauts. The Soviet Union had planned to send a rescue mission with the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran but the Shuttle was delayed. (NY Times, Jan 1/91)
NASA broke ground at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a $56.2 million facility to prepare pieces of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Mar 26/91; USA Today, Mar 27/91; W Times, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; CSM, Mar 28/91)
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
The press reported hearings of the Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation at which NASA Administrator Richard Truly defended NASA against charges by the General Accounting Office (GAO) that it understated the cost of the planned Space Station and its operations through 2027 by at least $34 billion. Truly questioned GAO figures and stated it was time to begin building the station rather than submit it to further study or audit. (W Post, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; WSJ, May 2/91; B Sun, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91; Plain Dealer, May 5/91)
Salyut 7, the Soviet Space Station, crashed into Earth's atmosphere near Argentina's border with Chile. Powered by solar energy and chemical batteries, it contained no nuclear fuel or other dangerous substances. (P Inq, Feb 7/91; AP, Feb 7/91; UPI, Feb 7/91; W Times, Feb 8/91; NY Times, Feb 8/91; UPI, Feb 8/91; AP. Feb 8/91; C Trin, Feb 8/91)
NASA engineers studied a tiny crack on the hinge mechanism of Shuttle Atlantis but planned to go ahead with a launch in April. Atlantis was scheduled to ferry into orbit the Gamma Ray Observatory, a Hubble Space Telescope-class astronomical instrument built to study extremely high energy radiation from deep space. (NASA Release, "STS-37 Mission Advisory"; UPI, Mar 6/91)
NASA scientists connected with the Hubble Space Telescope correction project were quoted with reference to the amount of work to be done. The Hubble science team, subject to top-level NASA approval, was to build a second generation Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WFPC) with only four instead of eight of the powerful electronic light detectors known as charge-coupled devices (CCDs). The proposed change took account of tight money and time pressures but meant that the photographic operation might take 10 to 20 percent longer, according to Ed Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble scientist. The extent of repairs to be made would be decided by the end of 1991 but probably would involve Shuttle astronauts making three or four spacewalks of at least six hours each. (W Post, Oct 20/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91)
An international conference at the University of California San Diego, sponsored by the university's Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, the California Space Institute, and Los Alamos, New Mexico's National Laboratory Center for National Security Studies expressed concern over the rising cost of space exploration and the difficulty of justifying such costly ventures as sending humans to Mars. Roger Bonnet, chief scientist of the European Space Agency, which cooperates with the United States on the Space Station, regretted American hesitations on the Space Station. (LA Times, Jan 12/91)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
The media reported on Administration efforts to have the elimination of funding for the Space Station reversed in the House of Representatives. In this connection, the New York Times carried a major editorial urging that the Space Station not be funded. In response to that editorial, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter of support for the Space Station from Thomas Stafford, Chairman of the Synthesis Group, to Representative George Brown, Chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (USA Today, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; NASA Release N91-42; WSJ, Jun 6/91; CSM, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
In response to the House-Senate Conference report on the FY 1992 budget, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA was very grateful for the funding for Space Station Freedom. However, it was disappointed that the total NASA appropriation did not keep up with inflation. (NASA Release 91-158)
According to the media, in a General Accounting Office (GAO) report to be submitted to Congress, NASA underestimated the cost of building the redesigned Space Station by $10 billion and the cost of operating it through the year 2027 by about $24 billion. GAO is to submit the report, its first since the Space Station restructuring, to the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation. Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher in the report questioned the cost value because only one of the original eight Space Station uses, that of a research outpost, was being met. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
The Senate on July 17 voted 64 to 35 to approve President Bush's $2.03 million request for the Space Station in the new fiscal year, $100 million more than the House appropriated. (W Post, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; UPI, Jul 18/91)
University of Colorado astronomer Jack Brandt talked of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its fuzzy focusing. Discoveries included proof that Pluto has a moon and dramatic photographs of a star spewing hot gases during its birth in the Orion constellation. (W Times, Feb 14/91)
Prior to the House vote, Thomas M. Donahue, Professor of Planetary Science at the University of Michigan, wrote an article published in the Christian Science Monitor. In it he sharply criticized NASA for making the Space Station its priority rather than scientific inquiry and urged Congress not to support the Space Station. CSM, Jun 7/91)
The media reported the concern of Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station that the station and the space program in general might be sold because of Russia's economic plight. The role of the new Soviet republics with regard to space was also undetermined. Subsequently, Yuri Semyonov, general designer of the Energia team that managed Mir, said according to Tass, that the Space Station would remain the property of his collective. (NY Times, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 7/91; P Inq, Sep 8/91; B Sun, Sep 8/91; AP, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91)
A lengthy article discussed the work of Dr. Allan R. Sandage, a former assistant of Edwin P. Hubble and his heir. Like Hubble, Sandage is an observational cosmologist concerned with investigating the galaxies and the implications of the expanding universe. Using the Carnegie Institution, which has telescopes at Mount Wilson, as his base, he was working on a two-volume atlas of galaxies. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
The media carried comments by William B. Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, that if the congressional appropriations process did not restore the cut in the Space Station funding, it would kill the project and signal that the United States "was going out of the manned space business." In addition, some media articles commended Congress for its action or raised serious questions about NASA's new design or its education of the public about the need for a Space Station. (NY Times, May 21/91; AP, May 21/91; B Sun, May 21/91; SP News, May 20-26/91)
Nationally syndicated economics columnist Warren Brookes questioned the administration's efforts to rescue NASA's Space Station and the new space program represented by the National Aerospace Plane. Brookes stated that possibly national security concerns justified both these programs but their economic justification was dubious. (W Times, May 29/91)
The Washington Post reported on growing congressional hesitations about supporting NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program. Legislators recently realized the mission would cost almost as much as the Space Station although it would carry only robots, not people. The Senate recommended cutting $50 million from the administration's 1992 Earth Observing System (EOS) budget request. The EOS, which would involve a series of large, sophisticated satellites, is to be the centerpiece of the mission. The House cut $145 million from the proposed budget request. Meanwhile, a panel of aerospace experts is reviewing the EOS engineering design and posing difficult questions. (W Post, Aug 9/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA personnel were warning elected officials across the country that the killing of the Space Station would mean lost jobs in their districts. (LA Times, May 25/91)
The press carried accounts of administration statements, led by Vice President Dan Quayle, vowing to fight to save the Space Station despite the Appropriations Subcommittee action. (P Inq, May 17/91; W Post, May 17/91; B Sun, May 17/91; AP, May 17/91; UPI, May 17/91)
NASA announced that the University of Tennessee-Calspan's Center for Advanced Space Propulsion (CASP), Tullahoma, had selected three firms for the launch and recovery of the unmanned, Earth-orbital Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET) space system. Space Industries, Inc., Houston, would be responsible for payload integration, orbital operations, and recovery system and services; Space Services, Inc., Houston, would be in charge of the launch vehicle and services; and Westinghouse Electric Company, Millersville, Maryland, would supervise systems engineering and the service module. The initial funding for COMET in 1991 was $10.5 million. (NASA Release 91-14)
Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator, of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, testified before the House Science Subcommittee that the redesign of Space Station Freedom had limited the scope of the laboratory, eliminating experiments in astronomy, physics, and earth sciences. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA announced that it recently signed an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) to cooperate in developing the Cassini spacecraft to study Saturn. The Cassini spacecraft would consist of the Saturn Orbiter provided by NASA and the Huygens Probe System provided by ESA. It was currently scheduled for launch by NASA on a Titan IV/Centaur vehicle in April 1996. NASA would provide overall Cassini mission operations and ESA will support probe operations. The flight from launch to Saturn orbital insertion requires approximately seven years; once there, the mission baseline lifetime is four years. (NASA Release 91-1)
The press reported the House Appropriations Committee action voting to kill NASA's Space Station and ignoring a White House veto threat in that regard. (W Post, Jun 4/91; B Sun, Jun 4/91; USA Today, Jun 4/91; W Times, Jun 4/91; P Inq, Jun 4/91; WSJ, Jun 4/91; AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; SP News, Jun 3-9/91; LA Times, Jun 4/91)
The National Research Council in its report The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, after two years of study recommended that more modest instruments than the Hubble Space Telescope and only a few large observatories be developed. The next instrument, the $617 million Gamma Ray Observatory, was to be launched in April 1991. During the 1990s, of more than 50 proposals made, the report endorsed only four: the $1.3 billion Space Infrared Telescope Facility; an $80 million infrared-optimized telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii; the $115 million Millimeter Array, a group of telescopes to cover star-forming regions and galaxies; and a $55 million optical telescope to operate in the Southern Hemisphere. The report recommended several more modest programs including the $230 million Stratospheric Observatory for Far-Infrared Astronomy; the $250 million Astrometric Interferometry Mission to map positions of celestial bodies more precisely; the $15 million Large Earth-based Solar Telescope; and a $70 million spacecraft dedicated to the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopy Explorer satellite and increasing to five the Explorer satellites to be launched on rockets. (UPI, Mar 19/91; W Post, Mar 20/91; W Times, Mar 20/91; NY Times, Mar 20/91; LA Times, Mar 20/91; B Sun, Mar 24/91)
AP reported that the Baikonur Space Station in western Kazakhstan seemed ready to avoid the problems that harmed nuclear testing at Semipalatinsk. A Soviet space delegation visited the Kazakh capital of Alma Ata in April to conclude a program of scientific, technical, and economic cooperation between the two countries and to build a training school for young cosmonauts in Leninsk. (AP, Aug 30/91)
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)
An interview featured Lawrence Ross, Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, a 30-year-old facility with 3,000 civil servants. Priorities at Lewis include research in propulsion, electric power generation, and advanced communications. Ross answered various questions about the Space Station, solar dynamic power systems, nuclear propulsion research, the continuing need for maintenance funds, and the role of Lewis in the National Aerospace Plane program. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council stated that a smaller, simpler new design for NASA's Space Station did not meet the basic research requirements for which it was to be built. This development came as NASA was preparing to solicit Congress for its annual funding and when the European Space Agency and other international partners had accepted NASA's new plan. (W Post, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91; B Sun, Mar 16/91; NY Times, Mar 16/91; C Trin, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, commended U.S. government-sponsored educational displays at the Experimental Aircraft Association's exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin. It specifically complimented NASA's Space Station and Space Shuttle displays and astronaut Steve Nagel's presentations as effectively communicating U.S. space leadership. (AvWk, Aug 5/91)
Representative Barbara Boxer, Democrat from California, chair of the House Government Operations subcommittee on government activities and transportation, announced a hearing about the Space Station. Boxer said the General Accounting Office report and the analysis of her staff revealed "astronomical" differences between NASA cost estimates for the Space Station and "more objective, independent analyses." (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
A columnist compared NASA's cutting the plans and cost for the Space Station at congressional request with proposed programs of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). Whereas NASA cut its projections, to the point that some questioned the viability of the result, SDI appeared to have an undiminished appetite for funds. (LA Times, Apr 21/91)
According to UPI, reporting from Soviet television, a small satellite launched from Mir Space Station had not operated since it was lifted one week previously. (UPI, Jun 23/91)
The media reported on NASA's plans to install corrective lenses on the Hubble Space Telescope in order to correct the faulty lens and at the same time to make other repairs. Details remained to be announced. (AP, Jul 2/91; NY Times, Jul 3/91; W Times, Jul 3/91)
According to UPI, an extraordinarily sharp picture of Jupiter taken by the Hubble Space Telescope showed the planet's turbulent atmosphere and the telescope's capabilities. (UPI, May 6/91)
The New York Times carried an extensive article with diagrams describing many of the proposed reductions contemplated by NASA in the cost and role of its orbiting Space Station. The mission was to study the long-term effects of space on astronauts and other living things and to see whether the nearly weightless environment offers commercial possibilities. NASA was scheduled to deliver the modified proposal to Congress March 5. (NYT, Mar 5/91; W Times, Mar 5/91)
Grumman Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,900 jobs by the end of 1991. The major cause was reduced US government defense spending, which included reductions in NASA's budget, leading to a scaling down of Grumman's Space Station Support Division. (AP, Apr 2/91)
PR Newswire reported that engineers from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company would meet with representatives of NASA and its international partners from July 8 to 25 to review changes to the basic design of Space Station Freedom. Discussion is to center on Work Package 2 dealing with such factors as the propulsion assembly, resource node design, external thermal control, data management, communication and tracking, extravehicular systems and guidance, and navigation and control systems. (PR Newswire, Jul 8/91)
The Huntsville Times indicated that NASA and consumers in general had much in common, namely a situation of being caught in a recession when careful budgeting was necessary. Nonetheless, many NASA programs, such as Magellan's probe of Venus, and the Hubble Space Telescope, were continuing their good work. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 17/91)
The House of Representatives voted to authorize NASA to spend $14.9 billion in the next fiscal year, about $500 billion less than President Bush had requested. The approval included the full $2 billion Bush sought for Space Station Freedom. Concurrently, the House directed the National Academy of Sciences to study whether the goals of the Space Station could be achieved more cheaply by other means. (W Post, May 3/91; W Times, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91
The Government Accounting Office issued a study criticizing NASA's system of testing spacecraft before launching. It called the system poorly organized with testing practices varying from one center to another because NASA lacked uniform policies. The study dealt with the Hubble Space Telescope and the weather satellites, as well as Space Shuttles. (AP, Sep 23/91; UPI, Sep 23/91; LA Times, Sep 23/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; WSJ, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
A space publication printed an adapted version of Senator Dale Bumpers' (Democrat from Arkansas) speech when he introduced legislation in July to cut funding on the NASA Space Station drastically. He favored solving U.S. problems on the ground, not in space. The same issue carried remarks of Senator Jim Sasser (Democrat from Tennessee) that the Space Station was something the United States could not afford. Furthermore, the magazine carried an interview with Jim Beggs, chairman of Spacehab Inc. and former NASA administrator, concerning his organization's relationship to NASA. (SP News, Sep 9-15/91)
Red Star announced that pieces of the Soviet 40-ton Salyut 7 Space Station and the attached Cosmos-1686 cargo ferry will fall to Earth on February 6 or 7. The expected location of the fall site was not known. (LA Times, Feb 1/91; AP, Feb 2/91; C Trin, Feb 3/91; W Times, Feb 4/91)
NASA administrator Richard H. Truly announced additional actions to implement the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. Truly briefed the National Space Council on January 11 on the status of NASA's review. NASA decided as follows: Space science would remain NASA's priority and NASA would implement the existing strategic plan, as recommended by the advisory committee. In response to the committee's recommendation, NASA planned to form a special task force with the Department of Defense to assess over the next two months development of an evolutionary heavy-lift launch vehicle. Space Station Freedom restructuring activities, centering on life sciences on microgravity research and applications, conducted in concert with international partners, would be extended to incorporate the committee's recommendations. NASA would move with the Office of Personnel Management to structure a personnel management system that recognizes NASA's special needs to attract and retain top-flight scientists, engineers, and other specialists.
An article in the Washington Post pointed out NASA's policy of spreading out its contracts for the Space Station and other space projects among numerous states, which helped gain the support of congressional figures for NASA funding. (W Post, Jul 16/91)
According to the Washington Post, new findings of astronomers tended to indicate that the universe was both smaller and younger than previously thought. The result, if the Hubble Space Telescope should be able to provide accurate readings on the matter, might prove that the calculations of the Hubble constant (regarding the age and size of the universe) needed to be revised. (W Post, Sep 30/91)
An article in Congressional Quarterly described the careful trimming of various programs performed by Senator Barbara Mikulski in order to provide sufficient funds for the Space Station. (Congressional Quarterly, Jul 13/91)
Douglas Birch authored a feature article on the Hubble telescope, its findings and its limitations because of the flawed main mirror. Reportedly, the Hubble repair mission is to occur in November or December 1993. Astronomers were also concerned about the telescope's age in terms of its effectiveness. Much of Birch's article centered on an interview with Douglas Duncan, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Institute on the campus of Johns Hopkins University, who used the Hubble telescope spectrograph data extensively. (B Sun Magazine, Oct 20/91)
NASA program scientist Edward Weiler said in a telephone interview with UPI that an emergency Shuttle mission to replace faulty gyroscopes and solar panels aboard the Hubble Space Telescope was not needed before a flight already set for 1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NASA engineers were perfecting computer control software that would stabilize the telescope if all its gyroscopes were to fail, until a Shuttle repair mission were mounted. (UPI, Aug 23/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement following action by the House of Representatives to continue the development of Space Station Freedom. Truly commended the bipartisan vote in the House, expressed his confidence that Freedom would win support in the Senate, and expressed his commitment to shape the final NASA FY 1992 budget in a way that balanced the various research and project areas. (NASA Release 91-88)
Extensive media coverage of experiments performed by the astronauts aboard Atlantis continued. Among such experiments were testing of equipment to be used on the Space Station, such as fiber optic cables to transmit signals, a cooling system, and modifications in controls for computers. Another experiment involved lighting a small fire to learn how flames propagate in the absence of gravity. In addition, a NASA optometrist tested eye drops on himself and astronauts performed treadmill tests and blood experiments. Astronauts commented on the large amount of haze around the Earth, possibly from the Kuwaiti oil field fires or from the volcanic eruptions of Mount Pinatubo. (P Inq, Aug 6/91; NY Times, Aug 6/91; W Times, Aug 6/91; W Post, Aug 6/91; USA Today, Aug 6/91; AP, Aug 6/91; UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Times, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; AP, Aug 7/91; UPI, Aug 7/91; P Inq, Aug 8/91; NY Times, Aug 8/91; W Post, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 8/91; AP, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91; B Sun, Aug 9/91; W Times, Aug 9/91; AP, Aug 9/91; UPI, Aug 9/91)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for NASA's office of Space Systems Development, met with all staff at the Reston, Virginia Space Station Freedom office. He said NASA intended to maintain a strong and effective team at Reston during the Space Station Freedom development period. (NASA Release 91-192; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 15/91; W Post, Nov 16/91; Washington Technology, Nov 21/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston announced the award of a contract to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, modifying the Space Station Freedom Program Integration Support (Schedule B) contract. Schedule B involved the integration of Space Station components. (NASA Release C91-nn)
UPI reported that workers at Baikonur Cosmodrome had rolled a Soyuz TM-12 rocket into place to take two Soviet cosmonauts and a British woman to the Mir Space Station in a commercial mission. (UPI, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
NASA's scaled-back design for Space Station Freedom was to be considered at a National Space Council meeting at the White House. The National Space Council members include members of the Cabinet, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, the White House Chief of Staff, the presidential science adviser, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (W Post, Mar 18/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, wrote a guest column stressing the importance of the Space Station to manned flight and the opportunity it provided not only for space leadership but also for the development of weightless materials sciences and biotechnology. (Fla Today, Jul 16/91)
The Washington Post cited the Synthesis Group unpublished report stating that although a Space Station in Earth orbit was preferable, if such could not be built in timely fashion and with the desired capabilities, one could consider using the moon as a preparatory environment for a Mars mission. (W Post, May 25/91)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
NASA announced the award of an avionics systems engineering and analysis support contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The work was to include work on Space Station Freedom as well as Space Shuttles and advanced spacecraft, manned and unmanned. (NASA Release C91-s)
The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors passed a resolution asking state and federal legislators to block a proposal to move NASA's Space Station program office out of Reston, Virginia. (Fairfax Journal Weekly, Feb 20-21/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
An internal memorandum signed by four NASA officials as well as interviews with staff at the Reston, Virginia, facility indicated a strong opinion that moving the headquarters now would disrupt development of the $30 billion Space Station. At a recent meeting three-quarters of NASA staff were said to oppose a move. Despite this fact, NASA Assistant Administrator William B. Lenoir was said to have decided to recommend moving the headquarters. (H Chron, Apr 13/91)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
An article by S. Fred Singer, guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, where he is completing a book on space policy, discussed the Space Station and the Stafford committee report. He advocated Martian moon exploration as NASA's best solution. (H Post, Jun 20/91; W Times, Jun 25/91)
A space journal editorial advocated that the Space Station be judged by Congress on its own merits and that space exploration was also a social need, medically, environmentally, and agriculturally. NASA did what Congress requested and the committee needed to explain its failure to approve the revised Space Station plans. (AvWk, May 27/91)
NASA was considering repairs costing at least $50 million to the Hubble Space Telescope. In addition to the telescope proper, the question was whether to compensate for flaws in three other instruments: two spectrographs and the faint-object camera. Such repairs would involve Costar (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement) and cost $30 million to $40 million, while the telescope repair cost would be $14 million. To test the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water tank at Marshall Space Flight Center would determine whether the work could be accomplished in the estimated 16 hours required. Despite the need for such repairs, Edward Weller (Wiler?), NASA program scientist for the observatory, stressed the achievements the Hubble telescope had made in revealing the universe. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; B Sun, Apr 23/91; Birmingham News, Apr 23/91; AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91)
According to the Washington Post, the Hubble Space Telescope discovered evidence that dying stars can rejuvenate themselves when they collide with each other. The violent collision enables them to be reborn as a younger, brighter star. (W Post, Aug 22/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91)
Robert F. Sekerka, Dean of the College of Science at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh and Chair of the Committee on Microgravity Research of the Space Studies Board, wrote an article in the Wall Street Journal sharply criticizing the appropriation for the Space Station. He questioned the purpose of the Space Station and its cost-effectiveness. (WSJ, Jun 10/91)
The media reported that the House Appropriations Subcommittee, by a six to three vote, had agreed to cut all but $100 million of the projected $2 billion Space Station budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1991. The $100 million was to be used to close the project and study two alternative space science projects. (W Post, May 16/91; WSJ, May 16/91; W Times, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)
According to the press, two members of the House subcommittee that oversees NASA spending, Chairman Bob Traxler, Democrat of Michigan, and ranking minority member Bill Green, Republican of New York, asked NASA Administrator Richard Truly why NASA did not buy a Mir Space Station or other technology from the Soviet Union. NASA replied that the U.S. aerospace industry would not like it. (AP, Oct 25/91; B Sun, Oct 26/91; LA Times, Oct 27/91)
According to AP, the Hubble Space Telescope presents astrophysicists with a mystery: the existence of hydrogen clouds in space that should have dissipated billions of years ago. According to Ed Weiler, NASA's space telescope program manager, this was Hubble's most significant finding to date. (AP, Oct 23/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, awarded Metric Constructors, Inc., of Tampa, a $56,215,000 contract to build the Space Station Processing Facility. The 457,000-square-foot facility was to contain preflight and processing points for Space Station Freedom as well as 63,000 square feet of dedicated payload processing space. (NASA Release C91-h)
The subcommittee of NASA's Office of Astronautics and Exploration Technology said the redesign of the Space Station would still enable all proposed experiments to be handled. However, two major experiments might not be able to be conducted simultaneously because of power limitations. (Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that a Soviet spacecraft carrying supplies for the two cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station almost collided with the station during a docking attempt. (AP, Apr 12/91; C Trin, Apr 14/91)
An alert ground controller noticed that the Progress-7 cargo module was on a collision course with Soviet Space Station Mir and deflected the module. The two cosmonauts succeeded in docking the module and obtaining the food supplies. (AP, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 29/91; W Post, Mar 29/91)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had made a supplemental agreement to the contract with McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California. The modification included the changes made in Space Station Freedom Program review activities. (NASA Release 91-124)
NASA's Johnson Space Center announced the award to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, of a modification to the Space Station Freedom Schedule A contract. Schedule A provided hardware components for the Space Station and the modification will encompass the Integration, Test, and Verification Environment and Ada Compiler. (NASA Release C91-pp)
A space publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard Truly would forgo attendance at the 1991 Paris Air Show in order to remain in Washington to keep close watch on the congressional fight to keep the Space Station appropriation in the budget. In an editorial in the same journal, it was stated that maintaining the Space Station "at the cost of nearly everything else NASA does would be a major mistake." Subsequently, an editorial in the San Jose Mercury News expressed similar concern that NASA's other important programs would be sacrificed for the sake of the Space Station. (SP News, Jun 10-16/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 11/91)
The media reported that a British woman, Helen Sharman, went into space in a Soyuz TM-12 rocket with two Soviet astronauts, destined for Space Station Mir. The astronauts were to remain on Mir to do repairs while Sharman was to return with the two Soviet astronauts now on Mir. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; NY Times, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle stressed the importance of US space activities, including the fact that "A permanent U.S. Space Station is vital to our future technological development and economic prosperity." (H Chron, Mar 24/91)
The media reported that 14 major scientific organizations were joining forces to warn of the "excessive cost" of the planned $30 million Space Station that would "threaten the vitality" of essential scientific research programs and imperil U.S. leadership in world technology. The organizations urged a "balanced" space program but did not call for the Space Station to be killed. (LA Times, Jul 9/91; P Inq, Jul 10/91; W Post, Jul 10/91; NY Times, Jul 10/91; Science, Jul 19/91)
James R. Thompson, NASA Deputy Administrator, was quoted as praising NASA's preeminence in space and aeronautics technology but admitting its recent difficulties. In view of these, Thompson indicated he thought NASA should slow its push for the Space Station and instead adapt the Space Shuttle to fly longer missions to demonstrate why a Space Station would be valuable.  (Birmingham News, Aug 29/91)
UPI reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had detected gas clouds that appear to be from the universe's early day much nearer Earth than previously thought possible. NASA also released pictures taken by Hubble of an unusual jet spouting from a massive, unstable star called Eta Carinae, which upset existing ideas about how the star spewed out matter. (UPI, May 17/91)
NASA held a news briefing designed to show that Space Station Freedom was back on track. NASA Administrator Richard Truly indicated that the final design of the station would be streamlined in weight and electrical power and would rely on robots for repairs. (USA Today, Dec 6/91; W Post, Dec 6/91; W Times, Dec 6/91; AP, Dec 6/91)
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore announced that for financial reasons it was ending its participation in the Magellan Telescope project in Las Campanas, Chile as of June 30. It cited an inability to raise the $15 million, which was its project share. The role of the Astronomy Department at Johns Hopkins was enhanced through its space participation. The Hopkins Ultaviolet Telescope was successfully flown aboard the Space Shuttle and Johns Hopkins contains on campus the Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA's center for astronomy programs with the Hubble Space Telescope. (B Sun, Apr 3/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
NASA announced the selection of Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, to provide institutional and programmatic support services for Space Station Freedom Program and Operations Office, Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release C91-cc)
The media reported the successful efforts of two Soviet cosmonauts outside the Mir Space Station to replace a damaged antenna. (AP, Jun 25/91; UPI, Jun 25/91)
The Chicago Tribune carried an article dealing with the boon that the blurred vision of the Hubble Space Telescope was proving to researchers. Some dozen teams of scientists took Hubble data and using their computer enhancement programs produced clearer images. In the process they have raised their own profiles in a sometimes obscure research field. (C Trin, Dec 15/91)
Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 was expected to fall today. Unexpectedly high solar activity in recent years had increased atmospheric drag on the station and speeded its orbital decay. (NY Times, Feb 6/91; USA Today, Feb 6/91; UPI, Feb 6/91)
An editorial in a space journal commented on the work of cosmonauts in the Soviet Mir Space Station who are conducting advanced materials and fluids experiments in at least five processing systems. In addition, Soviet engineers were preparing several evolutionary unmanned materials spacecraft that would provide Soviet scientists more processing time in unmanned spacecraft than their US counterparts. Whereas these Soviet facilities presented opportunities for use by American researchers for experimental purposes, which they were doing increasingly, a challenge was also presented to the United States. NASA bureaucracy and deficiencies in the US microgravity program, for example, resulted in it taking some researchers two years to book commercial processing flights on the Shuttle. Although NASA planned microgravity budget increases from $125 million in FY 1992 to $225 million in FY 1995, this would require White House and congressional support. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
According to a space publication, NASA's cost estimate for its Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program had increased to about $3 billion, and NASA formally announced that the main ASRM goal was to aid the construction of the Space Station. The ASRM was intended to launch an extra 8,000 pounds of Space Station equipment on each Shuttle flight carrying Space Station hardware. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91)
The press reported on Bush administration efforts to save Space Station Freedom in the light of actions of the House Appropriations Committee as well as the protests of participating nations that were angered at Congressional action, such as Japan, Canada, and the European Space Agency. (B Sun, Jun 3/91; W Post, Jun 3/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center asked for proposals for a follow-on system to its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). The system was to be used to manage data relating to payloads for Space Shuttles and ultimately for the Space Station. The new system was to include a relational data base management subsystem, a project management subsystem, a technical documentation subsystem, and a page printing subsystem and covers a 10-year period. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, announced that the Space Studies Board has long opposed justifying Space Station Freedom solely on scientific merit. However, the Board recognizes, and NASA concurs, that "there are national considerations for building a Space Station other than scientific research." Congress and NASA decided to build the Station in an evolutionary way so that ultimately it would meet the principal scientific research requirements intended. The Station represents a significant part of the long-term goals for the civil space program set by the President. NASA was confident that this was the time to proceed. (NASA Editors' Note N91-17)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
China reported that it would send astronauts into space by the year 2000 as the first step toward launching its own Space Station. "Before the year 2000 China will have completed its research into experimental manned spacecraft and carrier rockets," said the State Commission on Science and Technology. (UPI, Apr 7/92; LA Times, Apr 8/92)
NASA announced that congressionally imposed funding limits for Space Station Freedom would delay its full operation by about nine months. Under a revised schedule, NASA would begin launching parts of the Space Station in March 1996, a four-month delay. The station would be ready for limited astronaut use in June 1997 and for full astronaut use in June 2000, a nine-month delay. (Space News, Sept 28-October 4/92)
Newly-released photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope showed that the "Whirpool Galaxy" may have a black hole at its core and that the core of a powerful infrared radiating galaxy called Arp 220 supports vigorous star birth and supernova star explosions. Astronomers suspect that Arp 220 is the product of an earlier collision of two "parent" galaxies. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealed a new class of object in the universe--a grouping of gigantic star clusters produced by the collision of galaxies. Images of the core of the peculiar galaxy Arp 220 show that stars are produced at a furious rate from the dust and gas supplied by the interaction of two galaxies. The discovery was made by Dr. Edward Shaya and graduate student Dan Dowling, University of Maryland, and the Wide Field/Planetary Camera Team. (NASA Release 92-80)
NASA continued to prepare for what it called "the most aggressive" space-shuttle mission yet--its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set for December 7, 1993. As conceived, it would require four astronauts working in two-person shifts several days to make the repairs. They would need three or possibly four space walks to complete the work. The main task was to install a new camera and a set of corrective mirrors to compensate for spherical aberration in the main 2.4-meter mirror. These and other repairs would, NASA hoped, restore 90 to 95 percent of Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM, Dec 16/92)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
A newspaper reported that three NASA aquanauts submerged since May 6, 1992, in a research station 30 feet below the surface of Emerald Lagoon, Florida were doing well but missed sunshine and their family members. The exercise was part of preparation for months-long stays aboard space station Freedom. (USA Today, May 22/92)
NASA astronomers announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had caught a clear glimpse of more than 300 galaxies clustered four billion light-years away, giving astronomers their first detailed view of galactic structure at a time when the solar system was just beginning. The Hubble images revealed that star-forming galaxies were far more prevalent in the clusters of the younger universe than in modern clusters of galaxies near us today. The findings have important implications for theories of how galaxies have evolved and are continuing to evolve at an apparently rapid rate. The observations also may have uncovered the most distant cluster of galaxies yet seen at a distance of 10 billion light-years, two-thirds of the way back to the presumed origin of the universe. (NASA Release 92-213; NY Times, Dec 2/92; LA Times, Dec 2/92; W Post, Dec 2/92; The Sun, Dec 2/92; USA Today, Dec 2/92; UPI, Dec 2/92)
Daniel S. Goldin, the newly appointed Administrator NASA said he was a strong supporter of the controversial Space Station Freedom, which was being developed in part at the NASA Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. The Space Station Freedom, whose price had soared from $8 billion to $40 billion, was a frequent target of lawmakers looking to trim NASA's budget. But Goldin said, "I believe that there is a crying need for human interaction in space. If we are to fulfill our role of NASA and to have humans seek their destiny in space, we must understand the interactions of humans in a hostile space environment, the long-term impacts of zero gravity, microgravity, radiation." (News-Herald, Apr 23/92; Plain Dealer, Apr 23/92)
Astronaut Kathryn Thornton became the second woman to walk in space when she floated into the open cargo bay of Endeavour and tested techniques for building a Space Station. Thornton was accompanied by Thomas Akers, one of three men who had captured a wayward satellite the day before. (C Trib, May 15/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers announced the detection of the rare element boron in an ancient star. This element may be "fossil" evidence of energetic events which accompanied the birth of the Milky Way galaxy. An alternative possibility is that this rare element may be even older, dating from the birth of the universe. If that is the case, then the HST findings may force some modifications in theories of the Big Bang. (NASA Release 92-5)
It was reported that for the first time in a generation, NASA and the Air Force were developing a new rocket engine and launch system. The National Launch System (NLS), which was to consist of three new vehicles, would become operational in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to Space Station Freedom. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
NASA reported that a survey of the heavens with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was uncovering remote and unusual galaxies never before resolved by optical telescopes on Earth. HST revealed an unusual variety of shapes and structures in these distant galaxies, which previously had appeared as fuzzy blobs in ground-based sky surveys. The results might lead to much clearer understanding of the formation and evolution of galaxies. The results were presented by Dr. Richard Griffiths of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. (NASA Release 92-98)
NASA announced that it had awarded about $15 million for 124 microgravity research grants to develop the research potential of Space Station Freedom as one of the nation's premiere science and technology assets. The grants represent an increase of 70 percent in the number of investigators sponsored by NASA's microgravity division. The division now sponsors nearly 200 scientific investigators and plans to expand to at least 300 before the agency's planned Space Station becomes operational in the late 1990s. (NASA Release 92-167; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA and NPO-Energia, A Russian company, planned to meet during the next two weeks for a final review on the feasibility of using the Soyuz TM spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard the Space Station. The Soyuz spacecraft was one of various concepts being considered for use as a return vehicle. (NASA Release 92-212)
At the Asia-Pacific International Space Year Conference in Tokyo, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Shatalov called for strengthened space monitoring to determine compliance of major military powers with strategic nuclear arms reduction treaties. Shatalov said such collaboration in space also would help uncover possible efforts by smaller countries to develop nuclear weapons. Japan announced a plan to allow Southeast Asian countries to use a module that will be built onto the future international space station for scientific experiments in orbit. (UPI, Nov 16/92)
Rockwell International and a Russian company announced plans to collaborate on a system to enable the Space Shuttle  Atlantis to dock with Russia's MIR Space Station. Rockwell said it had signed an agreement under which NPO Energia would develop hardware for the system and build some components. (AP, Sept 9/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
Russia launched a spaceship carrying two monkeys and insects into orbit to conduct radiation experiments on the creatures. Experts from the European Space Agency as well as Italian, German, and other foreign scientists were to oversee the biological experiments. The ITAR-Tass news agency also said that Cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyov and Sergei Avdeyev, who had spent five months aboard the Mir Space Station, were in good condition following routine medical examinations. (AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92)
Hubble Space Telescope scientists announced that Hubble has used a natural "zoom lens" it discovered in space to photograph an otherwise invisible distant galaxy and to chart concentrations of the mysterious dark matter that controls the fate of the universe. The astronomers said that the telescope was actually seeing a phenomenon known as a gravitational lens, which occurs when the gravitational field of a massive object bends light rays from a more distant source. They regarded the ability to discern in detail the structure of the distant magnified object as a major breakthrough in observing techniques. (W Post, Oct 9/92; UPI, Oct 8/92; NY Times, Oct 9/92; NASA Release 92-87 and 92-168)
A bipartisan group of prominent Americans proposed a plan to reduce government spending, invest in growth, and reshape the income tax system in the hope of balancing the federal budget in a decade. Decisions on which programs would be cut were left to Congress and the president, but the group suggested that NASA's planned Space Station, mass transit operating aid to cities, and other programs would be prime candidates for funding reductions. (AP, Sept 30/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts made a spacewalk to position a cable that will power an exterior engine on their Mir Space Station. (AP Sept 9/92)
It was reported that a Russian-German space crew will blast off from Kazakhstan on March 17, 1992, the first manned flight since the birth of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). German cosmonaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade was scheduled to travel aboard a Soyuz craft to the Mir Space Station, six weeks after his countryman Ulf Merbold returned from a successful eight-day mission aboard the U.S. Shuttle Discovery in January. Kayser-Threde GmbH, a small Munich high technology firm, would produce hardware for scientific tests during Flade's week-long mission. (Reuters, Feb 24/92)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope announced that they had spotted the gathering of swirling stars that is believed to be the gravitational signature of a black hole in a galaxy called M32. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories in Tucson, Arizona, and a scientist using the Hubble, said that based upon what he has seen so far, "I would be surprised if M32 turns out not to be a black hole." Concurrently the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory discovered 11 objects in space that constitute "a new class of objects--the gamma ray quasar." The new gamma ray quasars, some as far as 10 billion light-years away, are probably similar to the thousands of other quasars detected in recent years, but the nature of quasars is still debated. (AP, Apr 9/92; B Sun, Apr 9/92; LA Times, Apr 9/92; W Times, Apr 9/92; U Post, Apr 13/92; USA Today, Apr 9/92; CSM, Apr 14/92; NASA Release 92-46 and 92-47; NASA Note N92-28)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
Michael Griffin, NASA associate administrator for exploration, said that a new heavy-lift vehicle built from components of the Space Shuttle transportation system should be able to launch elements of Space Station Freedom at a cost comparable to that of the space shuttle. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
Opponents of Space Station Freedom, led by Representative Tim Roemer of Indiana, said they would try to strip from the 1993 federal budget virtually all of the $2.25 billion requested for the project by NASA. The attack would come as an amendment to legislation that would set maximum spending levels for the agency over the next three years. (LA Times, Apr 29/92)
NASA acknowledged that it could not keep the Space Station project on schedule even with the most optimistic current funding projections. The projected level of Congressional appropriations for the next few years meant certain delays in development and launch schedules of anything up to 12 or 18 months. Such delays would mean that the station would miss the official December 1999 target for being able to support a crew on a permanent basis. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company received two NASA contracts worth $267 million for work on the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight systems contract, valued at $147 million, includes funds for servicing missions, the first of which was set for December 1993 and was to deliver an optical instrument to correct the telescope's flawed mirror. (WSJ, Sept 2/92)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
Astronomers reported interesting initial results from a survey of several hundred quasars being studied with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Using Hubble's high resolution images, the "Snapshot Survey" program detected evidence on gravitational lensing at a level of detail not usually found with ground-based telescopes. The findings set new limits on the nature and distribution of material in the universe. The results provided information on objects such as stars and galaxies that can be detected with telescopes as well as non-luminous material or "dark matter." In the past decade, about a dozen examples of probable gravitational lenses had been discovered by ground-based telescopes. According to conventional theoretical models, approximately half of all multiple-image gravitational lenses cannot be identified from ground-based telescopes because the separation between the images would be less than one arc second, which is below the nominal resolution limit for ground-based telescopes. The Hubble Space Telescope routinely provides 0.1 arc second resolution of moderately bright point sources, making it a unique and powerful tool for searching for multiple-image lenses. The HST data may ultimately provide new and unexpected insights into the early universe. While the Snapshot Survey will not offer insights into the competing Big Bang models, results will provide scientists with the denizens of the universe but not how they got there. (NASA Release 92-3)
The Air Force and NASA announced that they were developing a new family of rockets to meet the unmanned launch needs of the next century. As currently conceived, the National Launch System would include three new vehicles designed to lift cargoes ranging from 20,000 to 130,000 pounds into low Earth orbit. The new rockets were expected to become operational in 2002 and would carry supplies to Space Station Freedom at less cost than present U. S. delivery systems. (W Times, Aug 18/92; Birmingham News, Aug 19/92)
Based upon images taken by NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers reported that they had found intriguing evidence that a black hole, weighing over 2.6 billion times the mass of the sun, exists at the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. Galaxy M87 is at the center of a nearby cluster of galaxies in the constellation of Virgo, 52 million light-years distant, and contains more than 100 billion stars. (NASA Release 92-10)
House-Senate negotiators agreed yesterday to provide $2.1 billion next fiscal year for Space Station Freedom. The agreement spelled the end of another year of efforts by opponents to kill a program they consider too expensive and of little scientific value. The Space Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its planned 30-year lifetime. (W Post, Sept 23/92; USA Today, Sept 23/92; LA Times, Sept 23/92; The Sun, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Lending their expertise with long-duration exposure to microgravity, the Skylab IV astronaut crew was scheduled to participate in a series of underwater tests that would help in the development of Space Station Freedom. The tests will be monitored by engineers represented by NASA, the Boeing Defense and Space Group, and international partners from the European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency. (NASA Note N92-42)
NASA announced that a Space Shuttle flight link up with the Russian Mir Space Station, tentatively planned for September 1994, would be retargeted for launch in April 1995. A flight by a Russian cosmonaut aboard the Shuttle Discovery remained on track for launch on November 16, 1993. The first flight to begin building the planned Space Station Freedom was rescheduled for July 1996. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
Some leading American astronomers complained about the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support for astronomical research in the United States. The absence of dependable funding put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan, the astronomers charged. Federal financing had flagged, they said, just as a steam of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices were ready to be exploited. There were also management problems. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that poor management of America's space and astronomy programs had hobbled efforts to compete with European science. (NY Times, Aug 18/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Dr. Jon Holtzman, of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, led a team of scientists in discovering new clues to cataclysmic events in the history of the peculiar galaxy NGC 1275, located approximately 200 million light-years from Earth. The scientists discovered about 50 bright objects at the center of the galaxy which appear to be young massive globular star clusters. This discovery was surprising because most globular clusters are among the oldest objects in the universe. (NASA Release 92-9)
At a press conference of the 179th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Atlanta, astronomers reported that recent ultraviolet observations with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) suggest that what were thought to be randomly distributed, nearby primordial clouds of hydrogen may actually be associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 92-4)
A spokesman announced that NASA had failed in its latest attempt to fix the jammed main antenna on the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft, but the agency said it would try different repair methods next year. Engineers turned Galileo's main antenna toward the sun to warm it, then cooled it in shade, but the antenna remained stuck. The latest warming and cooling of the antenna was the seventh and final effort to open the antenna by thermally expanding or shrinking what NASA engineers think are stuck pins on three of the antenna's ribs. Despite the loss of the main antenna, NASA scientists expected to complete 70 percent of Galileo's mission by using a small antenna. The small antenna, however, is capable of transmitting only 1 percent as many computer "bits" as the main antenna would have sent. (AP, Jul 8/92)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
A space agency spokesman said that NASA had failed again to open the main antenna of its Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft. Engineers had heated the antenna with sunlight over three days in March, then cooled it in shade. They hoped the antenna would expand and then shrink enough to free its jammed parts, said Jim Wilson, a spokesman fot the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (P Inq, Apr 17/92; USA Today, Apr 17/92)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, predicted a "Perils of Pauline" battle in Congress over the survival of Space Station Freedom, saying the outpost was an investment in the future that should not be squandered for short-term gains. Despite the high costs and frequent redesigns, Goldin said the station was vital to the future of America's space program. Although he refused to predict the outcome of congressional debate, he expressed guarded optimism that Freedom would survive the latest challenge. (UPI, Apr 29/92)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
At the American Astronomical Society's semiannual meeting in Atlanta, a team of scientists announced that, using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had made the most precise measurement to date of the percent of heavy hydrogen in space, which better determines the physical conditions present in the theorized Big Bang at the origin of the universe. Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, differs from ordinary hydrogen by having one neutron in addition to one proton in its nucleus. A measurement of the ratio of deuterium to ordinary hydrogen provides a critical test of conditions in the universe at the time of the Big Bang because it is believed that essentially all of the deuterium now present was created at that time. If further research finds no evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," then the new deuterium measurements strengthen the idea that the universe will expand forever. If true, the universe had a brilliant beginning but will have no end. (NASA Release 92-2)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
A briefing and demonstration of a prototype low vision enhancement system (LVES), cooperatively developed by NASA and the Lions Vision Center at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, was scheduled for to be held May 13 at the Oncology Center Auditorium. The LVES technology, originally developed for possible use on Space Station Freedom, potentially could help millions of Americans afflicted with certain low vision problems. (NASA Note N92-43)
NASA's inspector general, Bill Colvin, said that an investigation had been going on for nearly two years as to whether the Perkin-Elmer Corporation of Danbury, Connecticut, maker of the flawed mirrors of the Hubble Space Telescope, withheld data that would have revealed focusing problems before Hubble was sent aloft. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; WSJ, Oct 20/92)
Many scientists, concerned that there might not be enough money for basic research, question the wisdom of spending huge sums on projects such as the Space Station. Yet, research shows that the economic benefits of NASA's programs are greater than generally recognized. In 1987, NASA's procurement budget generated $17,800 million in total industry sales, had a "multiplier effect" on the economy of 2.1 million people, created 209,000 private-sector jobs and $2,900 million in business profits, and generated $5,600 million in federal, state and local government tax revenues. Furthermore, these benefits were widely distributed throughout the country. (Nature, Jan 9/92)
NASA announced plans to consolidate some management functions for the Space Station Freedom program and to create a contractor-led integration team to ensure the successful building and deployment of the international Space Station. The consolidations affected operations in Reston, Virginia, and at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The consolidation came amid charges of cost growth and delays at Johnson Space Center and among the center's team of contractors led by McDonnell Douglas. The problems associated with the $5 billion contract had prompted two audits and one investigation by NASA's inspector general. (NASA Release 92-214; W Post, Dec 2/92; Space News, Dec 7-13/92; AvWk, Dec 7/92)
NASA's funding remained flat as Congressional appropriations committees completed work on NASA's 1993 budget. Although some high-profile programs such as the Space Station and a  constellation of environmental monitoring satellites emerged virtually unscathed, newer or less visible efforts suffered setbacks. An advanced series of tracking satellites, robotic missions to the moon, and a new generation of launchers were among the efforts put on hold for at least the next year. Spending on space research and technology was reduced by 13 percent. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), an international team of astronomers took a major step in redetermining the expansion rate of the universe. This rate, known as the Hubble Constant, is one of two critical numbers needed for making a precise determination of the size and age of the universe. The Constant is an estimate of the rate at which the universe is expanding and is expressed in kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light years). The results were reported by Drs. F. Duccio Macchetto, Nino Panagia and Abhijit Saha of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland; Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Institute of Washington; and Gustav Tammann of the University of Basel, Switzerland, at the internationl workshop "Science with the Hubble Space Telescope," held in Sardinia, Italy, June 29 through July 9, 1992. (NASA Release 92-97)
With just over three years left before construction of Space Station Freedom begins in Earth orbit, NASA announced that it would add spacewalks to upcoming Shuttle flights when possible, beginning with one during STS-54 in January 1993. (NASA Release 92-210)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev returned to earth five months later than originally planned. The 33-year-old flight engineer's stint in space aboard the Mir Space Station had been originally scheduled to end in October. But because of the disintegration of the Soviet Union, money problems in Moscow, and Kazakh nationalism, he was asked to extend his space journey by almost five months, creating a predicament for him and making him a media celebrity. (NY Times, Mar 26/92; USA Today, Mar 26/92; W Post, Mar 26/92; WSJ, Mar 26/92; B Sun, Mar 26/92)
A NASA airplane, equipped with delicate instruments, carried three astronomers to 41,000 feet above Hawaii last month to examine indications of a "black hole" at the heart of the Milky Way galaxy. The launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and improvements in ground-based instruments led to several announcements this year of tangible evidence for the existence of "black holes." (LA Times, Sept 21/92)
It was reported that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was studying aurorae on the giant planet Jupiter. The HST made observations of Jupiter over a four-day period when ESA/NASA Ulysses spacecraft swung by the giant planet. While passing Jupiter, Ulysses made measurements of Jupiter's powerful magnetic field and the flow of subatomic particles along magnetic field lines. Simultaneously, HST was looking at aurorae, one visual manifestation of these electrical fireworks. These joint observations provided a unique opportunity to combine ultraviolet images and spectra with information on particles and fields. By studying the activity of Jupiter's aurorae, astronomers hoped to learn more about the dynamics of Jupiter's immense magnetic field, the structure of the giant planet's upper atmosphere, the effects of aurora on the chemistry of the polar regions on Jupiter, and Jupiter's interaction with the moon Io via a magnetic "flux tube." (NASA Release 92-22)
After triumphing in a bruising congressional battle in 1991 and securing a $2.25 billion berth in the Administration's 1993 budget, NASA officials and Space Station Freedom contractors said they were on target toward a scheduled launch of the first Space Station components in November 1995. The station, to be lofted piece by piece aboard the Space Shuttle, was to be partially operational by 1997, and permanently manned by a four-astronaut crew by 2000. (LA Times, Feb 24/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a French researcher landed safely in Kazakhstan after completing scientific experiments aboard the orbiting Mir Space Station. The 14-day mission brought to a close the third joint Russian-French flight since 1982. The three worked on experiments involving astrophysics, biology, and bioengineering. They also conducted geophysical research based on commercial contracts from several European countries and members of the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AP, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 10/92; The Sun, Aug 11/92)
Russian space authorities reported that they had developed a new design for their Mir 2 Space Station and that initial production of the primary module had already started. The new Mir 2 design envisioned a core with five modules that were to be attached to the middle of a long beam. The officials said they expected Mir 2 to be launched in the mid-1990s and that it represented Russia's determination to continue its long-term plan of manned flight activities despite the difficult financial and political situation in Russia. (AvWk, Aug 10/92)
The Space Station Freedom was saved, as the House of Representatives voted down an amendment aimed at killing the $40 billion project. The House voted 237-181 against an appropriations bill amendment that would have cut $1.2 billion from the 1993 budget for NASA, effectively eliminating the Space Station. The Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its lifetime. It was the fourth time in the last two years that the House had affirmed its commitment to build the Space Station. Supporters said the vote could well represent the program's last serious Congressional challenge. (P Inq, Jul 30/92; LA Times, Jul 30/92; NY Times, Jul 30/92; WSJ, Jul 30/92; W Times, Jul 30/92; W Post, Jul 30/92; The Sun, Jul 30/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92; AP, Jul 30/92; UPI, Jul 30/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92; AvWk, Aug 3/92)
In the summer 1992 issue of Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Richard H. Kohrs, director of Space Station Freedom in NASA's Office of Space Development, discussed the advantages and challenge of constructing Space Station Freedom. Aside from the international cooperation required to build and operate it, Kohrs gave three primary functions that the Space Station would perform in the U.S. civil space program: 1) it would enable humans to learn to live and work productively in space; 2) it would serve as an advanced research facility; and 3) it would provide experience and knowledge of building, operating, and maintaining large systems in space. The Space Station was also expected to be a vital component of the total U.S. civil space program, augmenting the planetary exploration program, astronomical research, life-sciences program, aeronautics research, and transportation program. (Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Summer 1992)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
In a mission called "La Chalupa 30," four men were to conduct investigations in an underwater habitat without any direct outside human contact for 30 days, giving the Behavior and Performance Laboratory at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, the opportunity to study team performance as part of its continuing investigation to identify pertinent psychological issues for long duration space flight. "The mission will serve as an environment which is analogous to future extended space missions on the Shuttle or Space Station," said Dr. Al Holland, Head of the Behavior and Performance Laboratory. (NASA Release 92-62)
NASA chose Rockwell International's Palmdale plant in California to refit the seven-year-old Space Shuttle Atlantis, allowing the spacecraft to stay aloft longer and possibly enabling it to rendezvous with the Russian Space Station Mir.  (LA Times, Jul 2/92)
A joint Russian-French crew blasted off on a 12-day mission aimed at keeping the aging Space Station Mir in orbit until 1996.  The cosmonauts were slated to install a complex of stabilizing gyroscopes inside the Station and also to work in space to assemble an engine to make space navigation easier. (W Times, Jul 22/92; AP, Jul 21/92, Jul 27/92; UPI, Jul 27/92; The Sun, Jul 28/92; WSJ, Jul 28/92; W Post, Jul 28/92; NY Times, July 28/92; APn, Jul 27/92; UPn, Jul 27/92)
A Russian-French crew docked with the Space Station Mir during the first of several joint missions intended to strengthen both countries' space programs. While aboard Mir, the crew was scheduled to conduct several experiments, including one into the chemistry of urine and saliva in weightlessness. They also would test vibrations and pressure on the human body. (AP, Jul 29/92)
Lockheed, a principal designer of NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, won $267 million in contracts to maintain, service, and help repair the orbiting observatory. (W Post, Sept 9/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts on Tuesday completed a series of spacewalks to install an engine and move an antenna on the Mir Space Station, partly in preparation for docking with a U.S. Space Shuttle in 1994. (AP, Sept 15/92)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
It was reported that the Kennedy Space Center was about to break gground on a second Space Station project, a new building to service the outpost's propulsion modules. The 3,000 square foot building, to be located behind and south of the operations and checkout buildings in Kennedy Space Center's industrial area, would be the space center's third hazardous processing plant. This one was to be dedicated to servicing a single type of payload: 800-gallon modulles filled with propellant, which would be used to keep the space station positioned properly in orbit. The new buildingg wouldbe able to accomodate testing, cleaning, and servicing of two to four modules simultaneously. The Kennedy Space Center was soliciting bids for construction of the plant, which was to be 70 feet high, 135 feet longg and 65 feet wide. A contract, worth about $11 million, was expected to be awarded in June 1992, with construction beginning in July, said payload projects manager JoAnn Morgan. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
NASA scientists using the Hubble Space Telescope said they had discovered extended disks of dust around 15 newly-formed stars in the Orion Nebula starbirth region 1,500 light-years away. Such disks are a prerequisite for the formation of solar systems like the sun's. Hubble's detailed images confirm more than a century of speculation, conjecture, and theory about the genesis of solar systems. Astronomers said the Hubble data was the strongest evidence yet that planets could exist beyond the solar system and may even be a common occurrence. "We have found a place where it is very possible that there will be planets within the next few million years," said Edward Weiler, program scientist for the space telescope, at a NASA briefing. (NASA Release 92-226; W Times, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec. 17/92; NY Times, Dec 17/92; LA Times, Dec 17/92; CSM Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 17/92; UPI, Dec 17/92; APn, Dec 17/92; Newsweek, Dec 28/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin charged a new team of agency officials with finding a cheaper way to build Space Station Freedom, even if that meant assembling much of it without the Space Shuttle. The team, comprised mainly of officials within NASA but outside the Station program, was asked to redesign the Station so that it can be completed on time despite congressionally imposed spending limits. Goldin's directive came in the wake of reduced Space Station funding in both the House of Representative and the Senate. Findings were due to Goldin by November. (Space News, Aug 17/92; AvWk, Aug 24/92)
The Senate approved funding of $2.1 billion for continuation of the Space Station after defeating a proposal to close down the project because of its expense. The Senate vote, together with House approval in July, assured continued funding and Congressional support for the Space Station. (W Post, Sept 10/92; LA Times, Sept 10/92; WSJ, Sept 10/92; AP, Sept 10/92)
The U.S. Senate rejected by a wide margin a move to cancel NASA's international Space Station but forbade NASA from significantly changing the laboratory's design and schedule. If approved by the House of Representative, the restriction would severely limit NASA's ability to overhaul key aspects of the program. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA announced that the Space Station Freedom program had initiated a new effort to reduce dramatically the time it would take to integrate small experiments on the Space Station. Called EXPRESS for Expedited Processing of Experiments to Space Station, NASA engineers hoped to reduce the time it takes to get a small payload flown aboard Freedom from up to five years to less than one. (NASA Release 92-191)
NASA's Cassini mission to Saturn passed a major milestone with the completion of a project-wide critical design review. The review included a comprehensive examination of the mission and spacecraft. (NASA Release 92-222)
Dr. Carl Fichtel, Principal Investigator for the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), announced that NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory found three new gamma-ray quasars, detected more than 200 cosmic gamma ray bursts, and captured the best ever observation of the glow of gamma radiation from the disk of the Milky Way galaxy. The Compton Observatory, built by TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, California, is the second of NASA's "Great Observatories." The first was the Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April 1990. The Compton Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, from the Space Shuttle Atlantis, orbits Earth at an altitude of 268 by 262 miles. (NASA Release 92-6)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin agreed to seek increased funding for NASA's life sciences program destined for the Space Station Freedom, calling current funding levels "disgraceful" and clearly in need of increased funding. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
NASA announced that an exotic mix of materials and equipment would be exposed to the unique conditions of microgravity during Space Shuttle Columbia's 13-day mission scheduled for June 1992. The flight would be NASA's longest Shuttle mission and was the first of a series of missions leading to 90-day assignments aboard the planned Space Station Freedom. Astronaut Bonnie Dunbar and three scientists were scheduled spend most of their time in the pressurized Spacelab module in Columbia's cargo bay. (USA Today, May 27/92)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had revealed a chain of luminous knots in the core of the most distant known galaxy--one that existed in the infancy of the universe and is located more than 10 billion light-years from Earth. The new photos, taken with the telescope's wide field and planetary camera, reveal detail ten times better than photographs previously taken with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 92-203; W Times, Nov 14/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope revealed an unusual new optical jet in the nucleus of the elliptical galaxy NGC 3862. NGC 3862, also known as 3C264, is a bright radio source and x-ray source. It is the sixth brightest galaxy in a rich cluster of galaxies known as Abell 1367, located at a distance of about 260 million light-years away in the constellation Leo. (NASA Release 92-61)
Space Shuttle Columbia commander Richard N. Richards made a pitch today for the Space Station Freedom, saying that astronauts on the Columbia Shuttle flight needed more time in orbit to conduct scheduled experiments. Such time would be available on the Space Station, which had experienced funding difficulties in Congress. Two Shuttle astronauts worked though part of their breaks as they rushed to complete experiments, one dealing with the growth of crystals and the other with dust particles. (W Post, Jul 4/92)
The House of Representatives voted to spend $2.1 billion next year for work on NASA's Space Station Freedom as opponents ended their efforts to scuttle the project. (The Sun, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
Yuri N. Koptev, a top Russian space official, declared in Izvestiya, that the six-year-old Space Station Mir must be replaced by 1994 and suggested turning to the West for technical and financial assistance. "We do not exclude attracting foreign capital and forming a joint stock company for joint use of the Mir Station," he said. (AP, Feb 28/92)
NASA's Galileo spacecraft flew by the Earth at 10:09 a. m. EST, completing a three-year gravity-assist program and setting course to reach Jupiter in December 1995. The spacecraft was programmed to measure the near-Earth environment and to observe Earth and the moon during this flyby. (NASA Release 92-217; UPI, Dec 2/92, Dec 7/92, Dec 8/92; Dec 9/92; AP, Dec 1/92, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92; W Post, Dec 9/92; WP, Dec 9/92)
NASA announced that it would kick-off a nationwide tour of its full-scale traveling Space Station Freedom model in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. The model, which is housed in two connected tractor trailers, features the U.S. living quarters and the U.S. laboratory module of the international space-based research facility. (NASA Note N92-47)
Walter Jaffe of the Leiden Observatory in the Netherlands said that the Hubble Space Telescope had captured the most detailed view yet of an immense caldron of heat, violence, and energy surrounding what might be called a "black hole," a celestial object 10 million times more massive than the sun. Astronomers said the photograph provided powerful support for the theory of "black holes" by showing several of the features predicted to surround them. The galaxy belongs to the Virgo Cluster of galaxies about 45 million light-years from Earth. (W Times, Nov 20/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; W Post, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 20/92;)
Florida Today reported that the Hubble Space Telescope, despite a flawed primary mirror that prevented it from stargazing perfectly, nevertheless had shown astronomers enough of the universe to rattle their theories of creation and the nature of the universe. Circling the Earth every 90 minutes the Hubble has provided new insights into "globular clusters, the black hole, gaseous hydrogen isotopes, and a shell of gas moving from a giant star in another galaxy." (Florida Today, Feb 2/92)
In remarks before the National Space Club, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the United States needs a laboratory in space so scientists can learn how to protect the health of humans living and working for long periods in space and improve the quality of life on Earth. "We can light up the sky with the inspirational work of Space Station Freedom, or we can stand by and watch the greatest technological bonfire of the century if it's canceled. We need Space Station Freedom and we need it now," said Goldin. (NASA Release 92-92)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
Rockwell's Space Systems Division and NPO Energia announced that they had signed a contract that was the first step in building docking hardware for a U.S. Space Shuttle/Russian MIR Space Station mission planned for 1995. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA and the National Institutes of Health signed an agreement to enhance each agency's biomedical research capabilities. The agencies pledged to develop programs that apply NASA's unique expertise to practical, medical needs on Earth and in space. The agreement was intended to stimulate new opportunities in the biomedical and behavioral research community because it provides for greater access to space-based facilities as well as involvement by university-based research centers. It was expected to increase support for Space Station Freedom, funding for which was under attack in Congress. (NASA Release 92-119; W Post, Jul 22/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
NASA announced that extended observations by the Hubble Space Telescope indicated that Jupiter's moon Io has a smaller atmosphere than previously thought, with very dense regions possibly over volcanoes and surface frost. The observations also showed that despite continual volcanic activity, Io's surface has remained largely unchanged since first photographed by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. (NASA Release 92-163)
The planned U.S. Space Station Freedom survived an attempt to kill it when the House of Representatives defeated a move to cut the $2.25 billion needed to keep the program on track. The 254-159 vote to continue funding marked the fourth time the House had voted on the costly and ambitious program in recent years. (UPI, Apr 30/92; AP, Apr 30/92; W Post, Apr 30/92; USA Today, Apr 30/92)
American space scientists said the hottest star ever recorded--33 times hotter than the sun--had been photographed in a faraway galaxy by the Hubble Space Telescope. Burning at 360,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the white star at the heart of a glowing red nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy is going out in a "blaze of glory," said Sally Heap, an astrophysicist with NASA. (NY Times, Apr 21/92; AP, Apr 21/92; W Times, Apr 21/92; USA Today, Apr 21/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
Russian cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kalery worked outside the Mir Space Station on an unscheduled two-hour spacewalk to activate a pair of gyroscopes that help stabilize the Space Station. The gyroscopes had worn out naturally during the course of Mir's life and had to be replaced. (AP Jul 8/92)
NASA administrator Daniel Goldin announced in a number of recent speeches the first major reforms resulting from the internal review of NASA programs he had ordered. The Earth Observing System would be streamlined again, and incentives to Space Station Freedom contractors might be pooled to assure that they worked as a team. The reforms were designed to make U.S. civil space programs better, faster, and cheaper. Money saved would be applied to new missions using small spacecraft. (AvWk, Sept 28/92; Science, Oct 2/92)
Solar scientists were puzzled by an unexpected "gamma ray afterglow" discovered on the sun by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The glow, a strong emanation of high-energy gamma rays, persisted for more than five hours after a solar flare explosion on June 11, 1991. A similar phenomenon occurred four days later. The scientists also announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had taken the first image of the sun in neutrons, the first picture of any celestial object ever made with neutrons, that is, matter, rather than light. Another scientist reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had found evidence of powerful beams of downward-streaming protons at the onset of a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more than 30 light-years away. Solar flares can produce magnetic storms on Earth that interfere with electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA Releases 92-112 and 92-113; NY Times, Jul 16/92; USA Today, Jul 16/92; The Sun, Jul 16/92; P Inq, Jul 16/92; UPI, Jul 15/92, Jul 17/92; W Post, Jul 20/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
NASA officials said that the Galileo spacecraft and its atmospheric probe had passed the half-way mark on their voyage to Jupiter. The first full test results on November 20 and December 2 since launch three years ago showed that the probe's systems were in good working order. Galileo was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter in early December 1995. A major milestone in space communications was achieved recently when NASA scientists successfully transmitted laser signals to Galileo at a distance of 1.3 million miles. (NASA Releases 92-224 and 92-225; AP, Dec 16/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth on Monday after 189 days in space. The two cosmonauts made four space walks during their stay on the orbiting Space Station Mir and carried out a variety of experiments. (AP, Feb 1/93)
NASA announced that it planned to launch Shuttle Endeavour and seven astronauts on December 1 on a  mission to repair the troubled Hubble Space Telescope. (UPI, Oct 21/93)
NASA said that it planned to launch a repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope as planned next month despite a troublesome sensor on one of Shuttle Endeavour's wing flaps. The faulty sensor poses no safety problems, a Nasa spokesman said. (APn, Nov 19/93; RTw, Nov 19/93)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin's shuffling of top Space Station officials had led to internal friction between NASA and officials at the Reston, Virginia, program office for the Space Station. NASA's international partners in the Space Station were also reportedly concerned that they were not fully involved in key decisions involving the Station. (AvWk, Aug 2/93)
NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom Utilization Conference, planned for June 21-24 in San Francisco, California. NASA managers decided to postpone the conference because of recent instructions to redesign the Space Station. (NASA Media Advisory)
The magazine Science reviewed the three main redesigns of the Space Station, noting that the White House's mandate that NASA produce a less costly station design had upset the U.S.'s international partners. (Science, May 28/93)
John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93)
President Clinton declared his support for building a Space Station in partnership with the Russians and received support for the project from key figures in Congress during a White House meeting on November 29.  (W Post, Dec 1/93; RTw, Dec 1/97; AP, Dec 1/97; APn, Dec 1/93; NY Times, Dec 1/93; USA Today, Dec 1/93)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-61 to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was scheduled for December 1, 1993. The flight was the first in a series of planned visits to the orbiting telescope. The 11-day mission was designed to accommodate a record five spacewalks with the capability for an additional two if needed.
Three cosmonauts, including one Frenchman, landed in the Central Asian republic of Kazakhstan after a successful mission aboard the Russian Space Station Mir.  The 22-day Russian-French mission was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan July  1 on board a Soyuz TM-17 craft and two days later docked with Mir. (UPI, Jul 22/93; AP, Jul 22/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that a dispute was brewing within NASA regarding who was to be assigned to the management team overseeing work on the redesigned Space Station.  NASA
Yuri Koptev, head of the Russian Space Agency, said that Russia would definitely take part in the creation of a proposed Space Station with the United States. Work on the Station should start in 1997 and be finished by 2001. (Reuters, Nov 16/93; P Inq, Nov 26/93)
An article in the Christian Science Monitor reported that scarce NASA funding jeopardized the Space Station and manned flights. NASA had asked for a $1 billion increase over fiscal year 1993; however, Representative Ralph Hall, D of Texas, the chairman of the House space subcommittee, told Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, that a billion-dollar increase was not very likely. (CSM, Apr 28/93)
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved $1.9 billion for continued work on Space Station Freedom, but the project faced a fight in the full Senate, where opponents wanted to cut funding. (USA Today, Sep 10/93)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have been able to see a double star whose existence they had known only by the intermittent bursts of x-rays recorded over the last 20 years. The binary star, made up of a neutron star and a white dwarf, is 30.000 light-years away from Earth. The report of the discovery was recently published in Astrophysical Journal Letters. (NY Times, Sep 7/93; W Times, Sep 5/93; W Post, Sep 13/93).
After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93)
NASA announced that the December flight of the Endeavor Space Shuttle mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope was scheduled to last ll days and to involve a record five spacewalks, with the possibility of two additional walks, if needed. (NASA Release 93-76; W Times, Apr 25/93)
According to reports, the Clinton Administration's new budget would cut funding for NASA's planned Space Station by 40 percent; the cuts were predicted to trigger another major restructuring of the project and more delays. Key Capitol aids said the House had approved $1.35 billion for the program in the next fiscal year, instead of the $2.25 billion NASA had requested, Clinton was reported to be troubled by the massive cost-overruns associated with the project. (W Post, Feb 12/97; AP, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93; UPI, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, praised President Bill Clinton as generally being "on track" with  his space and aeronautics program. However, the author suggested that President Clinton needed to clarify his vision for the Space Station; decisive action was needed in a project that already had consumed $8 billion over nearly a decade. An editorial in the Orlando Sentinel urged President Clinton to keep his commitment to the Space Station but to do so with an "eye toward greater efficiency."  (AvWk, Feb 22, 1993; O Sen Star, Feb 22/93)
Russian officials announced that two Russian cosmonauts had taken a space walk to rearrange solar panels on the outside of the Mir Space Station in order to increase the panels' efficiency. The rearrangement also would prepare the Mir for an eventual docking by the U.S. Space Shuttle. The cosmonauts encountered several problems during the walk and had to stay outside their capsule longer than planned. (AP, Apr 4/19, Apr 4/20; RTw, Apr 20/93; USA Today, Apr 20/93)
NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the agency's new office of Space Science, effective immediately. During his career at NASA, Diaz served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, managed the Galileo and Ulysses programs in the Solar System Exploration Division, and developed space science programs for Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 93-53)
NASA announced that it had banned news organizations from covering meetings about the redesign of Space Station Freedom. NASA said the meetings would be closed because they involved mainly NASA employees, not outside advisers. NASA has formal advisory committees, which meet openly in compliance with a 1972 law governing such meetings. (Space News, March 22-28/93)
NASA announced that the Galileo spacecraft had successfully explored the asteroid Ida located between Mars and Jupiter. Although hampered by a jammed main antenna, Galileo zoomed around 1,491 miles from Ida and took all but three of 21 planned photographs.  The three missing photos were the longest-distance photos and unimportant compared with the close-ups. The first photos were not scheduled to arrive at Earth for another two months; the others were to be transmitted in the spring of 1994.  (AP, Aug 28/93; RTw, Aug 28/93; USA Today, Aug 30/93; NY Times, Aug 29/93
The Washington Post reported that the Space Station Freedom redesign team was struggling over a key issue: how to cut the facility's costs while retaining enough power to make the facility worth building. In 1985, NASA engineers envisioned a power system that supplied 135,000 kilowatts (kWs), far more than any other spacecraft. The basic outline of the original plan remained, but the planned capacity had dropped to about 57kW. President Clinton could select a new space design by mid-June. (W Post, May 31/93; USA Today, June 2/93)
NASA's $30 billion Space Station survived its third, and presumably final, vote in the House of Representatives, when members voted 248-184 to keep it from being grounded by budget-cutters (H Post, Nov 23/93; H Chron, Nov 22/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
The Senate endorsed the Clinton Administration's plan to build the Space Station by refusing to cut funding for the 1994 program from $1,94 billion to $500 million.  The latter amount would have been used to shut down the program. (RTw, Sep 21/93; UPI, Sep 21/93; AP, June 22/93; LA Times, Sep 22/93; P Inq, Sep 22/93; NY Times, Sep 23/93)
Late this month, the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft was scheduled to visit a big chunk of rock named Ida, only the second asteroid to be explored up close.  Galileo, launched from a Space Shuttle in 1989, was scheduled to be within 1,500 miles of Ida in late August, on its way to its 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. Galileo made the world's first asteroid encounter--with Gaspra--in October 1991.
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
NASA announced that astronomers working with the Hubble Space Telescope had some success in their attempts to measure the Hubble Constant and the age of the universe. The Hubble Constant (HO) is the ratio of the recession velocities of galaxies to their distances in the expanding universe. The age of the universe can be estimated from the Hubble Constant and currently is thought to lie between 10 and 20 billion years. A more precise measurement of the Hubble Constant is required to narrow this range. (NASA Release 93-108; P Inq, June 10/93; RTw, June 9/93)
NASA officials announced that further testing on the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II (WF/PCII), an instrument scheduled to fly on the Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission in December, might be necessary. Tests had cleared the camera of suspicion that it was flawed, but NASA asked for one last independent review of the data just to make completely sure.  (NASA Release  93-169; W Post, Sep 28/93)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
The Clinton Administration considered cancelling NASA's $30 billion Space Station and the $8.2 billion Super Collider but decided to keep the programs after encountering intense opposition to their cancellation. Cost overruns on the two programs, however, have damaged their political prospects in the administration and Congress. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93; AP, Feb 6/93, 8/93; UPI, Feb 5/93, Feb 8/93; W Post, Feb 6/93; W Times, Feb 6/93; P Inq, Feb 6/93;B Sun, Feb 6/93; NY Times, Feb 6/93)
Writing in the Washington Times, Representative George E. Brown, California Democrat and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, argued that critics of the Space Station were themselves partially responsible for the delay, confusion, and high costs of the Station because of the annual sniping, redrafting and retrenchment to which they have subjected the  Space Station. Brown maintained that the United States needs the jobs provided by the Space Station, needs the scientific challenges of space-based design and engineering, and needs the emotional satisfaction of exploration and discovery.
An editorial in the Baltimore Sun urged President Clinton to give a "strong go-ahead" to the building of Space Station Freedom. (B Sun, June 17/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that, according to congressional aids, President Clinton had decided to push for construction of a sophisticated, orbiting space laboratory that would make use of much of the technology already developed for Space Station Freedom. The President appeared to hint at this decision in a June 15 press conference. (LA Times, June 16/93)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered a group of stars that apparently had been cannibalized of their cooler outer gas layers by other passing stars, resulting in stellar "naked cores" with surface temperatures five times hotter than Earth's sun. (NASA Release 93-109; NY Times, June 10/93; P Inq, June 10/93; B Sun, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93; Science, June 14/93)
Congress held an oversight hearing March 2, in which members of Congress attempted to determine what had led to a potential $1 billion overrun in the Space Station program. Space Station managers testified on how the overruns had developed and how they planned to fix them. At the hearing, NASA officials said they had offset all but about $500 million of the potential cost overruns for the next three year; they had done so largely by cutting management jobs and replacing consultants with government employees. (W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93; Space News, Mar 8-14/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93; H Post, Mar 3/93)
NASA settled a union grievance with Reston, Virginia Space Station employees and cleared the way toward opening a new office in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Sep 9/93)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Allan H. Meltzer, professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that if the Clinton Administration were serious about reducing spending it would eliminate the $30 billion Space Station, reduce entitlements, and cut wasteful projects. (WSJ, Feb 22/93)
The media announced that NASA had unveiled four designs for a scaled-down Space Station. None of the designs, however, could be built as cheaply as the White House had requested and still meet the orbital laboratory's main goals. The team presented cost figures ranging from a low of $11.9 billion to $13.3 billion to build the design that more completely resembled the Space Station Freedom. Three of thee options were similar to the original design of the Space Station but achieved savings through reduction in hardware, management, and capability.
The Washington Post reported that Maxime Faget, chairman and founder of Space International Inc., had resigned from his position as consultant to the Space Shuttle redesign team. Some NASA employees questioned Faget's objectivity because his company had earlier proposed its own alternative Space Station and design and because the company would likely bid on any new design proposal. Faget's resignation "was determined by both NASA and Space Industries as necessary." (W Post, Mar 24/93)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that a NASA advisory panel had found that the Hubble Space Telescope would have had even more component failure in orbit if the launch had not slipped from 1986 to 1990 as a result of the Challenger accident. The delay enabled technicians to do additional testing that revealed suspect parts. (AvWk, May 24/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation reported that its Martin Marietta Astronautics Group had received a $35 million contract from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build the propulsion module subsystem for NASA's Cassini spacecraft mission that was to study Saturn, its moon Titan, and the rest of the Saturnian system. The Cassini was scheduled for launch in October 1997. (W Times, Apr 13/93)
NASA announced that it had notified all its contractors to discontinue all overtime on Space Station work and said that it would "restrict new spending." (W Times, Feb 27/93)
NASA named representatives from government and industry and academic experts from across the country to take part in an independent review of NASA's Space shuttle redesign options. A total of 16 individuals were invited to serve on the committee. Charles M. Vest had previously been named by Vice President Albert Gore to head the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station. The Advisory Committee was to submit its recommendations in June. (NASA Release 93-59)
Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)
Writing in the journal Nature, U.S. scientist Walter Jaffe said that his team had taken pictures of a so-called nuclear accretion disk, which scientists have long theorized surrounds a black hole.  The idea is that matter swirls around the black hole as it is being pulled in, forming an accretion disk, a flat ellipse resembling a round Danish pastry.  The disk was discovered through use of the planetary camera on the Hubble Space Telescope. (RTw, Jul 14/93)
A November Discovery flight, the second Spacehab flight of the year, was scheduled to carry the Wake Shield Facility (WSF), designed to be released from the payload bay to create an atomic oxygen wake as it circled the Earth. Discovery astronauts would conduct experiments to determine the effect the "space wake" had on them. The December flight of Endeavour was scheduled to be the first servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release 93-10)
In an article in the Washington Post Magazine, entitled "Has NASA Lost Its Way?," author Peter Carlson described his viewing of a Shuttle launch, which he called inspiring," and reviewed the history of Space Station Freedom. About the Space Station, he concluded, "So if they can cut the waste and trim the fat, if they can really do it cheaper, faster, better, then let them do it." (W Post, May 30/93)
NASA added a spacewalk to a U.S. Shuttle mission scheduled for July as part of a continuing program to give astronauts experience before start of Space Station construction in 1996. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
Daniel S. Golden, NASA administrator, named Dr. Joseph F. Shea, adjunct professor of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and former NASA employee, to be in charge of the redesign of the Space Station. Golden also announced measures to conserve resources and restrict new spending during the redesign transition. (NASA Release 93-038; Space News, Mar 1-7; UPI, Feb 27/93; W Post, Feb 27/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had provided the most detailed look yet at comet Shoemaker-Levy 5, which was hurtling toward a July  1994 collision with the planet Jupiter.  Hubble's high resolution images showed that the approximately 20 objects that make up the comet are much smaller than originally estimated from observations with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 93-188; USA Today, Oct 15/93; S F Chron, Oct 15/93; RTw, Oct 14/93; W Post, Oct 25/93)
Senator John Warner, R. Virginia, introduced legislation to kill NASA's manned Space Station project. Calling the Space Station "wasteful and unnecessary," the senator urged President Clinton to kill the project. (W Post, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93)
Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported that the White House had begun to review the various options for redesign of the Space Station. There were reports that the President might be wavering in his support for the Station and perhaps would be willing to sacrifice it for his broader economic goals. (AvWk, June 14/93)
President Bill Clinton announced that he would ask Congress to support a scaled-down version of Space Station Freedom and would attempt to broaden international participation in the program. Clinton said that he would also support the Superconducting Super Collider project. (RTw, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; W Post, June 18/93; LA Times, June 18/93; USA Today, June 18/93; NY Times, June 18/93; W Times, June 18/93; B Sun, June 18/93; WSJ, June 13/93; AP, June 18/93)
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
An article in New Scientist suggested that many failures in space are not the fault of electronics or software, but something more fundamental--the mechanics.  The article identified a number of space missions that had problems caused by mechanical failures. Examples include the mission involving the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca); Germany's TVSAT1, a direct broadcast satellite launched in November 1987; and the Hubble Telescope. (New Scientist, Oct 30/93)
Writing in the New York Times, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, suggested that now that the Cold War was over and there was no longer any need to demonstrate U.S. space superiority over the Soviet Union, the time had come to "put Space Station Freedom out of its misery." Parks noted that there was very little one could do in a Space Station; he added that the scientific accomplishments of the Russian cosmonauts in Russian Space Station Mir had been meager and that there was little expectation that U.S. astronauts would do any better. He noted, further, that the costs connected with the station were enormous. (NY Times, Apr 18/93)
NASA managers and industry contractors blamed Space Station cost overruns on the rush to redesign the effort in 1990 and 1991. Congress directed NASA in October 1990 to shave $6 billion from the Space Station over five years. NASA settled on a plan in early 1991 to shorten the pressurized modules and reduce the number of solar arrays. The agency also pushed back the date when the crew could occupy the Space Station by two years--to 1999--and reduced the crew size by half. In addition, NASA redid plans for the latticework structure that forms the Space Station's backbone and the Johnson Space Center's major responsibility in the program. According to Jack Boykin, Johnson's acting project director, the plan was too optimistic in its estimates of cost and technical complexity.
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, attempted to smooth over "strained" relations with top NASA management, upset over a letter that he had written to a House subcommittee investigating space station funding. In part the letter read,"I have been concerned with regard to the validity of the present cost and schedule estimates." NASA officials scheduled to testify before the subcommittee said that Goldin's comments seemed to discredit what they had to say even before they said it. Yesterday, Goldin denied that he distrusted his top managers. (W Post, Mar 5/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, aerospace engineer James F. Glass advocated funding the Space Station, arguing that not only does NASA provide jobs and dreams, but it also keeps the country pulling together for America's future. He noted that when NASA, with all its faults, spends a dollar, the taxpayer usually receives a dollar's value.  Ultimately, in Glass's view, the country needs to focus on more than survival; it must reach for the stars. (LA Times, Jul 20/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that Space Station Freedom needed to be everything from a scientific laboratory to "an inspiration to children."  Disagreeing with Goldin, Robert L. Park, representing the American Physical Society, argued that the "Space Station is unlikely to make any significant scientific contribution." (AP, Jul 1/93, Jul 2/93)
In its annual report, NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel said that the Space Station had "progressed considerably in the past year." The report went on to say that the effort "exhibits a degree of stability and continuity that has previously been absent." (APn, Mar 18/93)
The Washington Post reported that NASA's dream of building a permanent human outpost in space was generating much controversy. President Clinton's decision to shrink Space Station funding and his mandate that the station be redesigned added to the controversy. (W Post, May 17/93)
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
Speaking on CNN's morning news show, Senator Jim Sasser, D-Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, called the Superconducing Super Collider a $7 billion scientific pork barrel. He said he would propose cutting it out of the budget along with the Space Station. (AP, Feb 7/93)
The media reported that NASA administrators were seeking to quell the concerns of European space officials over the redesign of the planned U.S. Space Station. Clinton's decision to redesign the project could have "disastrous effects' if it results in an orbiting lab unsuitable to foreign partners, a German executive said. (WSJ, May 14/93; AP, May 13/93)
The House of Representatives voted to maintain $2.1 billion in funding for the scaled-down Space Station Freedom by a 220 to 196 vote. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin attributed the growing support to an intense lobbying effort by the White House and congressional supporters. The project's chance of surviving the Senate vote were seen as good. (RTw, June 28/93; UPI, June 28/93; APn, June 29/93; AP, June 29/93; W Post, June 29/93; LA Times, June 29/93; H Post, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93; W Times, June 29/93; NY Times, June 30/93)
NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)
After conferring with Space Station contractor McDonnell Douglas, space officials confirmed that a cost overrun of at least $500 million was expected if costs were not brought under control. They told a congressional panel that the Station was now a $31.3 billion project. The increases appeared to be mainly in the Johnson Space Center portion of the program. NASA's Marty Kress, the Space Station project's new deputy director, said managers were determined to lower costs and were considering various means for doing so. Key congressional aides expressed anger at the news of the overrun, noting that for years NASA had ignored their advice on a design strategy to lower costs. (W Post, Jan 31/93; Space News, Feb 1-7/93; O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number  of organizational changes in the agency. He named John R. Dailey to be Acting Deputy Administrator and said that Dr. Joseph Shea, recently named as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis, would have oversight over all Space Station related development activities.
The ITAR-Tass news agency announced that a cargo ship loaded with food, water, fuel and equipment had docked with the orbiting Space Station Mir. The cargo ship also delivered a landing capsule to the two Mir astronauts, who had been aboard the Mir for four months. (AP, May 24/93)
Science reported that NASA had agreed that NASA and Russian scientists would cooperate in several research projects aboard the Russian Space Station Mir in 1994. The joint effort would be part of a scientific exchange signed by the United States and Russia last July. (Science, May 28/93)
The Washington Post reported that NASA, under White House instructions to cut the budget of Space Station Freedom, was attempting to push the McDonald Douglas Corporation out of the $30 billion Space Station contract. McDonald Douglas was the prime contractor in the project, which had cost overruns of between $300 million and $1 billion. (W Post, Apr 25/93)
A senior NASA official who asked not to be named said that the agency was seriously considering attaching Space Station Freedom modules to Russia's Mir Space Station and helping refurbish the seven-year-old facility. NASA was also actively looking at combining Freedom with the next-generation Mir Station, which Moscow said it planned to launch around 1996. (Defense Daily, Aug 26/93)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle criticized political opponents of a permanent U.S. Space Station, arguing that the Space Station's detractors risk costing this nation its scientific and technological preeminence for decades to come. (H Chron, June 2/93)
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency (ESA) have invited Russia to help them build a new Space Station, according to an announcement by the ESA. (RTW, Oct 18/93; NASA Release N93-650)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin notified employees in a memo distributed the previous week that the scaled-back Space Station would mean the loss of about 1,300 jobs among federal workers alone.  Space Station work involved 2,300 of NASA's 24,000 employees. (AP, Jul 26/93; Sp News, Jul 26-Aug 1/93; B Sun, Jul 27/93)
A Washington Post editorial had generally favorable comments regarding President Clinton's economic stimulus-deficit plan, noting that he had taken on some formidable interest groups. It suggested, however, that he  could have killed the Space Station as "unaffordable in present circumstances." A Washington Times editorial argued that both the Space Station and the Superconducing Super Collider should be cut. A Philadelphia Inquirer editorial called for a delay in building the Space Station because of funding issues. (W Post, Feb 24/93; W Times, Feb 26/93; P Inq, Mar 7/93)
Included in the promises Bill Clinton made during his presidential campaign were two relating to NASA. Clinton promised to create a civilian research agency to serve as a means of transferring new technologies into new products. He also promised to support construction of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Jan 15/93)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Bryan O'Connor, Deputy Director of the Space Station Redesign Team, would take over management of the Space Station effort in order to accommodate a request by the team's leader, Joseph F. Shea, that his workload be reduced. Shea submitted his resignation as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis; he was to serve as Special Advisor to the Administrator and advisor to O'Connor. (NASA Statement on Advisory Committee Meeting)
NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)
According to NASA, President Clinton's plans for the Space Station could threaten some of the 125 Maryland jobs connected with the project. About $14 million was being spent in Maryland on station-related work. (B Sun, Feb 18/93)
The Houston Post reported that the two committees charged with redesigning Space Station Freedom were behind schedule. The two groups, a technical resign team mainly made up of NASA employees and a team of outside experts, had been faced with much infighting at NASA and a barrage of criticism from Congress and the foreign countries participating in the Space Station project. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin asserted that the work would be finished on time. (H Post, May 4/93; AvWk, May 3/93; H Chronicle, May 6/93)
In letters to the editor of the Baltimore Sun, two Johns Hopkins University physics professors defended the importance of the Super Collider. Both writers said that the project represented basic research of the highest caliber and noted that its fate should not be tied to that of the Space Station. (B Sun, Jul 1/93)
NASA described Space Station Freedom as a laboratory for industry as well as government and set aside a third of the Station's experiment space for commercial research. NASA planned to begin launching pieces of Space Station Freedom into orbit in 1996. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
The Christian Science Monitor reported that astronomers who study the evolution of the cosmos hoped that the Hubble space telescope, if it could be repaired as planned this December, would help them resolve a paradox relating to the universe's age. Current research implies that the universe is younger than the oldest stars. One of the Hubble's key missions was to refine what had become the foundation for many cosmic distance scales. (CSM, May 12/93)
Writing in the Christian Science Monitor, James Oberg, a professional space engineer and a specialist on Russian aerospace, hailed the success of Russia's manned Space Station, Mir. He noted that the Mir, launched in 1986, had been continuously occupied since mid-1989 by successive teams of cosmonauts.
Europe, Japan, and Canada--the United States's partners in the Space Station project--rejected NASA's move to redesign the project. They instead demanded that the team begin by considering revisions to the current plan. They warned that they might be forced to pull out of the program if the United States changed the plan significantly. (Space News, March 15-21/93)
NASA announced that in one of the deepest celestial surveys yet made by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers had discovered a small group of previously unknown interacting galaxies estimated to be three billion light-years away. Because Hubble caught the galaxies in an early stage of evolution, they offer new clues as to how galaxies have changed over time. (NASA Release 93-203)
NASA announced that the Space Station redesign team would submit its final report on three design options to the White House Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station on Monday, June 7. The three options included a modular concept that would use existing flight-proven hardware, a derivative of the current Space Station Freedom design, and a Space Station that could be placed into orbit with a single launch of a Shuttle-driven vehicle. (NASA Release 93-104; UPI, June 6/1993; AP, June 7/93; NY Times, June 6/93; W Post, June 6/93; B Sun, June 6/93)
Writing in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Daniel S. Greenberg noted that "times are bad" for the so-called mega projects of our era: Star Wars, the Space Station, and the super atom smasher in Texas. He, warned, however that big-science mobilization should not automatically be suspect, suggesting, for example, that the country would benefit from an all-out effort on a project such as the electric car. (P Inq, May 21/93)
Static firing tests of a propulsion development test article for Space Station Freedom began at NASA's White Sand's Test Facility (WSTF) in New Mexico in late December. The tests checked the preliminary design for the propulsion module that was to be used for Space Station attitude control, orientation, speed and altitude control, and avoidance of space debris. (NASA Release 93-7)
Writing in USA Today, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson, R-Texas, noted that research planned for the Space Station program would help women. Research already scheduled for the newly redesigned Space Station would address several women's diseases, from osteoporosis to ovarian and breast cancer to immune-system disorders.  (USA Today, Aug 12/93)
The media reported that Representative George E. Brown, chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, told a news conference that NASA's effort to save Space Station Freedom was doomed unless the project continued with a scaled-down version of the current design. Although the streamlined model of Freedom was the most expensive of the three options being analyzed, Brown noted that it was also the one with years of experience and $8 billion in development costs behind it. (WP, May 21/93; H Chron, May 21/93; LA Times, May 21/93; W Times, May 21/93; NY Times, May 21/93; W Post, May 21/93; AvWk, May 24/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
The countdown began for the Hubble Telescope repair mission, considered by many to be NASA's biggest challenge in space since the Apollo moon landings. The Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to lift off on the 11-day flight on December 1. (B Sun, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; USA Today, Nov 29/93; P Inq, Nov 29/93; NY Times Magazine, Nov 28/93; USA Weekend, Nov 26-28; W Post, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; RTw, Nov 27/93, 28/93; APn, Nov 27/93, Nov 28/93; UPn, Nov 26/93, Nov 28/93; W Times, Dec 1/93)
Richard H. Kohrs, Director, Space Station Freedom, retired from NASA after 30 years of service. Kohrs was appointed Space Station Freedom Director on June 1, 1989. (NASA Release  93-160)
The Washington Post reported that U.S. and Russian scientists would meet in Washington during the week to discuss ways to cooperate on U.S. and Russian Space Stations and possibly merge the two stations in the late 1990s. The Post said that Vice President Al Gore was leading the White House initiative on this subject. (Rtw, Jul 26/93; W Post, Jul 26/93)
NASA held a marathon, 59-hour dress rehearsal of the agency's $251 million mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope and repair its flawed vision. The 11-day mission aboard the Shuttle Endeavour was planned for December 1.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
Marshall Engineers and Scientists Association President Wesley Darbro said that it appeared that the Marshall Space Flight Center would lay off about 478 workers, all associated with the Space Station program. (Huntsville Times, Sep 20/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Office of Space Flight would assume responsibility for management of the Space Station Program.  Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Associate Administrator of Space Flight, was scheduled to lead the integration of these major programs.  (NASA Release  93-1291; AP, Oct 20/93)
NASA managers and engineers warned that infighting and confusion jeopardized the Space Station effort. Critics said that NASA must strengthen accountability, do away with bureaucratic constraints, and forge a more cohesive team. There was widespread disagreement among Space Station players over whether NASA should make some personnel changes or take a more radical path, for example, invest more authority in the program office in Reston, Virginia, or concentrate effort at a single NASA center. (Space News, Feb 15-21/93)
Space-agency officials from the United States, Europe, Canada, and Japan agreed to invite Russia to join them in building an international Space Station that would be the world's largest collaborative science project. (WSJ, Dec 7/93; B Sun, Dec 7/93; TTw, Dec 6/93)
White House officials said that President Clinton had decided to proceed with a slightly slimmed down version of the original Space Station Freedom design. The Space Station was expected to cost about $10.5 billion over five years. (RTw, June 16/93; NY Times, June 17/93; USA Today, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
Studies on the feasibility of using Soyuz TM spacecraft as crew return vehicles for the U.S./international Space Station were scheduled to enter a more detailed phase according to NASA Associate Administrator Arnold D. Aldrich. NPO ENERGIA was to study modifications, launch options, and costs for one year. The Soviet hardware could allow NASA to permanently staff the station by 1998 or 1998. (AvWk, Jan 4/1993)
In a Time magazine essay, Dennis Overbye advocated cooperating with the Russians in building the new Space Station. He suggested  that the inclusion of Russia would breathe new life into the tired Space-Station project.  At the very least, he advocated that the Space Station go into a high-inclination orbit so that Russian spacecraft could visit from the Baikonur spaceport and perhaps perform rescue operations. (Time, Jul 19/93)
NASA officials said that the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to be functioning well, but that they would not know until February whether or not the Hubble's vision problems had been corrected. (W Times, Dec 16/93; Fla Today, Dec 14/93, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; UPn, Dec 15/93)
In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
A spacewalk was added to Space Shuttle mission STS-57 aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour as part of a series of spacewalk tests NASA planned to conduct during the next three years to prepare for the construction and maintenance of Space Station Freedom. Endeavour was scheduled for an April launch. The main objectives of the STS-57 mission were retrieval of the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) deployed during a Shuttle flight in August 1992 and the conducting of research in the Spacehab module. (NASA Release 93-31)
John H. Gibbons, Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy, outlined to the members-designate of the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station, three budget options. The three options are a low option of $5 billion, a mid-range option of $7 billion, and a high option of $9 billion. Each option would cover the total expenditures for the Space Station from fiscal year 1994 through 1988. (NASA Release 93-64)
A team of astronomers using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope discovered a "double nucleus" in the center of the neighboring spiral galaxy M31, located in the constellation Andromeda.  Hubble shows that the M31 nucleus is much more complex than previously though, according to Dr. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, Tucson, Arizona.
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
NASA announced that the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had been selected to design and build, in-house, the Space Station Furnace Facility, the first major element of Space Station scientific instrumentation and the focus of microgravity materials science research on the Space Station. (NASA Release 93-211)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
A Soyuz spacecraft with a Russian-French crew docked successfully with the Mir-1 orbiting Space Station on July 3. (RTw, July  3/93)
NASA announced that it planned to launch a $550 million-plus mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. Observers viewed the mission as very important for NASA's future; failure to repair the telescope would not only be a blow to astronomy but also would fuel the debate in Congress about NASA's ability to build Space Station Freedom later in the decade. The concern over the repair mission led to extensive oversight, numerous internal debates about the mission, and talk of a possible lengthening of the duration of the mission in order to allow for as many as six spacewalks. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93; Science, Feb 12/93; RTw, Mar 11; B Sun Magazine, Mar 14/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
The head of the Japanese space agency's office of space utilization said that Japan was unhappy with cutbacks to the Space Station Freedom project. Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa may bring up the issue at a meeting with President Clinton, scheduled to be held in Washington this week. (LA Times, Apr 14/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
A New York Times editorial suggested that if pain was to be spread fairly, the country's two biggest science projects, the $8.3 billion Superconducting Super Collider now being built in Texas and the $30 billion Space Station, had to be cut along with other vital programs.
Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)
The President's 1994 budget request for NASA called for an increase over last year's budget and contained key provisions for the Space Station program and the development of important new technologies. The President was to propose a $14.7 billion budget for NASA for fiscal year 1994, up from $14.1 billion during the current year.
The Los Angeles Times reported that congressional supporters of the proposed Space Station were warning that the project would face serious trouble if President Clinton supported a radical, low-cost design. Supporters of the Station made it clear that they supported the most elaborate and expensive of the three redesigns developed by NASA. This design, which would cost $13.3 billion over the next five years, would cut more than $4 billion from the cost of the Station, yet it would keep most of the Station's capabilities and make use of much of the work that NASA had done on the project over the last nine years. (LA Times, June 11/93)
NASA announced that it had cleared the instruments scheduled to be used for the Hubble Telescope repair mission.  It was feared that the instruments had been contaminated by sandy  grit that had seeped into the cargo room where the equipment was being stored. The grit problem forced NASA to move the Endeavour to a different launch pad. (B Sun, Nov 16/93; W Times, Nov 16/93; USA Today, Nov 16/93; RTw, Nov 15/93)
By a one-vote margin, the House of Representatives voted to fund Space Station Freedom. As a result of a 216-215 vote, the program escaped an attempt by budget-cutting lawmakers to scrap the multibillion-dollar project. (WSJ, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93; LA Times, June 24/93; W Times, June 24/93; USA Today, June 24/93; AP, June 24/93; UPI, June 23/94; RTw, June 23/93; W Post, June 24/93)
The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
The House Space, Science, and Technology Committee passed a $15.16 billion authorization for NASA, in effect rejecting the attempt to kill the Space Station. The authorization would give the Space Station $1.9 billion a year for the next six fiscal years and $1.3 billion in the fiscal year 2000. Congressional opponents of the station, however, vowed to take the fight to the House floor. (NY Times, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; USA Today, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93)
In an address to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, said that the redesign effort for Space Station Freedom was making "great progress." (AvWk, May 10/93)
A New York Times editorial recommended that Congress eliminate the Space Station program because of the need to find deeper budget cuts and the fact that the program looked "more like pork-barrel spending for the aerospace industry than an exciting technological venture." The editorial noted that cutting the program would force the nation to reassess just what role humans should play in space. (NY Times, June 23/93)
A spaceship, with two cosmonauts on board, was launched from Kazakhstan to test a new docking procedure for a possible linkup with a U.S. Space Shuttle. The spaceship was scheduled to dock with the orbiting Space Station Mir and deliver the two cosmonauts, who would replace the two currently on board the Mir.  (W Times, Jan 23/93; AP, Jan 24/93; UPI, Jan 24/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced that following a White House directive, NASA had begun a redesign of the proposed Space Station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build, and cheaper to operate. The redesign team planned to present three proposed models to the Clinton Administration by June 1. Goldin said that the agency would make maximum use of the $8.5-billion worth of work that had gone into designing and planning the Space Station since the mid-198s. (NY Times, Mar 12/93; W Times, Mar 12/93; LA Times, Mar 12/93; B Sun, Mar 12/93; AP, Mar 11/93, Mar 12/93; WSJ, Mar 12/93; Space News, Mar 15-21; AvWk, Mar 15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93, Mar 12/93)
Hughes Aircraft and Perkin-Elmer Corporation agreed to pay $25 million to head off a threatened government lawsuit, charging them with liability for the defect that crippled the $2-billion Hubble Space Telescope, the Justice Department announced. (UPI, Oct 4/93; AP, Oct 5/93; NY Times, Oct 5/93; B Sun, Oct 5/93, Oct 8/93; W Post, Oct 5/93; WSJ, Oct 5/93; LA Times, Oct 5/93)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had reported that recent NASA Hubble Space Telescope observations of a class of active galaxies further supported the theory that they are fueled by a massive black hole at the center. (NASA Release 93-130; RTw, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
By using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have concluded that the Markarian 315 galaxy, a galaxy that has been observed for ten years, is in reality composed of two merged galaxies; the collision of the two galaxies is thought to have provided new fuel for a massive black hole, which has a "tail" of gas 240,000 light-years long. (NASA Release 93-006; W Times, Jan 8, 1993)
In a report delivered to the White House, a panel appointed by the President said it found the two cheaper options for a Space Station to be the "most deserving of further
Writing in the Chicago Tribune, commentator Joan Beck called on Congress to kill the Space Station. She admitted that killing the project would cost jobs, but argued that doing so was necessary if progress were to be made in cutting back the deficit. (C Trib, June 24/93)
Scientists reported that NASA's Galileo spacecraft had detected changes in the interplanetary magnetic field as it passed the asteroid Ida on August 28. (NASA Release 93-193)
NASA announced that a task force established by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to review plans for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission had concluded that "the mission is achievable." The servicing mission was currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA Release 93-96)
Russia's Mir Space Station celebrated its seventh anniversary in orbit on February 20. The Mir has given Russian cosmonauts much experience with extended periods in space. About half-dozen cosmonauts have made multiple flights and spent a total of more than a year in orbit. (AP, Feb 19/93)
Two Russian cosmonauts orbiting the earth since July  have been forced to extend their stay on the Mir Space Station by 49 days because of a delay in sending a relief craft, a space agency officials announced. (RTW, Oct 16/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had looked into the nucleus of a galaxy created by the collision of two galaxies and had discovered a pinwheel-shaped disk of gas surrounded by clusters of young stars born as result of the collision. "This may unlock the key for understanding how all globular clusters formed in ellipticals," said Dr. Brad Whitmore of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.
An editorial in the Washington Post noted that in light of the budget deficit it was difficult to quarrel with Congress's decision to kill funding for the Superconducting Super Collider. By that same token, however, the Space Station deserved to be killed, especially because the Super Collider had the potential to contribute to human knowledge while the Space Station did not. (W Post, June 30/93)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it had picked two Germans, a Spaniard, and a Swede for its first joint missions with Russian astronauts to the Mir-1 Space Station in 1994 and 1995. The ESA had reserved one slot each for the two flights. A decision on which two men would participate would be made in the weeks before the flight. (RTw, May 7/93)
NASA announced that it planned to use the eight Space Shuttle flights scheduled for 1993 for research relating to the building and operation of Space Station Freedom, scheduled to be launched in three years.
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts was scheduled to blast off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission during which the team would carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments. This was the fourth joint Russian-French space mission since 1982. The mission had been largely overshadowed by the space program's serious financial problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union. (RTw, June 6/30)
After a one-day weather delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour lifted off before dawn on a mission to repair the out-of-focus $3 billion Hubble Space Telescope. Four members of the Shuttle crew, made up of six men and one woman, were to take five planned day-long spacewalks in an attempt to restore the full capability of the Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; TRw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; NY Times, Dec 3/93; APn, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93)
NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
A spokesman said that NASA had delayed loading the Hubble Space Telescope's replacement parts into Space Shuttle Endeavour because a fine, sandy substance had been found on two sealed plastic bags containing instruments needed to repair the telescope. A wind storm was thought responsible.  Officials were to inspect the instruments to make sure they had not been damaged. NASA did not believe the inspection would delay the mission's target liftoff of Dec. 1. (AP, Nov 2/93; RTw, Nov 2/93, Nov 4/98; B Sun, Nov 4/93)
Writing in Business Week, science writer John Carey predicted that Congress would ultimately keep alive the Space Station, which he labelled a boondoggle, and very likely kill the scientifically worthy Super Collider. Carney charged that the  Space Station was mainly being kept alive to preserve 15,000 mostly high-paying jobs in areas hard hit by defense cutbacks.  He viewed the cries of those who charged that the country couldn't afford the Super Collider as hypocrisy, noting that Congress funds much less worthy projects. (Business Week, Sept. 13/93)
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
NASA scientists said they were "ecstatic" over their progress in bringing the Hubble Space Telescope back to life after this month's repair mission. Hubble's ground handlers at NASA predicted that they would focus the observatory completely by the end of January, about two weeks quicker than expected. (H Post, Dec 23/93; APn, Dec 29/93; B Sun, Dec 25/93)
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
The Houston Chronicle reported on a new nationwide poll of registered voters conducted by Yankelovitch Partners and sponsored by NASA contractor Rockwell International Corporation. The poll revealed that 70 percent of American voters supported the construction of a permanently staffed Space Station and 63 percent believed that the United States should spend "whatever is necessary" to preserve its lead in space activities. Some of the poll results, however, reflected wide swings of support for the space program. (H Chron, May 25/93)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts blasted off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission. The team was scheduled to carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments and undertake three space walks.  This was the fourth joint Russian-French space flight since 1982. (RTw, Jul 1/93; RT, Jul 1/93)
The newly released proposals to redesign Space Station Freedom drew mixed reviews on Capitol Hill, with supporters praising the effort and detractors citing the cost of the project as further evidence that it should be abandoned. (W Post, June 9/93; LA Times, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; P Inq, June 9/93; AP, June 9/93; APn, June 8/93; RTw, June 8/93; H Chron, June 9/93; H Post, June 10/93)
NASA released two new Hubble space telescope photographs that show a bullet of gas streaking across the sky. According to J. Jeff Hester, an Arizona State University astronomer, the new pictures show a "shock wave from a colossal explosion of a star 15,000 years ago smashing into a pocket of interstellar gas, heating the gas and causing it to glow." Following the blast wave is a shaft of gas traveling at more than 3 million miles an hour. The images show the structure behind the shock waves in the Cygnus Loop supernova remnant. The Hubble photos are giving astronomers their first detailed look at the anatomy of the powerful astrophysical shock wave generated by a supernova. (NASA Release N93-002; B Sun, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 18/93)
House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)
Bryan O'Connor, a former astronaut and deputy director of the redesign team and deputy associate administrator of the office of space flight at NASA, said that NASA engineers planned to have three new design options ready by June. O'Connor said that two plans could cut the cost of the project by 50 percent or more. The third plan, which would be based on the current Space Station Freedom concept, would cost more. Whether the redesign effort could be done quickly and cheaply was still in doubt, O'Connor said. (AP, Apr 6/93; W Post, Apr 6/93)
NASA announced that April marked the 10th anniversary of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a space-based network developed to meet telecommunications needs of Space Shuttle, Space Station, and other low Earth-orbiting spacecraft missions. The TDRSS is equipped to support up to 24 user spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle, simultaneously. (NASA Release 93-60)
In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)
According to a report in Space News, NASA and White House officials agreed last week to consider partner concerns about the Space Station design effort. The U.S. Government would give their European, Japanese, and Canadian partners greater representation in the project and ensure that any alternative design did not exclude their hardware. The agreement was laid out in a March 19 document. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
Onboard computers aborted the launch of Space Station Discovery just three seconds before liftoff. This was the fourth delay for Discovery, which was halted twice for technical problems in July  and rescheduled because of a meteor shower on August 11. NASA said the next try could come in three to six weeks.
The Russians, eager to hawk their space wares to the West, were scheduled to hold a conference on the Mir Space Station July  27 to July  28 at the Dulles Hyatt in Herndon, Virginia.  Hosted by NPO Engergia, manufacturer of the Mir, the conference is scheduled to cover all aspects of the platform.  A large delegation was expected from the NASA Space Station redesign team. (Washington Technology, Jul 15/93)
A NASA panel recommended that the space agency plan two Space Shuttle missions rather than the scheduled one to repair the Hubble telescope. The panel agreed that the repairs could be done, but suggested that because of the complexity of the task, a back-up mission should be planned. (UPI, May 25/93; AP, May 25/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
U.S. Senate candidate Richard Fisher called Space Station Freedom a "pork barrel" project in a speech on Friday. Fisher, a Texas investor, was running as a Democrat in a special May 1 election. Fisher had advised the independent presidential campaign of Ross Perot, who had criticized the lack of spending controls on the Space Station project. Fisher, who in the past had voiced support for the Superconducting Super Collider, said that he was still studying the project's worth. (H Chron, Apr 24/93)
President Clinton thanked the crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour for giving "a great deal of credibility" to his attempt to save the Space Station. The President called the crew on Tuesday, June 22. (USA Today, June 23/93; NY Times, June 23/93; W Times, June 23/93)
The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)
NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
Several life science researchers questioned whether a redesigned Space Station would accomplish enough life science objectives to be worth the investment. Researchers at a meeting of the NationaL Research Council's Space Studies Board said that they expected a redesign to either shrink or reduce the centrifuge, a set of spinning modules designed for precise gravity experiments on animals aboard the station. Harold Guy, a professor at the University of California's School of Medicine in LaJolla, California, said that without a large centrifuge, much of the station's experimental value for life scientists would be lost. "The life science community may bail out," said Fred Turek, a neurobiologist and chairman of the space biology and medicine committee on the National Research Council's Space Studies Board. (Space News, Mar 1/93)
Representative George E. Brown Jr, chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, warned the Clinton Administration that ordering a redesign of the Space Station might doom not only the space station but also other international "big science" projects. He also sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin cautioning him against abandoning the current design, which had cost $8 billion so far. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
Space News reported that European space officials were monitoring news about the fate of the United States Space Station under the Clinton Administration. The 13-nation European Space Agency (ESA) had agreed to spend about $2.8 billion on its Columbus Space Station program. The European program included a habitable laboratory that was to be attached to the Station and related ground equipment. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
NASA officials announced that they planned to eliminate a number of expensive facilities and delay several Space Station assembly missions in their attempt to cut growing cost projections for the program. Senior program officials said that they had reduced $l.08 billion in anticipated cost increases for the Space Station to $678 million. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, commentator James Flanigan made the case for funding the Space Station, reminding readers of the Vest Commission report, ordered last March by the White House. The report listed three main goals of the Space Station program: to learn about space travel, specifically how human beings and materials react to prolonged weightless exposure; to gather technological and engineering knowledge; and to further international cooperation. (LA Times, June 28/93)
Technical breakthroughs in space have helped launch clinical advances on earth. Space Shuttle experiments, which focus on determining how best to maintain the health of astronauts aboard a future Space Station, continue to provide spin-offs for clinical medicine on earth, from programmable pacemakers to a better understanding of vestibular disorders. The cost, however, is very high, and the question remains whether the Space Station project represents a potentially giant leap for medicine or a small step for a select few. (Medical World News, Aug 15/93)
George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)
A Japanese cabinet advisory commission report stated that Japan needed to double its space budget over the next 15 years to initiate planetary expeditions, become a leader in Earth observation, and develop advanced robotics. The new space plan confirmed Japan's existing commitment to international space programs, inclduing the Japanese Experiment Module for NASA's International Space Station. The recommendations came from a long-term planning group within the Space Activities Commission and were to be forwarded to Japan's Finance Ministry at the end of August when the fiscal 1995 budget would be prepared. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
The anticipated fight over the budget and, specifically, the likelihood that NASA's appropriation would be cut and that further efforts would be made to eliminate funding for the International Space Station was featured prominently in the media. (SP News, May 16-22/94; Fla Today, May 16/94; Defense Daily, May 16/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
The Book Review section carried an extensive review of Eric J. Chaisson's The Hubble Wars: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope. Chaisson served as spokesman and director of educational programs for the Space Telescope Science Institute, a NASA-supported group of astronomers responsible for planning and directing the telescope's observational program. According to the author, the space telescope's progress toward scientific discovery was hampered by squabbling among NASA, the military intelligence community, industry, the press, and scientists. Some of the problems might have been avoided if the Hubble scientists had had access to the technical experience of the military intelligence community. (NY Times Book Review, May 29/94)
The Boeing Company denied any intentional wrongdoing but paid the U.S. Government $75 million to settle accusations that it systematically overcharged and mischarged the Government on military contracts. U.S. Attorney Kate Pflaumer said the most egregious mischarging was in Boeing's divisions that explored artificial intelligence applications to robotics, military command and control, high-speed jets, and Space Stations. Boeing admitted having improperly charged the Government several million dollars in costs incurred in selling aircraft overseas and having charged the Government millions of dollars for hazardous-waste disposal. (NY Times, Apr 30/94; WSJ, Apr 30/94)
NASA announced that its Galileo Spacecraft had begun a six-month process of radioing to Earth data taken during the collisions of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at Jupiter in July. (NASA Release 94-133)
Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania, who was scheduled to chair the House Science Committee in the new Congress, said he felt that Space Station appropriatations by Congress were safe. He indicated he wanted to explore ways of linking NASA facilities with universities and international partnerships as well as tax incentives for space business development, all of which he saw as ways of saving space funds. (AP, Dec 14/94; Gannett News Service, Dec 14/94; H Chron, Dec 15/94; Congressional Quarterly's Congressional Monitor, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 15/94)
The National Research Council reported that NASA officials had not yet established a solid working relationship with the Russian Space Agency. The Council found tremendous improvement in NASA management but considered that NASA thus far lacked a strong grip on Russian involvement. Since 1985 the Council, the operating arm of the National Academies of Science and Engineering, had reviewed the Space Station regularly under federal funding. The Space Station Committee, headed by Jack Kerrebrock, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor, also expressed concern that NASA needed to invest more in experiment development and preparatory work on Spacelab, the Shuttle's science laboratory. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; NY Times, Jul 29/94; Phillips Business Information, Jul 29/94)
NASA faced tough opposition over Russian participation in the International Space Station during hearings of the House Subcommittee on Space. Both committee chairman Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas, and James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican member, believed strongly that it should be an American Station. (O Sen Star, Apr 21/94)
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Partner met in Paris with officials of the Russian Federation for the first time to discuss steps to implement the decision to bring Russia into the Space Station partnership. The resulting joint statement referred to Russia's planned contribution, enhancing Station capabilities, needed changes to the legal framework of the 1988 agreements to include Russia, and a schedule to complete negotiations, beginning with an April meeting. (NASA Editor's Note N94-23)
A photograph was featured of the first node of NASA's international laboratory designed as part of the International Space Station. It was being manufactured by Boeing at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. (Fla Today, Oct 2/94)
A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)
NASA announced the dedication of the Independent Verification and Validation facility, a new research facility in Fairmont, West Virginia, that was to support NASA's work in advanced research, stimulate commercialization efforts, and provide training in a variety of engineering and technology areas. In addition to housing staff working on software for the International Space Station, it was to house parts of the Earth Observing System Data and Operations System. Senator Robert C. Byrd attended the opening. (NASA Release 94-88; Times-West Virginian, Jun 2/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)
Russia again postponed the launch of the Spektr research module, scheduled to rendezvous with Space Station Mir in December. Itar-Tass news agency reported that the launch had been postponed until May 1995. (Itar-Tass, Nov 17/94)
France planned on its next manned mission to Russian Space Station Mir in January 1996 to use an advanced Aerospatiale system called Alice 2 to improve knowledge of fluid behavior in microgravity conditions for use in materials processing. (AvWk, Dec 12/94)
NASA announced that the Space Station Control Board had approved a revised assembly sequence that provided significantly more power for the U.S. laboratory, provided an earlier U.S. capability for essential Space Station systems, and produced hardware in an efficient and cost effective manner while still meeting the $2.1 billion annual spending cap. (NASA Release 94-117)
NASA announced that based on technology developed for its Hubble Space Telescope, a new, non-surgical breast biopsy technique had been developed. The new technique, known as stereotactic large-core needle biopsy, was predicted to reduce national health care costs by about $1 billion annually. The technique involved an improvement to digital imaging technology called a Charge Coupled Device, a high tech silicon chip that converted light directly into an electronic image. (NASA Release 94-107)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said he would personally discuss the Space Station program with 220 members of Congress before the House of Representatives votes on the Station in the summer. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94; AvWk, Apr 11/94)
A feature article described the work of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. The astronomers devised plans for a Polar Stratospheric Telescope (POST) intended to reveal stars and galaxies in twice the detail possible with the Hubble Telescope and do so more cheaply. The telescope, which was to hang from a blimp tethered over the South Pole, was to be the prototype for a new generation of observatories that could follow Hubble into space. The Institute, together with Johns Hopkins University, a consortium of other universities, and two private manufacturers, planned to ask NASA for $500,000 to $1,000,000 for a six-month design and cost study. (B Sun, Feb 22/94)
The General Accounting Office issued a report to the Congress stating that Russian participation in the U.S. Space Station project would add nearly $400 million to the Station's cost as well as $1.4 billion for other NASA programs that supported the Station, instead of saving that amount, as had been predicted. (Reuters, Aug 2/94; P Inq, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 3/94)
Former NASA Space Station Director Richard Kohrs was a member of a team to revamp the Cassini mission for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also contacted him, reportedly asking that he look at the troubled Space Station program. (SP News, Mar 28-Apr 3/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronauts Norman E. Thagard and Bonnie J. Dunbar as prime and backup crew members for a three-month flight on Russian Space Station Mir in March 1995. Both astronauts flew on previous U.S. Shuttle flights and conducted various scientific experiments. (NASA Release 94-16)
In a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, chairman John Dingell, Democrat from Michigan, pressed NASA officials to explain why they had selected Boeing as prime contractor for the Space Station in late 1993 in spite of the firm's having failed NASA's own cost-control reviews. NASA officials admitted they did not know that Boeing was under 21 federal criminal investigations and was forced to pay the government $161 million in settlements. Testifying for NASA were Deirdre A. Lee, Associate Administrator for Procurements, and Deputy Administrator John R. Daily. In addition to the problems with Boeing, Michael Thibault, Assistant Director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency, said that an audit of charges by IBM, a subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas, one of the earlier Space Station contractors, found that about 20 percent of IBM's $490 million charges were not allowable under its contract. (LA Times, Jul 28/94; SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)
NASA announced that two teams of astronomers, working independently with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, had ruled out the possibility that red dwarf stars consituted the invisible matter, called dark matter, believed to account for more than 90 percent of the mass of the universe. The results increased the mystery of the missing mass because whatever dark matter was, its gravitational pull ultimately would determine whether the universe would expand forever or would someday collapse. Bruce H. Margon, an astrophysicist at the University of Washington at Seattle, in discussing the mystery of the missing matter, said "It's a fairly embarrassing situation to admit that we can't find 90 percent of the universe." Various theories had been proposed by physicists, such as that neutrinos, electrically neutral subatomic particles produced prolifically in the Big Bang, had mass, or that the value of the cosmological constant, a concept invented by Albert Einstein, was low, helping to account for the difference between the observed density of matter and the critical density. (NASA Release 94-188; Reuters, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 16/94; H Chron, Nov 16/94; C Trib, Nov 16/94; CSM, Nov 17/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94)
The Senate voted 64 to 36 to defeat the amendment offered by Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat from Arkansas, to end funding for the International Space Station. (W Post, Aug 4/94; W Times, Aug 4/94; Huntsville News, Aug 4/94)
A biography of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin based on an interview with him, said that Goldin put in 15-hour days; originally, he did this seven days a week but now he did it five and a half days a week. In returning to NASA from TRW, he determined to battle the bureaucracy and did so. He expressed concern about America having become a nation of consumption, interested mainly in entertainment and recreation. His major present concern was keeping the Space Station on track. (News Register, Jul 17/94)
The Space Telescope Institute released photographs made by the repaired Hubble Space Telescope of comet fragments that were to smash into the planet Jupiter in July. The fragments were projected to strike with the force of 100 million hydrogen bombs, with the explosions so bright that the light would be reflected off Jupiter's moons. (Reuters, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94; AP, Feb 9/94)
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
NASA's Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station, Wilbur C. Trafton, said he expected Russia to participate in the Space Station partnership in accordance with the agreement reached in 1993. Such participation was scheduled to allow the project to be completed in June 2002 instead of 2003 and save $2 billion. If Russia should withdraw from participation, backup plans existed. (AP, Feb 18/94; Reuters, Feb 18/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
In a telephone interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, who was formerly general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group in Redondo Beach, California, answered questions about NASA and his efforts to revive the agency. Among other topics, he discussed the International Space Station, the difficulties of working in space, and the problems of budget cuts that NASA faced. (Orange County Register, Apr 8/94)
NASA announced the completion of the International Space Station System Design Review. Using approximately 75 percent of Space Station Freedom hardware, the completed Station was to consist of U.S. elements, including the integrated truss, habitation module, and laboratory module; the Russian science power platform, service module, and functional cargo block vehicle (FGB); the European laboratory module; the Japanese experiment module and exposed facility; and the Canadian remote manipulator system. The assembly was to begin with launch of the FGB vehicle in November 1997. The U.S. contribution to the Station was estimated to cost $17.4 billion from Fiscal Year 1994 until assembly was complete in 2002. The ground system for the Station was to build on the Shuttle and Freedom programs. (NASA Release 94-53; USA Today, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 26/94)
Two Russian cosmonauts stepped outside Space Station Mir in order to reposition solar panels outside the Station. They were expected to spend five hours outside, and the repositioning of the panels should facilitate the visit of U.S. Shuttle Atlantis in 1995. (AP, Sep 13/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and ranking member of the House Space Subcommittee, wrote NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin requesting information about U.S. dependence on Russia, payments to the Russian government, cost constraints on the Space Station in view of NASA's tight budget, and financial agreements with Station international partners. He expressed reservations over the decision to move the Station to a higher orbital inclination at the Russian request and expressed the fear that the agreement with Russia was negotiated from a position of U.S. vulnerability because of budgetary limits. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
Wilbur Trafton, NASA's Space Station program director, who was in Houston to attend the Space Exploration 94 conference sponsored by the NASA Alumni League, said several Chinese officials attending a gathering of aerospace professionals in Huntsville, Alabama, asked informally about joining the U.S.-led International Space Station program. They were urged to pursue their goal through diplomatic channels. (H Chron, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope took new images of the planet Uranus that revealed the planet's rings, at least five of the inner moons, and bright clouds and a high altitude haze above the planet's south pole. (NASA Release N94-78)
NASA announced the names of the crew for the Space Shuttle mission to rendezvous and dock with the Russian Space Station Mir in October 1995. The mission commander was designated as Kenneth D. Cameron. (NASA Release 94-145)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had obtained the clearest views yet of distant galaxies that existed when the universe was a fraction of its current age. Hubble findings suggested that elliptical galaxies developed quickly into their present shapes. However, spiral galaxies in large clusters evolved over a much longer period. (NASA Release 94-201; Reuters, Dec 6/94; NY Times, Dec 7/94; W Post, Dec 7/94; W Times, Dec 7/94; H Chron, Dec 7/94; USA Today, Dec 7/94; CSM, Dec 7/94; H Post, Dec 7/94; Newsweek, Dec 19/94)
A congressional report, based on a House Subcommittee on Space tour of the European and Russian space communities, said Europeans were tired of U.S. changes in the International Space Station project and uncertain about U.S. plans to take Russia in as a full partner. The report also expressed concern about how well Russia could support its part of the Space Station agreement. (AP, Mar 23/94)
NASA was experiencing difficulties finding sufficient amounts of materials to fill the Shuttle's cargo bay in order to justify a planned ten Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir. It might develop that only six or seven flights would be needed according to NASA Shuttle chief Bryan O'Connor. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 1/94)
An article criticized of the ways in which NASA spent more than half the funds allocated to it on unproductive matters that had not advanced the design of the Space Station. The article alleged that at least 24 months of delays resulting from congressional budget-trimming and frequent redesigns cost $1.6 billion, a "hefty extra layer of management" cost $1.1 billion; a discarded propulsion and guidance unit cost $900 million, a failed data management system cost $500 million, and other redesigns and deletions cost $600 million. Since the appointment of Daniel Goldin as Administrator, many of the problems had been fixed, but if technical glitches and congressional meddling recurred, the program could again be in trouble. (Bus Wk, Aug 15/94)
After an unsuccessful attempt to link with the Mir Space Station, an unmanned Progress M-24 Russian cargo craft was scheduled to try again on August 30. A Russian spokesman said the docking mechanism of the Progress appeared too sensitive for the Mir's vibrations. The attempt of Progress to dock August 30 again was unsuccessful. However, on September 1 a Russian cosmonaut successfully docked the unmanned supply ship. (AP, Aug 29/94; Reuters, Aug 29/94; C Trib, Aug 31/94; UP, Sep 2/94; NY Times, Sep 3/94; W Post, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 3/94; P Inq, Sep 4/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
NASA Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn L. Huntoon announced a number of changes designed to assure the success of the Shuttle and International Space Station programs. Changes included the establishment of a new Projects Office, a new Business Management Directorate, and a new Information Systems Directorate; encouragement of rotational assignments and "teaming"; and new leadership appointments. Larry Bourgeois became head of the Projects Office, Terrence Hesse became director of the Business Management Directorate, and Jane Stearns became director of the Information Systems Directorate. A number of other appointments also were announced. (NASA Release 94-036; H Chron, Jun 17/94; H Post, Jun 17/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)
Groups of citizen lobbyists, particularly from Florida, Texas, and Ohio, came to Washington to lobby Congress on the importance of the Space Station to the continuation of a manned space program. (Fla Today, Jun 15/94; O Sen Star, Jun 15/94)
NASA announced that transmission of data from Galileo spacecraft indicated its observation of what was probably a satellite of the asteroid Ida, which would be the first moon of an asteroid ever sighted. The flyby of Ida occurred August 28, 1993. (NASA Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)
NASA announced the updated schedule of Space Shuttle/Space Station missions through calendar year 1997 and expendable launch vehicle missions through calendar year 2001. Included were 10 Space Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir between 1995 and 1997. (NASA Release 94-61)
Bowman Cutter, deputy assistant to the President for economic policy, took a lead in developing a space policy for the administration, according to a statement he made on May 26. As a first step, he convened a meeting May 13 at the White House with a diverse and bipartisan group of industry representatives, NASA managers, military officers, and academicians to discuss the space program's future. Although there was some talk about the Space Station, the major emphasis was on longer-term policy. Rather than new programs, White House officials said the focus was to be on streamlining NASA's bureaucracy, focusing research and development to help private industry, and pushing small missions to demonstrate advanced technologies. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
Possible evidence of a new planetary system only 52 light-years away arising from observation of a star named Beta Pictoris was published in Nature. Harold F. Levinson and colleagues at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio showed how a system of planets and comets could account for the phenomena seen near the star. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled some of these new discoveries. Planet hunter Charles M. Telesco at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama said of Levinson's work, "Whenever you can put a body of evidence into a coherent picture like that, everybody feels much better." (CSM, Dec 1/94; H Post, Dec 1/94)
Roger Bonnet, science director of the European Space Agency (ESA), stated in an interview that the ESA, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, sought some $350 million from member states to fund the first in a series of lunar programs that could end in a manned moon station within 25 years. The first European emissary to the moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (Lunar European Demonstration Approach), could land on the moon by 2001. LEDA would carry instruments to measure the darkness of the lunar sky, the frequency of meteorite impacts, and the stability of the ground, factors that would affect the functioning of a future astronomical observatory. LEDA would also need to analyze lunar soil for components to be used in the construction and operation of a permanent station. Such a European approach would bypass NASA's plans for an orbiting Space Station, a plan with which many European countries had become disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
The new chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, David Obey, Democrat from Wisconsin, divided a $540 billion federal spending budget in such a way that NASA had a good chance of getting 98 percent of the funds it requested for fiscal 1995. Efforts to kill the International Space Station project on the House floor remained likely. (O Sen Star, May 12/94; Fla Today, May 12/94; H Chron, May 13/94; H Post, May 13/94; W Post, May 13/94; SP News, May 16/94)
NASA announced a major milestone in the Space Station Program as of February 1, with the signing by NASA and contractor officials of documents ending the Freedom Work Package contracts. NASA had signed these agreements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. Instead, responsibility for design, development, and integration of work on the International Space Station program was being concentrated in a single contract with Boeing Defense and Space Systems Group, Seattle. (NASA Release 94-15)
NASA announced assembly sequence refinements that incorporated the latest updates to plans for the International Space Station. The sequence incorporated early provisions for a centrifuge and allowed for the earlier construction of Russia's Solar Power Platform but did not affect existing major milestones. (NASA Release 94-164)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement hailing the vote in the House of Representatives that defeated an amendment to end the Space Station program. In his statement, he expressed appreciation for the leadership of the President, the efforts of the Vice President, and the hard work of Chairman Brown and Representative Walker. He also praised the collaboration of NASA with international partners, which strengthened the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 94-106)
NASA announced that astronauts John E. Blaha and Shannon W. Lucid had been selected to train for the second of at least four scheduled astronaut stays aboard Russian Space Station Mir. The two were to begin training in Star City, Russia, in February 1995. (NASA Release 94-183)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used the European Space Agency's Faint Object Camera on the Hubble Space Telescope to confirm a prediction of the Big Bang theory--that helium should be widespread in the early universe. The July 7 issue of the British science journal Nature reported the way in which the helium was detected. (NASA Release 94-109)
Representative Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas and chairman of the Space Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, said he was not sure the President was doing enough to prevent defections among Space Station supporters. Representative George Brown, Democrat from California and chair of the parent committee, threatened to withdraw his support if the President could not get sufficient funds for other science projects. (H Chron, Apr 15/94; National Journal, Apr 23/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, in addressing a Maryland Space Business Roundtable, warned aerospace contractors that congressional budget cutters were targeting NASA's Space Station; meanwhile other congressional members supported increased funds for human services programs and sought to cut from science and technology projects. Senator Mikulski stressed the importance of investments in science and technology within the framework of a balanced budget. (B Sun, Feb 16/94)
An editorial in a major space journal urged that the European Space Agency (ESA) not abandon its Columbus space station module program, despite a redesign of the Freedom station in favor of a U.S./Russian station core. This threat, due to funding crises in Germany and Italy, would jeopardize one of ESA's own justifications for existence. While ESA's near-term strategy is to maintain Columbus and increase ESA's participation in the station, its long-term strategy is for an advanced crew transfer spacecraft for station operations--a major European technological development. The U.S., Russia, Japan and Europe all need this new vehicle. Launched by Ariane-5, it should be ready around 2005-2007, after Columbus in 2001. Further, European managers rightly stressed that the station program should make better use of Ariane 5 for resupply as well as launches, but costs now 30 percent over budget must be reduced. (AvWk, Jan 3/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, called a closed-door meeting on May 5 to discuss the $30 billion International Space Station. He called the meeting after Administration officials assured him that Space Station costs would not shortchange other NASA programs. Observers said Brown wished to assure that NASA received sufficient funds to conduct its activities. Committee members decided they could take no action until they heard of the decisions of the Appropriations Committee. (Fla Today, May 5/94; AP, May 5/94; O Sen Star, May 6/94; H Chron, May 6/94; H Post, May 6/94; Fla Today, May 6/94; LA Times, May 11/94; Huntsville News, May 11/94)
A Russian Military Space Forces official told Reuters that Russia planned a series of unmanned space launches to its orbiting Space Station Mir in May before a manned launch in June with a cosmonaut from Kazakhstan. The unmanned launches were to consist of a cargo spacecraft, a communications satellite in a joint program with the U.S. company Rimsat, and two military satellites. (Reuters, May 5/94)
Three cosmonauts aboard Russian Space Station Mir celebrated the eighth anniversary of the Soviet Union's launch of Mir in 1986. (AP, Feb 20/94; W Times, Feb 21/94)
A feature article, including photographs, described the problems centering around adequate living room in space for astronauts in relation to the design of the Space Station. The main factor limiting space of the 28-by-14.5 foot habitat was the size of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay in which it would ride into orbit. (NY Times, Sep 8/94)
Russian Space Mission Control spokesman Alexander Volchenkov announced that the Soyuz TU-18 rocket had lifted off Saturday for rendezvous with the orbiting MIR Space Station. Aboard were three cosmonauts, one of whom may attempt a new record for living in space. The craft was scheduled to dock with Mir for a crew change, after 200 days in space for the current crew.
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)
Spence Armstrong, NASA Associate Administrator for Human Resources, stated that in order to cut more than 1,000 jobs as Congress ordered, NASA needed to offer buyouts to staff. To restructure the Space Station Freedom project, NASA had to cut 1,300 positions, but employees were not leaving in normal attrition numbers--an attrition of only 600 to 700 persons was predicted for fiscal 1994, without buyouts. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said further cuts would endanger NASA's entire mission. The vice president's "reinventing government" group said NASA needed to accelerate its job cuts but stick with attrition and buyouts rather than reductions in force. The group offered no specifics as to positions NASA should cut. (Federal Times, Feb 24/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported from Moscow that nine Russian women went into training for long-haul space flights by starting a four-month stint of lying with their heads below their feet. The Institute of Medicobiological Problem was in charge of the experiment, which simulated lengthy space flights aboard the Mir Space Station. One woman was to be selected to fly on Mir in November. (Reuters, Feb 18/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94)
In the absence of a National Space Council chaired by the Vice President, Vice President Al Gore's office became the focal point for space policy. Gore and the White House seemed confident that the administration had sufficient support to pass the Space Station. (SP News, May 16-22/94)
NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)
The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with the Boeing Company on the key elements of the prime contract for the International Space Station. The agreement dealt with the scope of work, program schedule, cost ceiling, and fee arrangements as well as establishing contractual terms for the contract to be signed before year's end. (NASA Release 94-144)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin spoke to workers at Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems in eastern New Orleans, praising the company's new contract with NASA to make lightweight Space Shuttle external fuel tanks, calling the tanks an essential part of the Space Station. (Times-Picayune, Apr 26/94)
Bryan O'Connor, overseer of Shuttle operations at NASA headquarters, said that NASA expected to receive shortly a Russian-built Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly that would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russia's Mir Space Station. A damaged tube delayed delivery of the docking component. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the National Space Society's conference and challenged the space community to define the U.S. role in space. He expressed frustration at repeated congressional efforts to kill the planned International Space Station. (Fla Today, Mar 11/94)
NASA announced that its prime contractor for Space Shuttle orbiters, Rockwell Aerospace, on September 11 received the Russian-built docking mechanism, the Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly (APDA). This mechanism would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to join the orbiting Russian Mir Space Station in June 1995. Work was scheduled to begin immediately at Rockwell's Space Systems Division to assemble the APDA with the Rockwell-built docking system hardware. (NASA Release 94-151)
NASA's budget was scheduled to face possible major cuts according to top congressional sources. The Space Station, Earth Observing System, International Ultraviolet Explorer, Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer, Cosmic Background Explorer, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, Mission Operations and Data Analysis, Cassini, AXAF, and two $1 billion wind tunnels for the High Speed Civil Transport program could be affected.
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement following the defeat of the Senate amendment to end funding for the International Space Station. Goldin praised the Senate's vote of confidence as an indication of a bipartisan coalition of support. He said that the Space Station was a "truly international scientific effort, and a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in the post Cold War world." Subsequent to Goldin's statement, various media comments appeared stressing the commitment of "time and political capital" by the President and the Vice President to supporting the Space Station, in addition to Goldin's tireless efforts. (NASA Release 94-127; SP News, Aug 8-14/94; B Sun, Aug 12/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Larry DeLucas, a former Space Shuttle payload specialist and an expert in protein crystallography, as acting senior scientist for the Space Station. (NASA Release 94-206; Phillips Business Information, Dec 14/94)
Commenting on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's urging of space scientists to search for a habitable planet among the stars, science columnist Robert C. Cowen viewed such a quest as feasible in view of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. He saw the next phase of the search as involving a look for signs of gravitational interaction of a star and planets. (CSM, Jun 22/94)
The House by a 278 to 155 vote rejected the amendment that would have ended the Space Station program the next fiscal year and redirected $2.1 billion in proposed funding to other NASA programs. A key factor in building support was the Station's foreign policy significance as a result of bringing Russia in as a Station partner. Intense lobbying efforts by the Clinton administration also were a factor. (Reuters, Jun 29/94; AP, Jun 29/94; UP, Jun 29/94; WSJ, Jun 30/94; P Inq, Jun 30/94; W Post, Jun 30/94; USA Today, Jun 30/94; W Times, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jul 1/94; C Trib, Jul 5/94)
The International Space Station was entering a decisive six-month period in which governments in the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada were poised to sign the final industrial contracts and intergovernmental accords needed to build the facility. Barring unforeseen developments, the European Space Agency would be unable to commit itself to the Space Station before November 1995, when its member governments' ministers were scheduled to convene. Other remaining hurdles were the signing of the prime contract for Station hardware between NASA and the Boeing Company; the conclusion of a smaller contract between the Canadian Space Agency and Spar Aerospace; a final round of negotiations bringing Russia into full Station partnership; and an agreement among the partners on who would contribute what to the Station's upkeep and the apportioning of access to the Station's limited electricity and other resources. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had discovered the best evidence yet of a black hole in the constellation Virgo. The proof consisted of a whirlpool of hot gas at the core of galaxy M87, which lies more than 52 million light-years from Earth. The stars in the whirlpool appeared to be streaming toward the galaxy's center and then into orbits bound to an apparent black hole hidden at M87's core. Data from the Hubble spectrometer, used to measure the velocity of stars orbiting within the nucleus of the M57 galaxy, also appeared to confirm the black hole. Sally Heap, a NASA astronomer, at a national meeting of the American Astronomical Society, commented on the Hubble findings in terms of her own research. (NASA Release 94-82; Fla Today, May 25/94; B Sun, May 26/94; USA Today, May 26/94; W Post, May 26/94; NY Times, May 26/94; W Times, May 26/94; Fla Today, May 26/94; WSJ, May 26/94; O Sen Star, May 26/94; AP, May 26/94; CSM, May 26/94; Oregonian, May 27/94; Fla Today, May 29/94; AP, May 30/94; H Chron, May 31/94; C Trib, May 31/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 2/94; Newsweek, Jun 6/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Earle K. Huckins III as Cassini Program Director in the Office of Space Science. An international program, Cassini was designed to explore the planet Saturn, its rings and moons, and the surrounding environment. Scheduled for launch on a Titan IV Centaur in October 1997, the Cassini spacecraft was to swing by Venus, the Earth, and Jupiter before being inserted into orbit around Saturn in June 2004. Cassini was projected to orbit Saturn for four years. (NASA Media Advisory Aug 11/94)
Astronaut Jannice Voss Ford, training for a mission aboard Russian Space Station Mir, appeared in a two-hour electronic conference concerning the Mir flight, NASA, the Space Station, and her qualifications for being an astronaut. (Fla Today, Jun 12/94)
NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
In order to carry out a complex docking experiment that involved detaching the Soyuz spacecraft from Mir and then redocking using automatic systems, the three cosmonauts aboard the Russian Space Station would remain in space an additional day. The operation was carried out successfully on November 2. On November 4, the German scientist and two cosmonauts returned to Earth. (Reuters, Nov 2/94; Phoenix Gazette, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; UP, Nov 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave an impassioned defense of NASA to a group of aerospace executives attending an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference in suburban Washington. He described the budget fight as part of Congress's continuing effort to turn the space program into a "debating society" and said it was time for the talk to stop. He deplored the fact that NASA was not given enough money to create a space program that American youth could dream about. Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, who sat next to Goldin, in contrast spoke of "a fatally flawed space station program" on which space dollars should not be risked. (O Sen Star, May 5/94; Space News, May 9/94)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1994 activities and provided a chronology of major space events. Of particular note were the flight of a Russian cosmonaut aboard a U.S. spacecraft for the first time and a spectacular cosmic collision that occurred on Jupiter. However, it was the work of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope that dominated NASA news in 1994. Among Hubble results were the following: evidence of a massive black hole in the center of a galaxy 50 million light-years away, supporting Einstein's theory of relativity; observations of huge pancake-shaped disks of dust, raw material for planet formation, swirling around half the stars in the Orion Nebula; confirmation of a critical prediction of the Big Bang theory that helium should be widespread in the early universe; and significant progress in determining the age of the universe--between 8 and 12 billion years--and its size. (NASA Release 94-216; UPI, Dec 22/94)
Canadian Industry Minister John Manley said that Canada was cutting its contribution to the International Space Station program from $1.2 billion to $500 million. It could not afford the proposed level of funding and instead was focusing its energies on helping Canadian space industries. (H Post, Jun 7/94)
The crew of NASA's November Atlantis Shuttle mission were scheduled to test the feasibility of an unusual rendezvous procedure for the second docking with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. They would fly Atlantis on a "plus R bar" (the radius vector from the target's center of mass to the Earth's center) to rendezvous with and retrieve the Crista-Spas atmospheric research satellite on the ninth day of the planned 11-day mission. The new approach would save fuel and not require any braking. Crista-Spas was to be deployed from Atlantis's robot arm within about 20 hours of Atlantis's launch. (AvWk, Oct 17/94; SP News, Oct 24-30)
NASA announced the crew of the STS-60 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for flight from February 3 to 11, 1994: Mission commander, Charlie Bolden; Pilot, Ken Reightler; mission specialists, Jan Davis, Ron Sega, Franklin Chang-Diaz, and Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut with two long-duration flights aboard the Mir Station. His flight will begin a new three-phase era of cooperation: ten Shuttle--Mir missions, joint work on the core Space Station, and expansion of the Station to all other partners.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Space Subcommittee the Space Station program was proceeding but cost and schedule savings were decreasing. NASA earlier estimated Russian participation would save two years and $2 billion. After the Systems Design Review, it appeared time would be speeded by 15 months and savings probably would be $1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million instead of $400 million for lease of the functional cargo block vehicle. Furthermore, agreement needed to be reached with Russia on the cost of a major component required to provide navigation and reboost capability for the Station. NASA assured the Committee that the agency would never cede control of the Station to Russian ground commanders. Goldin also said it was essential for NASA to have stable funding. (Reuters, Apr 13/94; Defense Daily, Apr 14/94; O Sen Star, Apr 14/94; H Post, Apr 14/94)
NASA showed photographs taken by Galileo spacecraft revealing for the first time an asteroid orbited by its own moon. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory released the photos of asteroid Ida. (NASA Release 94-50; Reuters, Mar 23/94; P Inq, Mar 24/94; LA Times, Mar 24/94; W Post, Mar 24/94; USA Today, Mar 24/94; NY Times, Mar 24/94)
NASA announced names of members of the crew of Atlantis for its mission in mid-1995 to perform the first docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. Robert L. Gibson was to command the 10-day mission, which was to include a Spacelab module. (NASA Release 94-90; H Chron, Jun 4/94; H Post, Jun 4/94)
Construction was getting underway on the Space Station project according to John Winch, Boeing Defense and Space Group manager in charge of building the habitation and laboratory models for the Station. Boeing workers were about to go on a three-shift, five-day week to expedite the program. (Fla Today, Dec 8/94)
Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
NASA's Cleveland Lewis Research Center was scheduled to work with the Russians on a project to use the sun's rays to power the Russian Mir Space Station. In addition, the Lewis Center was to direct the building of two wind tunnels desired by the commercial aircraft industry to help design airliners that fly at 2.4 times the speed of sound. The two projects would help compensate for jobs lost at Lewis by funding cuts. (Plain Dealer, Feb 11/94)
Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)
A feature article described the training program in Russia of U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar. Thagard was scheduled to blast off to Russian Space Station Mir with two cosmonauts in March 1995; Dunbar was his backup. They were studying Russian intensively, both the spoken language and technical terminology. In addition, they practiced on a Soyuz simulator, conducted serious physical workouts, and engaged in Russian psychological training for long-haul space crews. (LA Times, Jul 12/94)
The retrieval of the German Crista-Spas satellite by Atlantis during its recent mission proved the validity of the rendezvous approach that NASA now planned to use for all dockings with Russia's Mir Space Station. Technical details were given of the "plus R bar" approach. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had taken an important step toward determining the age and size of the universe. They had been able to calculate with considerable precision the distance to a remote galaxy, M100, in the Virgo cluster of galaxies. This measurement established the distance to the cluster as 56 million light-years (with an uncertainty of +/- 6 million light-years). The research results, which were to be further refined, were being published in the October 27 issue of Nature. The overall conclusion was that the universe was only 8 billion to 12 billion years old. (NASA Release 94-180; Reuters, Oct 26/94; NY Times, Oct 27/94; W Post, Oct 27/94; USA Today, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; C Trib, Oct 27/94; Bakersfield Californian, Oct 27/94; CSM, Oct 28/94; W Times, Oct 29/94; Time, Nov 7/94; U.S. News and World Report, Nov 7/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
NASA and the California Institute of Technology (CIT) signed a five-year, five-billion-dollar, cost-plus-award-fee contract to manage NASA's 7,300-member Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). This contract consolidated two previous contracts for CIT, which has managed JPL since NASA's inception in 1958. JPL, NASA's lead site for solar-system exploration, designed and built the Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WF/PC II) recently installed on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). It also runs programs such as NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, its Galileo mission to Jupiter, and the Magellan mission to Venus, as well as the U.S. half of the NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the sun, the NASA/CNES TOPEX/POSEIDON, and the SIR-C/X-SAR radar system on the Shuttle. (NASA Release C94-c)
The House Appropriations Committee approved a NASA budget of $14 billion, $240 million less than the Administration's request. The approved budget included full funding, $2.1 billion, for the Space Station. However, opponents threatened a major fight once the budget came to the House floor. Following receipt of assurances "protecting the American taxpayers from any unforeseen failure in the U.S.-Russian space partnership" in a letter from President Clinton the evening of June 22, the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on space, James Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin, said he would support the Space Station. (AP, Jun 22/94; Reuters, Jun 22/94; W Times, Jun 23/94; W Post, Jun 23/94; H Post, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 24/94; USA Today, Jun 28/94; W Times, Jun 28/94 )
NASA announced that it had released the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Cassini mission to Saturn, which would be available for public review and comment over a 45-day period. Cassini was a cooperative scientific mission of the U.S. and European space agencies scheduled for launch in October 1997 for a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey to Saturn. (NASA Release 94-174)
NASA and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) announced their agreement to put their space cooperation on a long-term basis. The arrangement provided for expanded cooperation in space science, microgravity research, and the Mission to Planet Earth, as well as Canada's continued full partnership in the International Space Station program. (NASA Release 94-89)
NASA was preparing three rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir to launch the new cooperative effort between Washington and Moscow. In the first, scheduled for February 1995, Shuttle Discovery would simulate docking with Mir but not in fact touch it. In June 1995, Shuttle Atlantis would actually dock with Mir and remain together for four days, ultimately taking aboard U.S. astronaut Norm Thagard who would have joined Mir in March. In October 1995 Atlantis would be outfitted with an Orbiter Docking System that would be installed on the Space Station to facilitate future rendezvous. (AFP, Dec 16/94)
Vice President Al Gore made a brief fundraising stop in Huntsville, Alabama. He said that the International Space Station had tremendous foreign policy advantages for the United States as part of a new effort to create a partnership with Russia. Gore also cited Russia's decision to channel its resources into the Station rather than ballistic missile programs, for example. (Huntsville News, May 3/94; Htsvl Tms, May 3/94)
A NASA delegation led by Mike O'Brien from NASA's External Affairs Division in Washington was in Moscow to present to Russian officials the draft of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the International Space Station. The MOU detailed services to be provided by Station partners and the percentage of Station resources--power, water, storage space--each would receive. Bill Shepherd, deputy program manager for NASA's Station program, was optimistic about Russian response to the MOU and also optimistic about NASA's purchase of the 20-ton FGB navigation and propulsion tug (the first Station component to be sent up) from Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
The Hubble Space Telescope enabled a team led by Rice University astrophysicist Robert O'Dell to survey 110 young stars in a field of 3,000 in the Orion Nebula, which was 1,500 light-years from Earth. As a result, O'Dell reported at a NASA news conference, scientists found that the material required to create planets was common around stars; the same would be true of Earth's home galaxy, the Milky Way. (Reuters, Jun 13/94; W Post, Jun 14/94; B Sun, Jun 14/94; NY Times, Jun 14/94; LA Times, Jun 14/94; USA Today, Jun 14/94; H Post, Jun 14/94)
The new Canadian Liberal government announced that budget constraints obliged it to discontinue participation in NASA's planned international Space Station. Later, the Canadian government said this was a misunderstanding and that Canada's commitment was to be reduced. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 24/94)
NASA downplayed a slip in the first U.S. assembly launch for the Space Station, promising no more schedule bumps. Originally scheduled for launch in July 1997, the Boeing-built node was now scheduled for launch in December 1997. Moreover, the U.S. Habitation module was now scheduled for launch in March 2002 instead of January 2001. The program changes annoyed congressional staffers because the program put more dependence on the Russians. NASA station chief Wil Trafton remained confident that the changes would not cause serious harm to station assembly. (Defense Daily, Feb 22/94)
NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)
NASA announced the completion of the second of two shipments of solar panel modules, marking delivery of the first U.S. Space Station flight hardware for NASA's cooperative space endeavors with Russia. The shipments each consisted of 45 solar panel modules developed for the Mir cooperative solar array project, an effort that brought together NASA's advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's proven structures and mechanisms. Eighty-four of the modules were scheduled to be integrated with Russian-made frames in 42 hinged parts. The completed array would be returned to the United States to be taken to Mir on the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release 94-217; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
A report by the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on the Shuttle-Mir Rendezvous and Docking Missions criticized the lack of one person being in charge of the Shuttle-Mir phase one (1995-97) project. Accordingly, NASA was moving to remedy the situation and make the Space Station program structure similar to the existing Space Shuttle program structure. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers task force studying budgeting for NASA issued its report to the subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee. It said that "The proposed funding levels are inadequate to support both a balanced aerospace science-technology program and an active program of human spaceflight, including the redesigned space station." The report maintained that the work intended for the proposed Space Station could be done by robotic spacecraft or other efforts. (H Chron, May 21/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
NASA released new pictures of asteroid 243 Ida and its recently discovered moon taken by the Galileo spacecraft. Although similar in color and brightness, Ida and its moon appear to be composed of different types of material. (NASA Release 94-83)
NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
Two groups of astronomers, one centered at Indiana University and the other at Harvard University, announced, based on findings from the Hubble Space Telescope, that the universe was billions of years younger than previously estimated. The Indiana group said the universe could be as little as 7 billion years old whereas the Harvard group estimated the age of the universe at between 9 billion and 14 billion years. The Indiana study was published in the September 29 issue of Nature and the Harvard study in the current Astrophysical Journal. According to Stephen Maran, a senior astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Center and a spokesman for the American Astronomical Society, the findings should lead to further research to explain the discrepancy beween the oldest stars and the age of the universe. (LA Times, Sep 29/94)
With aid from NASA, the University of Florida Medical School created a microcomputer, more than 14 years in the making, which enabled physicians to communicate via satellite or telephone. The computer held the latest information from 12 medical reference books and more than 1,000 medical journals and was updated quarterly. Both an electronic library and a record-keeping system were provided to doctors. System 2000 was originally designed to help ailing crew members on distant space stations diagnose their own illnesses. NASA's director of aerospace medicine and occupational health, Dr. Earl Ferguson, expected the use of telecommunications in health care delivery to "totally revolutionize the way we practice medicine." (Fla Today, Sep 11/94)
In discussing the role of the South Pole infrared explorer (SPIREX), and two other projects operated by the National Science Foundation's Center for Astrophysical Research in Antarctica (CARA), a comparison was made of the way in which work from the South Pole on the ground resembled work of the Hubble Telescope in space. The astronomers involved, together with those at the Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore were seeking NASA support for a design and cost study of a balloon that would float 40,000 feet above the South Pole and carry a powerful telescope. (AP, Apr 22/94)
As part of the Administration's efforts to gain congressional support for NASA's International Space Station project, NASA was considering removal of the Russian Salyut Functional Cargo Block (FGB) vehicle from the redesigned configuration. If the FGB were removed, which some key members of Congress wanted in order to reduce dependence upon Russia, NASA might replace it with Lockheed's Bus-1. Following the March International Space Station System Design Review, international partners and White House advisers, including members of the presidential panel reviewed the Station redesign and, in general, seemed favorably disposed to the Station. The panel was headed by Charles Vest, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (AvWk, Apr 11/94)
The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that members of the NASA Hubble Space Telescope Recovery Team would receive the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association on May 6 for their outstanding work. (NASA Release 94-71; H Post, May 6/94)
NASA's budget situation and the impact of its congressionally mandated budget cutting on contractors were discussed. Spending on the Space Station was cut significantly, but because most of NASA's budget was tied to long-term space projects downsizing trends were slow to affect contractors. A table was given of the 20 major NASA contractors in fiscal year 1993, including the parent company, the subsidiary, the parent's location, and the amount of the contract. NASA was working on reducing the time required to select contractors and improving the internal procurement process. (Government Executive, Aug 94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
Alex Roland, a professor of military history and technology at Duke University, wrote a feature article in the "Outlook" section in which he maintained that promoters of the costly Space Station and the Space Shuttle were forcing abandonment of science experiments that would be more valuable. (W Post, May 22/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that two Russian cosmonauts had returned to Earth near Arkalyk, Kazakhstan, after nearly six months on board Space Station Mir. They left behind a colleague who intended to break the current record of 366 consecutive days spent in space by remaining on Mir 429 days. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; AP, Jul 9/94)
Victor Blagov, deputy head of Russian space missions, said that the six cosmonauts on the aging Mir Space Station would have to ration electricity for several months after the craft's solar batteries were unexpectedly drained. Problems first appeared on October 11 after a powerful piece of electrical equipment suddenly sprang to life, shutting down part of the Station and running down four of the six batteries. Four other solar batteries could not be put aboard Mir until the middle of 1995. (Reuters, Oct 25/94)
In a press release, Jim Waterman, Boeing Space Station manufacturing manager, said that Boeing had built 18,700 pounds of hardware to date for the International Space Station and was on schedule to complete almost 50,000 pounds of hardware within the next year. Using the manufacturing facility at Marshall Space Flight Center originally built for fabricating Saturn rocket stages, it had made a good start on three pressurized modules for the Station as well as hatches and experiment racks. (Aerospace Daily, Oct 26/94)
NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had found a new quasar, a mere 600 million light years away in Earth's cosmic backyard, as opposed to other quasars that were billions of light years away. The discovery of a quasar in galaxy Cygnus A would give astronomers their first opportunity for detailed study of a quasar. (NASA Release 94-160)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
An article discussed finding other planetary systems as an inspiring new challenge for astronomy and pointed out NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's proposal that NASA's core mission might be the search for a habitable planet. Mention was made of Proxima Centauri, the nearest neighbor of a bigger, hotter, brighter star: the sun, which made it an easy star around which to look for planets. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope was used to study Proxima Centauri and recently the Hubble discovered discs in the Orion nebula, which might produce planetary systems. Although the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) was eliminated by Congress, SETI continued with private money and became Project Phoenix, scheduled to be connected with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia in early 1995 and to listen for faint radio signals from hundreds of stars. (Economist, Jul 16/94)
NASA announced that the first set of solar array modules for the International Space Station program were to be shipped from the United States to Russia at the end of May. The modules were prototypes of flight units to be delivered in September to be incorporated into advanced solar arrays for use on Russia's Space Station Mir. (NASA Release 94-79; UP, May 23/94)
NASA also announced that the Hubble Space Telescrope had obtained the best images yet of a mysterious mirror-imaged pair of rings of glowing gas that encircle the site of the stellar explosion supernova 1987A. The explanation of the pair of rings was uncertain. (NASA Release 94-77; Reuters, May 19/94; AP, May 19/94; NY Times, May 20/94; B Sun, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; USA Today, May 20/94; CSM, May 26/94)
The requirements for Rockwell International's Space Systems Division in integrating a Russian-built mechanism into airlock hardware it had manufactured so Space Shuttle Atlantis could dock with Space Station Mir were described. The docking assembly would be the first in what could be a long line of hybrid U.S.-Russian space hardware. Rockwell executives were confident they could meet the May 1995 launch date for Atlantis. Rockwell's Russian partner was NPO Energia, with whom it had worked some 20 years previously on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Some of the complications of the collaboration were discussed. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
Russian cosmonaut Krikalev aboard Discovery exchanged greetings with Russian cosmonauts aboard Space Station Mir. The Soviet cosmonaut also got through by ham radio to students in Mars, Pennsylvania. (AP, Feb 8/94; UP, Feb 8/94; Reuters, Feb 8/94; W Times, Feb 9/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94)
A joint statement was issued following a meeting of the heads of space agencies involved in the International Space Station: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), and NASA. This was the first group meeting since Russia accepted the collective invitation to join the International Space Station partnership in December 1993. The heads of agencies discussed the outcome of the recently completed Space Station System Design Review. CSA, ESA, and NASDA noted the remarkable progress made to accommodate Russia as a new partner and to satisfy the interests of all the partners in the new program structure, and they commended NASA for its efforts to improve program efficiency and to clarify the potential for additional partner contributions.
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., announced the selection of a scientific investigation that included the development of a new camera for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). NASA was scheduled to work with Holland Ford of Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, to develop a new camera, called Hubble Advanced Camera for Exploration. The new camera would be installed on the HST by Shuttle astronauts during the third servicing mission scheduled for November 1999. (NASA Release C94-oo)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Appropriations Subcommittee meeting to consider NASA's budget, that NASA needed $2.1 billion for the International Space Station and could not build the station for less. (AP, May 17/94)
Although the November 8 elections gave control of Congress to the Republicans, major changes in funding for the space program were not expected. This was the case despite the fact that Newt Gingrich, Republican from Georgia, who was expected to be the next Speaker of the House of Representatives, was an outspoken space advocate as was Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania and ranking Republican on the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee. NASA was already making plans to sell the Space Station program to the 11 freshman Senators and approximately 85 new House members who were to take office in January. (SP News, Nov 14-20/94)
An unmanned cargo craft bearing food, fuel, and equipment docked with Russia's Mir orbiting Space Station according to Itar-Tass news agency. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)
In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)
Astronaut Bill Shepherd, deputy manager of the Space Station program office in Houston, said that NASA had contingency plans for building the International Space Station without Russian assistance, if necessary. However, NASA fully expected Russian participation. (Fla Today, May 17/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
NASA announced that its Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had provided new insights into how stars might have been formed billions of years ago in the early universe. A preliminary assessment of HST observations indicated that a pair of clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud instead of containing fewer than 1,000 stars as earlier thought, contained nearly 10,000 stars. If this were true billions of years ago, it would have altered drastically the early history of the universe, according to Nino Panagia of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-171)
One of the six ball-screw housings, the $95 million Russian docking system shock absorber, failed its test and the Russian builder wished to replace all six. This might delay the June 8, 1995 launch of Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir. (O Sen Star, Dec 15/94)
Larry DeLucas, recently appointed chief scientist of the NASA Space Station project, said the Station provided the next step for businesses such as pharmaceutical companies that were trying to develop new and improved products such as high quality crystals, uninhibited by the Earth's gravitational environment. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)
Rockwell Aerospace planned to deliver the Orbiter Docking System to NASA on November 21. To achieve a system that would enable a U.S. Shuttle to dock with Space Station Mir, Rockwell Space Systems Division integrated a Russian-built docking mechanism into the system. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 returned valuable new images of the supernova 1994 I in the inner regions of the "Whirlpool Galaxy," M51, located 20 million light-years away in the constellation Canes Venatici. A supernova is a violent stellar explosion that destroys a star while ejecting the products of nuclear burning into the gas between stars. (NASA Release 94-76)
Boeing Company of Seattle, prime contractor for the International Space Station, submitted a proposal to NASA outlining work that would be performed under a final contract and the cost of each task. NASA was to review the proposal and then begin negotiations. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
The final states of starbirth shown in new pictures by the Hubble Space Telescope, seem to touch off a cosmic celebration. Out of the dense whirlpools of gas and dust creating the stars erupt jets of shimmering gases extending billions of miles. The stars themselves, in machine-gun fashion, fire bursts of material at speeds of half a million miles an hour, creating what appear to be glowing beads. While many questions remain to be answered, the Hubble pictures appear to exclude whole classes of models regarding jet formation and evolution. (NASA Release 95-83; NY Times, Jun 7/95; W Post, Jun 7/95; USA Today, Jun 7/95; AP, Jun 7/95; Reuters, Jun 6 95; Time, Jun 16/95)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin applauded Japan's contribution as a partner in the space station program when he spoke to high level science officials in Tokyo. Goldin was on his first trip to Japan as head of NASA. (Phillips Business Information, Jan. 16/95)
Two new images taken by NASA's Hubble Space Telescope provided details of the results of two violent cosmic events.  One image shows a single star, actually a planetary nebula in the constellation Draco, which blew off its outer shell 1,000 years ago and is in the last stages of its life. The other shows the result of a rare and spectacular head-on collision between two galaxies located 500 million light-years away in Sculptor. (NASA Release N95-1; B Sun, Jan 12/95)
At a hearing of the House of Representatives Science Committee, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin testified that NASA had experienced a 30 percent budget cut in the last two years but said he was prepared to oversee a "cleanup" of NASA management. He asked Congress not to ask for any more cost-saving redesigns of the space station. Goldin said the agency was committed to change by functioning more efficiently with less money and by forming more partnerships with business to enhance the transfer of the latest technical information to industry. (UPI, Jan 6/95; Gannet News Service, Jan 6/95; Federal News Service, Jan 6/95; H Chron, Jan 7/95; NY Times, Jan 7/95; W Post, Jan 7/95; APn, Jan 6/95)
The Cassini spacecraft is being tested in preparation for integration of its major systems next year. The mission is scheduled to launch in October, 1997 with the spacecraft�s arrival at Saturn in 2004. (NASA Release 95-118; AvWk, Aug 28/95)
NASA's space station came under attack at a press conference by Sen. Dale Bumpers (D-Ark) and several other Democratic senators. Bumpers introduced legislation in the Senate that would kill the space station program along with six defense projects. (Htsvl Tms, Jan 6/95)
Saturn�s possible two new Moons sighted by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) on May 22 are thought instead to be orbiting clumps of icy rubble. Images from the August 10 �ring plane crossing� presented a new mystery. They seem to show at least three new objects, which are in different orbits than the two May objects. An explanation is that a shattered moonlet would be brighter and more visible, than when all of its mass was compressed into a single solid body. (NASA Releases 95-172; Science, Oct 20/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope has provided pictures of a special type of newborn star emerging from dense, compact pockets of interstellar gas called evaporating gaseous globules (EGGs). Hubble found the EGGs, appropriately enough, in the Eagle nebula which is a star-forming region of the nearby constellation Serpens. Many EGGs are found at the tip of the two largest finger-like features protruding from the nebula�s monstrous columns of cold gas, dubbed �elephant trunks.� Photos of EGGs at different stages of being uncovered provide an unprecedented look at how stars and their surroundings appear before they are truly stars. This process of forming stars from high-speed columns of hydrogen is quite different from the process of stars forming in isolation. The EGGs appear unable to form the disks that go on to become solar systems. (NASA Release 95-190; NY Times, Nov 3/95; W Post, Nov 3/95; W Times, Nov 3/95; USA Today, Nov/95; Fla Today, Nov 3/95; AP, Nov 3/95; Newsweek, Nov 13/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope serves as an interplanetary weather satellite for Mars and Venus. It shows that the Martian climate has changed since Viking visited Mars in the mid-1970s. The planet is now cooler, clearer, and drier. Venus continues to recover from an intense shower of sulfuric �acid rain� triggered by a suspected volcanic eruption in the late 1970s. Such knowledge of weather is critical to the planning of future missions to these planets. They also make natural laboratories for testing computer models that will lead to a general theory of the behavior of planetary atmospheres. The Hubble Space Telescope is a project of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA). (NASA Release 95-31; Fla Today, May 14/95; AvWk, Mar 27/95; Science, Mar 31/95)
A contract for the design and development of the International Space Station was signed today by NASA and the Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division. This 400-ton Space Station will be a catalyst for global cooperation, bringing together resources from the United States, Russia, Japan, member nations of the European Space Agency, Canada, and Italy. The new contract was for $5.63 billion. Assembly will begin in November 1997 with the launch of the U.S.-purchased Russian FGB �space tug� a power and propulsion module. It will be followed in December 1997 with Node 1, that would connect laboratory and crew modules and allow the Space Shuttle to dock. (NASA Releases 95-2 & 13; Space News, May 1/95; AvWk, Apr 10/95)
The proposed U.S. Space Station Alpha is on schedule for operation by the year 2002. (Reuters, May 23/95)
A protocol was signed for the Russian Functional Energy Block (FGB) to be launched in November 1997 as the first element of the International Space Station. After initial use as a propulsion module, the FGB will serve as a fuel storage module and a service area, which will provide living and experimentation space as well as backup guidance, navigation and control. The FGB will also serve as an integral part of the Space Station�s overall power and information subsystems. (NASA Release 95-13)
The first element of the International Space Station Alpha will be the Functional Energy Block (FGB). It is actually a 21-ton �space tug� being built in Russia and set for launch in November 1977. The U.S. Boeing Defense and Space Group has teamed with Russia�s Khrunichev Space Center on this project. Boeing will procure one block for launching. (Fla Today, Aug 18/95; Reuters, Aug 15/95; Space News, Dec 18/95; AvWk, May 8/95 & Sep 4/95)
NASA announced that it planned a February 2 liftoff for the Shuttle Discovery, whose astronauts were to attempt the first rendezvous of a space shuttle with the Russian Space Station Mir. The planned eight-day flight was considered a rehearsal for a series of Shuttle-Mir docking missions set to begin in late May or early June. The STS-63 Mission was to be commanded by James D. Wetherbee, with Eileen M. Collins as pilot. (NASA Release, 95-5; H Chron, Jan 19/95; AFP, Jan 19/95; APn, Jan 18//95; NASA Note to Editors, N95-4)
Launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-74). On its second visit to Space Shuttle Mir, Atlantis added a permanent Russian-built docking port. The 15-foot, 9,000 pound docking tunnel came with two new solar arrays, one built in Russia and one provided by NASA, that would be assembled later. The link up, which occurred on November 15, required the pilot, Kenneth Cameron, to aim for a target about three inches in diameter and connect at a speed of less than one-tenth of a mile per hour. The quarter-million-pound spacecraft docked with Mir, of about the same weight, as they sped through space at 17,500 mph. They remained docked for three days. Mission STS-74 ended on November 20, paving the way toward assembly of the International Space Station beginning in November 1997.
A large storm on Saturn was imaged by the Hubble Space Telescope on December 1, 1994. The storm, which was on Saturn�s equator and the size of Earth, was white and in the shape of an arrowhead. It was only the third storm seen on Saturn in the past two centuries. (AvWk, Jan 9/95)
Two astronomers at the American Astronomical Society's annual meeting in Tucson, Arizona, presented an extraordinary photograph of a nearby star in red-hot death throes similar to the cataclysm that astronomers theorize will destroy the solar system in several billion years. The photo, taken with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, showed never-before-seen detail in the glowing red gas cloud ejected by the dying star. The "Cat's Eye Nebula," or NGC 6543, is about 3,000 light-years from Earth in the constellation Draco, the dragon. (B Sun, Jan 12/95)
An article in "Space News" noted that in the year since its dramatic repair, the once-ridiculed Hubble Space Telescope had opened a new window on the universe and established itself as one of the most important observatories ever built. Astronomers were full of praise for Hubble, which had finally lived up to its pre-launch hype. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95; Fla Today, Jan 22/95)
The Galileo spacecraft has produced hard evidence in the form of an image that asteroids can have satellites. The satellite in orbit around asteroid 243 Ida has a 1.6 km (one mile) diameter. (Reuters, Apr 26/95)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope to study quasars began to reassess their theories after studying a series of quasars during the past few months. The astronomers expected the quasars, thought to be super-massive "black holes," to be surrounded by galaxies that "feed" the quasar. Instead, none of the first eight quasars they studied was surrounded by a galaxy, raising questions about of how black holes form and sustain themselves. "I really don't understand this," said project astronomer John Bahcall in a report to the American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona. (LA Times, Jan 13/95; W Post, Jan 13/95)
NASA reported that three years of data collection from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) confirmed that Clorofluorocarbons (CFCs) cause ozone loss.  The satellite detected CFCs and hydrogen fluoride, a product of the chemical breakdown of CFCs, in the stratosphere. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; The Grand Rapids Press, Jan 2/95)A General Accounting Office report called NASA's plans to expand and fund the scientific research needed to support a manned space facility unrealistic. The report indicated that NASA's projected $18 billion cost for Space Station Freedom was far too low. The chief congressional critic of the space station, Sen. William Cohen, estimated a $71 billion price tag. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; The Grand Rapids Press, Jan 2/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) shows that radio galaxies(which existed when the universe was half its present age(are surprisingly varied and intricate structures that are even more complex than previously thought. A team of astronomers at Cambridge University, England, is analyzing 28 radio galaxies that have been imaged by HST in visible light, by the Very Large Array Radio Interferometer, and by the UK Infrared Telescope. They propose that the remarkable structures seen in the Hubble images are different manifestations of activity associated with radio galaxies. The new details may be a combination of light from massive star forming regions, small satellite dwarf galaxies, and bow shocks caused by jets of hot gas blasted out of the galaxy�s core by a suspected black hole. The period of strong radio emissions is quite short relative to the total lifetime of a galaxy. (NASA Release 95-133)
A two-decade old cosmic mystery about hydrogen clouds in intergalactic space is being cleared up by recent Hubble Space Telescope data from 46 galaxies. The results suggest that the hydrogen clouds are vast halos surrounding galaxies and extending 20 times farther than the diameter of a galaxy. These findings confirm earlier Hubble data of more than a dozen hydrogen clouds within less than a billion light-years of our galaxy. (NASA Release 95-41; NY Times, Apr 18/95; Science, Mar 24/95)
After several attempts in 1994, Russian cosmonauts successfully tested the Mir space station's automatic docking equipment, clearing the way for the seven to ten scheduled dockings with American space shuttles through 1997. (AP, Jan 11/95; H Chron, Jan 12/95; Dayton Daily News, Jan 12/95; C Trib, Jan 12/95)
Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station carried ont geological studies of the Earth's surface and its mineral and petroleum resources. The three cosmonauts underwent physical examinations and were reported healthy. (ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis (mission STS-71). This first docking mission with Russian Space Station Mir occurred almost 20 years after the Apollo-Soyuz linkup in July 1975. The joined spacecraft had a record mass of about 200 tons and held a record 10 people�6 Americans and 4 Russians (8 men and 2 women). After five days of joint operations 245 miles above Earth, during which Mir�s current crew underwent extensive medical testing in a shuttle cargo bay laboratory, the Mir-18 crew returned with Atlantis, having been replaced by two Russian cosmonauts.
The Hubble Space Telescope has detected a long-sought population of comets dwelling at the icy fringe of the solar system. Based on the Hubble observations, astronomers estimate the belt contains at least 200 million comets. The existence of a comet belt encircling our solar system-like the rings of Saturn-was first hypothesized more than 40 years ago by astronomer Gerard Kuiper. The theory remained conjecture until 1992 when ground-based telescopes began detecting about 20 large icy bodies ranging from 60 to 200 miles in diameter. Hubble was able to identify objects just a few miles across. This region is thought to be the source of the short-period comets that orbit the Sun in less than 200 years. The planet Pluto is considered by astronomers to be the largest member of the Kuiper Belt region. The comet-disk lies just beyond Neptune and might stretch 500 times farther from the Sun than Earth.
Veteran Space Shuttle astronauts Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr., Richard N. (Dick) Richards and Pierre J. Thuot have left the Astronaut Office. Ken Reightler will join Lockheed Martin, Houston, as the Program Manager for Engineering, Test and Analysis. Dick Richards remains at NASA, moving to the Space Shuttle Program Office to serve as the mission director for the second servicing mission for the Hubble Space Telescope. After three Shuttle flights, Thuot will teach astronautics courses at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 95-104; AvWk, Jul 10/95)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite was launched to probe the Sun�s hidden interior, its boiling atmosphere, and the physics behind the supersonic solar wind. SOHO is a joint project of the European Space Agency and NASA. It will be positioned at the point where the gravitational pull of the Sun and Earth cancel out. (NY Times, Dec 3/95 & Dec 5/95; W Post, Dec 3/95 & Dec 4/95; USA Today, Dec 4/95; Fla Today, Nov 22/95, Nov 24/95, Nov 28/95 & Dec 1/95; CSM, Nov 28/95; Space News, Nov 6/95; AvWk, Nov 13/95)
Two amateurs discovered comet �Hale-Bopp,� which will pass near Earth in 1996. It could be the brightest comet in 20 years. Pictures from the Hubble Space Telescope show a remarkable pinwheel pattern and a blob of free-flying debris near the comet�s nucleus. (NASA Release 95-178; W Post, Jul 31/95; Fla Today, Aug 27/95; AvWk, Oct 16/95)
Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station carried ont geological studies of the Earth's surface and its mineral and petroleum resources. The three cosmonauts underwent physical examinations and were reported healthy. (ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
A converted DC-9 aircraft, which will be used for microgravity experiments, was rolled out today at NASA�s Lewis Research Center. The aircraft will provide investigators with a series of 18-22 second periods of near weightlessness by flying parabolic maneuvers. It will support research in the areas of biotechnology, combustion science, fluid physics and materials science. It also will support the development of equipment for use on the International Space Station and other orbital platforms. (NASA Release 95-79)
NASA and Boeing Defense and Space Group of Houston, Texas, signed a $5.63 billion contract for the design and development of the International Space Station. In particular, Boeing accepted responsibility for the design, manufacture, and delivery of the U.S. on-orbit segments of the station in a contract that extended through 2003. Assembly of the space station is projected to begin in November 1997; completion is foreseen in June 2002. (NASA Release 95-2; H Chron, Jan 14/95; Phillips Business Information, Jan 17/95; AvWk, Jan 23/95)
Today is the first of three dates that the Earth will be able to view the rings of Saturn on edge in about 15 years. Thirteen of Saturn�s 18 moons were discovered during past ring crossings. The other two dates in this trio will be August 10, 1995 and February 11, 1996. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory will use these opportunities to fine tune the mission of the Cassini spacecraft to be launched in 1997 for an examination of Saturn beginning in the year 2004. (NASA Releases 95-72 & 118; W Post, May 3/95; C Trib, Apr 28/95; AvWk, Apr 24/95)
NASA�s Galileo spacecraft has confirmed it has reached the inside of Jupiter�s magnetosphere. Direct measurements of the Jupiter system may now begin. Final tuning of the flight path is scheduled for December 2. On December 7, Galileo�s previously deployed atmospheric probe will plunge into Jupiter�s cloud tops and descend into the giant planet on a parachute. An hour after the probe mission is completed, Galileo will begin to fire its onboard rocket beginning a two year mission of close-up studies of the planet�s large moons, Jupiter itself, and the magnetosphere. The spacecraft was launched aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis and an Interim Upper Stage (IUS) on October 18, 1989. (NASA Releases 95-207 & 215; NY Times, Dec 3/95, Dec 7/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; W Post, Dec 4/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; USA Today, Dec 1/95, Dec 7/95 & Dec 8/95; Fla Today, Dec 7/95; WSJ, Dec 7/95; Time, Dec 11/95; Newsweek, Dec 18/95; AvWk, Nov 27/95, Dec 4/95 & Dec 11/95; Science, Dec 15/95)
NASA began a 110-hour countdown to the first of an unprecedented series of US missions to the Russian Space Station Mir. Launch of Discovery and its crew of six--including the first woman shuttle pilot and a famed cosmonaut--was set for February 2. The eight-day flight was to include a spacewalk by two astronauts, deployment and retrieval of an astronomy satellite, and science experiments in a commercial space laboratory. The primary goal of the mission was to be the rendezvous with Mir. (Reuters, Jan 29/95; APn, Jan 29/95; H Chron, Jan 31/95; H Post, Jan 31/95; H Chron, Jan 29/95)
Anatoly Kiselyov, General Director of the Khrunichev State Space Research and Industrial Center, said that NASA's terms for financing the work to develop and build the cargo module for the Alpha Station were unrealistic and that Russian air and space firms could not agree to them. Kiselyov said the real costs of building the functional cargo module would be 40 to 50 percent higher than American estimates, or at least $220 million. The cargo module is to be the first component of a future space station and is scheduled for launch in November 1997. It will serve as the basis on which to build a future space complex. (FBIS-Sov, Jan 13/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope�s images of 14 bright quasars produce a giant leap backward in the scientific understanding of them. Current theory caused astronomers to expect each quasar to be surrounded by its host galaxy. However, most were alone in space. Scientists will have to rethink theories about what makes quasars shine. (W Post, Jan 13/95; Science, Jan 27/95 & Nov 24/95)
During the edge-on view of Saturn�s rings on May 22 by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers found what may be two new Moons. (NASA Release 95-127; W Post, May 3/95 & Jul 28/95; USA Today, Jul 28/95; C Trib, Apr 28/95; AP, Jul 28/95; AvWk, Apr 24/95 & Aug 7/95; Science, Aug 4/95)
An article in "Space News" noted that in the year since its dramatic repair, the once-ridiculed Hubble Space Telescope had opened a new window on the universe and established itself as one of the most important observatories ever built. Astronomers were full of praise for Hubble, which had finally lived up to its pre-launch hype. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95; Fla Today, Jan 22/95)
The United States and Russia began taking practical steps toward merging their manned space programs.  NASA expected to begin shuttle flights to the Mir Space Station as a step in a joint venture to build a space station. The agreement called for seven flights through 1997 in which U. S. space shuttles would dock with Mir and allow the exchange of crews. One shuttle mission in 1995 would supply solar arrays that would combine U.S. advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's expertise in space structures and mechanisms in order to boost Mir's electrical output by six kilowatts. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; San Diego Union-Tribune, Jan 4/95)
NASA and Russian space station officials were scheduled to begin a series of technical exchange meetings at the Johnson Space Center intended to give clear direction to joint cooperation in constructing the international space station. Twenty-five teams of Russian technicians and engineers were expected to arrive to discuss a number of issues, including docking procedures, power supply distribution; structural mechanics, depressurization; and place and use of antennae. Crew size was also to be discussed. The meetings were expected to last until February 10. NASA officials hoped to agree on as much common ground as possible so that Russia could be made an official partner in the station project before the year is out. (Phillips Business Information, Jan 19/95)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) found an oxygen atmosphere on Jupiter�s second moon, Europa. This detection was made by a team of researchers at Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Science Institute, both in Baltimore. They used data provided by HST�s Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS) instrument from observations taken on June 2, 1994. Europa�s atmosphere is only one hundred billionth that of Earth. Europa, about the size of Earth�s moon, has an unusually smooth surface of solid water ice. The oxygen on Europa, whose surface temperature is -230 degrees Fahrenheit, is formed from purely non-biological processes. Water vapor and the gases oxygen and hydrogen are formed by the combination of sunlight and the bombardment of the dust and charged particles trapped in Jupiter�s intense magnetic field. (NASA Release 95-17; C Trib, Feb 23/95)
A space endurance record was set by Russian Cosmonaut Valeri Polyakov, who completed his 367th day aboard the Russian Space Station Mir. Polykov was launched into orbit January 8, 1994, and was expected to remain on Mir until March 22. (Phillips Business Information, Jan 9/95; USA Today, Jan 10/95; AP, Jan 10/95)
Senior NASA managers have recommended that Ames Research Center be placed under the oversight of a private contractor. However, it also recommended that Ames� aerospace facilities be transferred to Langley Research Center and that its space station centrifuge be transferred to Johnson Space Center. The Zero Based Review Team also endorsed sweeping changes in the organization of NASA�s other research facilities, but it rejected a proposal to have a contractor run the Kennedy Space Center. (SF Exam, Feb 18/95; Science, Apr 21/95)
Astronomers have confirmed the existence of a brown dwarf, the object of a 30-year search. Twenty to 50 times the size of Jupiter and too hot to be classified as a planet, GL229B is a small companion to the cool red star Gliese 229 in the constellation Lepus. It is near the theoretical limit (eight percent of the mass of the Sun) where a star has enough mass to sustain nuclear fusion. The brown dwarf was first sighted using the 60-inch observatory on Mt. Palomar. Scientists identified it in October 1994. Follow-up observations were made by Hubble�s Wide Field Planetary Camera-2 on November 17, 1995. Another Hubble observation six months from now will yield an exact distance to GL229B.
A Russian space enthusiast, Sergei Leskov, lamented the declining state of the Russian space program in the January 19 issue of "Izvestia." Production of rockets and other hardware has declined in the last few years, Leskov said, and even the hardware in orbit was on its last legs. The Mir space station, too, had grown old and increasingly gave mission controllers nasty surprises. He noted that during the past five years, funding of the space sector had been cut five-to-ten-fold in certain areas. The contract with the United States for construction of the Alpha space station had been the salvation of the Russian space sector, but only a small range of enterprises were involved in it, and the project did not promote development of new technologies. Without an infusion of more money, Leskov wrote, the Russian space sector could find itself as much a part of history as the Pyramid of Cheops. (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, Jan 23/95).
Launch of Space Shuttle Discovery (mission STS-63). On February 6 Discovery approached to within 37 feet of the Kristall module of the Russian Space Station Mir, where the two 100-ton spaceships flew in formation for a time. This rendezvous was a dress rehearsal for the first in a series of seven shuttle docking flights to Mir that would begin in June. This series, which will involve the Space Shuttle Atlantis, is intended to give the United States and Russia an unprecedented opportunity to combine flight operations, ground control, training activities, and research.
Several Senate Democrats proposed a $33 billion package to balance the budget by the year 2002 by cutting defense and space programs. The package included elimination of NASA's space station for a savings of $10 billion over five years. (Fort Worth Star-Telegram, Jan 6/95; H Chron, Jan 6/95, Jan 8/92; Greensboro News & Record, Jan 6/95; News and Record, Jan 6/95)
The Galileo spacecraft lost some of its collected data when a problem with one of its computer processors caused a shutdown of nonessential systems. Project Manager William J. O’Neil said that much of the lost data was of little consequence to researchers, but that data from Galileo’s continuous study of Jupiter’s magnetic field had suffered a significant loss, creating an information gap of about one week. The episode, which occurred in the midst of NASA’s string of impressive research achievements, highlighted the difficulty of directing a data-gathering probe thousands of miles from Earth’s surface.(Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft in Orbit Around Jupiter Loses Data,” Washington Post, 27 August 1996; Associated Press, “Computer Error on Spacecraft Exploring Jupiter,” 28 August 1996. See also Michael Meltzer, Mission to Jupiter: A History of the Galileo Project (Washington, DC: NASA, 2007).)
At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the station’s air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISS’s air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, “Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test,” news release, 10 May 1996.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the company’s plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCo’s Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. d’Amore called space “the ultimate frontier of global marketing.” The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitor’s advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavour’s Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, “Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit,” USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
NASA released images from its Galileo spacecraft, indicating that water might have existed on Jupiter’s moon Europa in the past, or might still exist there. According to scientists studying the images, Europa may have “warm ice” on its surface. Finding such ice would help scientists determine whether Europa’s climate could support life. “What we are really looking for is niches that could support life,” Ronald Greeley, a Galileo team scientist clarified, at a press briefing releasing the images. At first glance, the pictures, shot from a distance of about 95,700 miles (154,000 kilometers), seemed to depict a series of white stripes stretched across Europa’s landscape. However, the stripes were actually ice glaciers, long of interest to scientists. Researchers had long suspected that Europa might be one of the places in the universe possessing water and, therefore, an environment that could support life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed “skeptical optimism” at the Europa findings and urged the scientific community to examine the pictures further, in a tempered reaction similar to his stance regarding the discovery, one week earlier, of microbiological evidence of life on Mars.(NASA, “Statement by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Release of New Galileo Spacecraft Images of Europa,” news release 96-166, 13 August 1996; Reuters, “Galileo Hints at Water on Europa,” 14 August 1996; NASA, “Jupiter’s Europa Harbors Possible ‘Warm Ice’ or Liquid Water,” news release 96-164, 13 August 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “Jupiter Moon May Contain Ice Floes, Sea,” Washington Post, 14 August 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
A delegation from the U. S. Congress traveled to Russia to meet with Russian Space Agency officials. Representatives Jerry Lewis (R-CA) and F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), members of the subcommittee in charge of NASA’s funding⎯the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies⎯led the contingent. Their goal was to keep intact the coalition of countries dedicated to making the International Space Station (ISS) a reality. Faced with Russian insistence that the planned space station connect with the Russian space station Mir, the U.S. lawmakers warned Russian officials not to pursue radical changes in the plans for the space station. Sensenbrenner noted that obstinacy on the part of the Russians might result in the coalition’s building the ISS without Russian involvement.(Ben Lannotta, “Congress to Russia: Drop Mir–Station Link Idea,” Space News, 15–21 January 1996, 3, 20.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
NASA released Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images revealing much of the surface of Pluto for the first time. The Pluto imaging team declared the quality of the pictures better than they had expected. “Hubble has brought Pluto from a fuzzy, distant dot of light, to a world which we can begin to map, and watch for surface changes,” remarked Marc W. Buie, a member of the team. The HST took snapshots of nearly the entire surface of the planet during 6.4 days of its rotation. The pictures showed Pluto’s complexity, revealing nearly a dozen distinct provinces, and confirming the existence of a polar ice cap, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to verify. NASA officials were optimistic that the images would pave the way for a proposed Pluto flyby mission in the coming years. Pluto remained the only planet not yet visited by a spacecraft.(NASA, “Hubble Reveals Surface of Pluto for First Time,” news release 96-43, 7 March 1996.)
Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging craft’s lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mir’s state as akin to “a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it.” Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 20 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster?” 19 February 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin’s efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldin’s mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, “NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston,” 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin’s Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
NASA released images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, revealing a dust storm on Mars nearly the size of the state of Texas. The storm appeared in the pictures of the planet as a 600- mile-long (965-kilometer-long), salmon-colored patch. Scientists believed this was the first time that one of the huge storms had neared the planet’s northern polar ice cap.(Reuters, “Hubble Shows Texas-Size Dust Storm on Mars,” 4 November 1996.)
NASA released new images of Io, one of Jupiter’s moons, obtained by the Galileo spacecraft. Michael J. S. Belton of the National Optical Astronomical Observatories pointed out that radical changes had occurred on the moon during the 17 years between Galileo and the first observation of Io, via the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. According to Belton, active volcanoes had altered the color of the moon’s surface, forming deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide that painted the surface white.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Big Changes on Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon Io,” news release 96-143, 18 July 1996.)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope identified 18 star clusters that they believed to be embryonic galaxies. According to the New York Times, because the clusters resided 11 billion light-years from Earth, essentially, the scientists had glimpsed back in time. The observations supported a theory that galaxies begin with stars grouping together. The astronomers from Arizona State University and the University of Alabama called the discovery “the first page in an otherwise blank book.”(Lee Bowman, “Possible View of Galaxies Being Born,” Washington Times, 5 September 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Looking Back 11 Billion Light-Years, a Glimpse at Galaxy Birth,” New York Times, 5 September 1996. 125 NASA, “Lopez-Alegria To Replace Lawrence as NASA Manager to Russia,” news release 96-182, 5 September 1996.)
G. Porter Bridwell retired after nearly 40 years of service at MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Bridwell had served as Director of MSFC from 1994 until his retirement. He left the Center with an annual operating budget of US$2.5 billion and more than 3,000 employees. Bridwell had spent most of his career at MSFC, serving briefly as Acting Director of Stennis Space Center in 1987, and at NASA Headquarters from 1993 to 1994. Bridwell had also been a member of the space station redesign team. During his tenure, Bridwell had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, the Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Exceptional Achievement Medal, attaining the rank of Meritorious Executive.3 NASA announced that J. Wayne Littles would take over as the new Director of MSFC.(NASA, “Littles Named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 96-3, 16 January 1996. 1)
NASA revealed that the joint U.S.-Italian team investigating the failure of the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS) had determined that the tether experiment conducted aboard Mission STS- 75 had revealed numerous fundamental flaws in space physics and plasma theories. The TSS experiment had ended with the tether breaking before reaching its full 13-mile (21-kilometer) length. The scientists concluded that a number of theoretical models, widely accepted for as long as 30 years, were incorrect and in need of revision. According to Noble Stone, a NASA scientist at MSFC, the team’s most significant finding was that tether current flows between the satellite and the orbiter were three times greater than theoretical models had predicted. Because the amount of power generated was directly proportionate to the current, the harnessed energy had the potential to furnish thrust for rebooting a space station, satellite, or shuttle in a decaying orbit. Stone suggested that tether systems might some day supplement solar arrays as sources of power for long-term space platforms.(NASA, “Early Findings from Tethered Satellite Mission Point to Revamping of Space Physics Theories,” news release 96-106, 23 May 1996; NASA Marshall Space Flight Center “Fall Science Meeting Highlights Tether Satellite Results,” http://spacescience.spaceref.com/newhome/headlines/ast15oct96_1.htm (accessed 27 October 2008).)
During a top-level meeting between officials of the United States and Russia, NASA made public a shift in its policy, announcing that U.S. astronauts would not always have command aboard the ISS. In a compromise meant to encourage Russia to build its portion of the station, NASA conceded that astronauts from other countries would have the opportunity to command the ISS for significant periods.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Command of Space Station Will Be Shared by Other Nations,” 28 September 1996.)
Joseph B. Gurman of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHO’s scientists were excited and surprised to find that “movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun.” The scientists observed that the Sun’s plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, “Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found,” news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, “Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal,” 2 May 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft completed a flyby of Jupiter’s largest moon, Ganymede, passing only 519 miles (835 kilometers) above the moon’s surface. NASA had equipped Galileo with 10 scientific instruments to gather data from the expedition. The instruments began making measurements on 23 June, as the probe approached Ganymede. Images revealed an icy surface, with bright, clean ice covering part of the moon and darker, dirty ice covering the rest. This was the first data gathered during a collection mission planned for 1996 and 1997, in which Galileo would pass Ganymede before completing 11 orbits of Jupiter and surveying the planet’s other moons. NASA monitored Galileo’s progress through its Deep Space Network, using control stations in California, Spain, and Australia. Scientists and engineers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had built the Galileo spacecraft.(NASA, “Galileo Readies for Close Flyby of Jupiter’s Biggest Moon,” news release 96-122, June 1996.)
With funding from NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, researchers at Utah State University successfully developed a strain of wheat suitable for growth in space. The space wheat, called USU-Apogee, produced a yield equivalent to 600 bushels of grain per acre (21,000 liters of grain per 4,100 square meters), a rate three times more than the rate achieved in previous experiments. Researchers had worked for more than a decade developing the wheat. During the tests, USU- Apogee had thrived under the difficult conditions of artificial sunlight and high levels of carbon dioxide. In conditions approximating the environment in space, the wheat grew on short stalks, produced an unusually large number of seeds, and maintained green leaf tips (reflecting proper calcium levels). Scientists hoped that astronauts would be able to grow the wheat in the future International Space Station, as a more economical means of providing food for long-term space residents than frequent Shuttle supply missions.(NASA, “Utah State University Develops Space Crop,” news release 96-75, 15 April 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
NASA officials announced that a funding crisis in Russia would delay the human occupation of the International Space Station (ISS) up to eight months. Before the announcement, NASA had learned that the financial problems of the Russian Space Agency had virtually halted Russia’s work on the orbiting laboratory’s nerve center. Without Russia’s contribution to the station, the crew of the ISS would have nowhere to stay during the construction of the station in space. NASA officials remained hopeful that Russia would release funding for the project and keep its commitment to the effort. Nevertheless, NASA officials began revisiting contingency plans to address reductions in funding. Russian Space Agency officials planned to meet with their NASA counterparts to discuss the situation.(William Harwood, “Funding Crisis To Delay Occupation of Space Station,” Washington Post, 6 December 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
New audio recordings, gathered from the excursion of NASA’s Galileo spacecrafts to Jupiter’s large moon Ganymede, contained a “soaring whistle and hissing static,” suggesting that the moon possesses a planet-like magnetosphere. According to Donald A. Gurnett, who had conducted the experiments using Galileo’s plasma wave instrument, the data “is kind of like looking at a musical score.” The sound patterns mimic those found on Earth, Saturn, and Jupiter. Gurnett suggested that the new findings would have broad significance for the scientific community, possibly allowing scientists to draw further conclusions about the interplay between magnetic forces and matter throughout the universe.(D. A. Gurnett et al., “Evidence for Magnetosphere at Ganymede from Plasmawave Observations by the Galileo Spacecraft,” Nature 384, no. 6609 (12 December 1996): 535; NASA, “Big Icy Moon of Jupiter Found To Have a ‘Voice’ After All; Europa Flyby Next for Galileo,” news release 96-255, 12 December 1996.)
As Congress prepared to vote on NASA’s budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAO’s report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAO’s concerns about Russia’s continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that “in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays.” NASA’s spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASA’s projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAO’s critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., “GAO Criticizes NASA’s Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
NASA released time-lapse photographs taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), making the images immediately available on the Internet. Based on these images, lauded as the deepest images of the universe ever taken, scientists raised their estimate of the number of galaxies in the universe from 10 to 50 billion; “Suddenly, Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” the New York Times reported. Using a narrow “keyhole” view and focusing the HST on a portion of the sky only the width of a dime, telescope operators probed deep into the universe. The images revealed the process of a star’s death, as well as new information about how galaxies evolve. HST astronomer Howard E. Bond estimated that the Sun would die out in about 5 billion years.(John Noble Wilford, “Suddenly Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” New York Times, 16 January 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Takes Portrait of Universe,” Washington Post, 16 January 1996; NASA, “New Hubble Images Available,” news release N96-2, 17 January 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft discovered a giant iron core taking up half of the diameter of Jupiter’s moon Io, as well as a large hole in Jupiter’s magnetic field. Galileo Project Scientist Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) identified Io as the most “geographically active body in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Galileo scientists also measured the intense heat Jupiter generates, noting that the planet has a massive gravity field. Galileo managed to come within 559 miles (900 kilometers) of Jupiter during its 1995 flyby, allowing scientists to locate the iron core and the hole in the magnetic field. Although they were still grappling with the significance of the “completely unexpected finds,” scientists reported their early analysis of the data in Science magazine.(J. D. Anderson, W. L. Sjogren, and G. Schubert, “Galileo Gravity Results and the Internal Structure of Lo,” Science 272, no. 5262 (3 May 1996): 709−712; NASA, “Galileo Finds Giant Iron Core in Jupiter’s Moon Io,” news release 96-89, 3 May 1996.)
NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tank’s strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASA’s External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, “Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests,” news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, “First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite,” news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-24 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri and the first female French astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. The crew of Soyuz planned to resupply Mir’s long-term crew.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 514, 25 August 1996, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx514.html (accessed 29 July 2008); Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI), “Russian Spaceship Heads for Space Station,” 18 August 1996.)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States’ key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, “Russian Cosmonauts,” 24 June 1996; Associated Press, “Moscow,” 21 June 1996.)
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
NASA disclosed the startling discoveries of Rice University astronomer C. Robert O’Dell and graduate student Kerry P. Handron, who had used images captured by the Hubble Space Telescope to pinpoint thousands of gigantic, tadpole-shaped objects surrounding a dying star, the first time that scientists had observed the forms in such abundance. The scientists hypothesized that the final outbursts of the dying star probably caused the gaseous knots, each several billion miles across. O’Dell concluded that if a dying star caused the gaseous knots, then trillions of these forms might litter the universe.(NASA, “Hubble Finds Thousands of Gaseous Fragments Around Star,” news release 96-74, 15 April 1996.)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) identified what they believed to be the most distant objects observed to date. Researchers based at State University of New York at Stony Brook found several dozen galaxies so far away that they might have existed when the universe was less than 5 percent of its present age. The team of astronomers made its calculations on the distances of the galaxies from the Earth by relying on the relationship between speed and distance in the expanding universe. According to the scientific understanding of the speed-distance relationship, “the expansion of the universe causes the light from distant galaxies to be ‘redshifted’,” meaning that, because of the expansion of space, light leaving a distant galaxy as blue arrives at the HST as red light. The redshifting phenomenon allows researchers to tentatively measure the distance the light has traveled. Noting that other factors, such as dust, also might make a galaxy’s light red, Mark E. Dickinson of the Space Telescope Science Institute categorized the study as “enticing,” but also clarified, “it’s not a proof.”(Associated Press, “Hubble Scope Peers into Universe’s Past with Aid of Starlight,” 27 June 1996; NASA, “Findings from Hubble Deep Field Home in on Distant Galaxies,” news release 96-123, 26 June 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
The famed Comet Hale-Bopp made its closest approach to the Sun, accelerating the comet’s process of shedding the gargantuan ice shards that, scientists hypothesized, might contain the basic ingredients necessary for life to begin. Based on data gathered by researchers during the 20 months between the discovery of the comet and its approach to the Sun, scientists theorized that the outer layers of Comet Hale-Bopp probably contained methanol, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen sulfide, and other carbon compounds. Because of its proximity to the Sun, many telescopes, most significantly the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had to stop tracking the 25-mile-wide (40-kilometer-wide) comet to avoid damage to their sensitive instruments. The approach of the comet was a scientific opportunity occurring once “every 200 years or so,” according to Brian G. Marsden of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Comet sightings thrilled amateur and professional astronomers alike, as well as causing some paranoia. In one tragically irrational response to its approach, 39 members of the Heaven’s Gate religious community committed suicide, under the delusion that they were about to catch a ride on a spaceship hidden behind the comet’s tail.(William J. Broad, “The Comet’s Gift: Hints of How Earth Came to Life,” New York Times, 1 April 1997.)
NASA announced an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) for the European construction of two docking nodes for the International Space Station (ISS). In exchange, NASA agreed to launch the ESA’s Columbus laboratory module. The “launch-offset barter agreement” was typical of the arrangements in progress to bring the ISS closer to fruition. The ESA announced immediate plans for the Italian Space Agency to carry out the actual construction of the two nodes, slated for mid-2000 launches. In addition to the construction arrangement, the ESA agreed to provide a variety of minor hardware, including refrigeration units, for the astronauts’ living space and for research areas of the ISS.(NASA, “NASA-ESA Agreement Enhances Station with Additional Node,” news release 97-36, 10 March 1997. 220 NASA, “Lunar Prospector Spacecraft Construction Complete,” news release 97-38, 12 March 1997.)
U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASA’s temporary resident aboard Russia’s Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linenger’s Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, “Astronaut Rides Soyuz,” 8 February 1997.)
An international team of astronomers announced the discovery of three black holes in three nondescript galaxies, suggesting that nearly all galaxies may in fact have massive black holes. Using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the researchers took a census of 27 galaxies to find a series of black holes massive enough to consume millions of Sun-like stars. The findings, which the scientists presented in full at the 189th meeting of the American Astronomical Society, provided insight into the origin and evolution of galaxies, as well as clarifying the role of quasars in the galaxy. Douglas O. Richstone of the University of Michigan, who led the research team, stated that two of the black holes had “weighed in” at 50 million and 100 million solar masses, respectively. Scientists remained divided on why black holes exist so abundantly in space. One theory suggested was that, at the center of most or all galaxies, supermassive black holes exist, where gases ignite to the hottest temperatures known, sending nearby stars spiraling in new directions. Ralph Narayan of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics called the black holes “the ultimate victory of gravity.(Paul Recer, “Astronomers Find Stronger Evidence of Massive Black Holes,” Huntsville Times (AL), 14 January 1997; NASA, “Massive Black Holes Dwell in Most Galaxies, According to Hubble Census,” news release 97-9, 12 January 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earth’s ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASA’s trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, “one word for our mission would be diversity.” With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, “August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch,” news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study,” USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, “Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
Mir’s crew had to abandon a German-built robotic camera called the Inspector, which Russian space officials had hoped would capture precise images of the holes in the Spektr module, made when the a cargo craft crashed into Mir in June 1997. The camera had failed immediately after its launch, diverting from its planned course. After attempting for several hours to redirect the Inspector, the crew made plans to change Mir’s orbit, to avoid a collision with the unruly robot. The malfunctioning Inspector was the latest in the long string of accidents and malfunctions that had forced the three Russian-American crew members aboard Mir to spend nearly as much time on maintenance as on scientific research.(Reuters, “Mir To Abandon Robot Space Camera After Failure,” 17 December 1997; Associated Press, “Robot Fails, Floats Free Near Mir,” 18 December 1997.)
Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov conducted an “internal” spacewalk, entering the damaged Spektr module of Mir. Once inside the darkened module damaged by the June 1997 cargo craft collision, the men found floating space debris. Seven bags and a refrigerator door were among the items banging around inside the Spektr module. After securing the debris, the cosmonauts went to work installing new solar-panel cables to restore full power to Mir. The cosmonauts, who were wearing bulky spacesuits, performed the 6-hour spacewalk inside a cramped module. Although the men became exhausted before they could finish the repair work, the arduous exercise had boosted the station’s power supply by 30 percent. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the cosmonauts to conduct another repair operation during the following days.(David Hoffman, “A Partial Repair Gives Mir a Power Boost,” Washington Post, 21 October 1997; Associated Press, “A Spacewalk of Surprises Aboard Mir,” 21 October 1997.)
Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced the agency’s support for a film company to shoot a Hollywood-style movie aboard Mir. Russian director Yuri Kara had submitted a proposal to bring actors and film crews to Mir to shoot the film, entitled “Space Flight Has a Price.” Although the Russian Space Agency had not officially approved the project, the cash-strapped agency welcomed the unique opportunity to earn money. The biggest obstacle to the project seemed to be finding financial backers willing to pay to send Kara’s crew into space. The prospect of filming a movie aboard Mir raised some concerns in the space community, but Kara noted that Russian cosmonauts already had acting experience, having filmed commercials aboard the space station for products, including Pepsi-Cola, Omega watches, and Israeli milk.(Associated Press, “Mir⎯the Movie,” 5 November 1997.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASA’s more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlight⎯not enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecraft’s instruments from freezing. NASA’s policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the mission⎯the first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planet⎯as NASA’s boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: “I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.”(NASA, “Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet,” news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, “NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission,” news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, “Protestors Set Stage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
Henry C. Ferguson, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, announced the discovery of stars residing outside of any defined galaxy. Scientists had long suspected that such stars existed, but Ferguson and his team were the first to confirm the theories. They did so using images captures by the HST, which revealed as many as 600 stars in the seemingly blank spaces among the Virgo cluster of galaxies, approximately 60 million light-years away from Earth. Ferguson suspected that many more stars⎯perhaps as many as 1 trillion Sun-like stars⎯are adrift in the galaxies of Virgo. The astronomers theorized that galactic mergers, or the tidal forces of nearby galaxies, had displaced the stars from their home galaxies.(John Noble Wilford, “Hubble Detects Stars that Belong to No Galaxy,” New York Times, 15 January 1997.)
NASA marked the one-year anniversary of the United States’ continuous presence in space, a tenure that began with the mission of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard the Mir space station. Astronauts John E. Blaha and Jerry M. Linenger had followed Lucid’s stay. NASA planned to maintain a continuous presence aboard Mir until 1998.
Shuttle Discovery ended Mission STS-82 with a safe landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The early morning landing occurred later than NASA had planned because of cloudy weather in Florida. NASA praised Discovery’s crew for its work refurbishing the HST.(William Harwood, “Discovery Lands: Shuttle Back from Hubble Repair Mission,” Chicago Sun-Times, 22 February 1997.)
NASA announced the retirement of Wilbur C. Trafton, who had guided NASA’s International Space Station (ISS) planning for nearly four years. Trafton resigned from his position as Director of the Space Station Program one week after a contentious hearing, in which NASA officials informed Congress that cost overruns on the ISS had reached nearly US$1 billion. However, at Trafton’s departure, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised him, stating, “Will Trafton has met or exceeded all of the challenges I have placed before him.” During Trafton’s tenure, Russia had officially joined the ISS effort as a full partner, and the ISS had moved from planning stage to construction.(NASA Trafton Announces His Departure from NASA,” news release 97-264, 13 November 1997; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA’s Space Station Chief Resigns,” Washington Post, 14 November 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russia’s Mir space station and in Russia’s failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, “Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy,” 21 September 1997; Associated Press, “Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia,” 22 September 1997.)
Hubble scientists released their first reviews of the newly upgraded HST, concluding enthusiastically that the refurbished space telescope offered exciting new possibilities. The upgrades to the HST significantly improved the range and precision of the instrument. Scientists reported peering approximately 50 million light-years away and zeroing in on previously undetectable black holes. According to Edward J. Weiler, the head of NASA’s Hubble team, the added Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, installed in February 1997, reduced the length of time it took to confirm the presence of black holes in the universe. Weiler called the HST a “census bureau” for black-hole hunting, allowing researchers to survey these objects as a population rather than as individual phenomena. Another new instrument installed in February, the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS), enabled the HST to capture near-infrared wavelengths, beginning to penetrate the “dusty veil” that had prevented astronomers from studying the birth and death of stars. NASA engineers also disclosed that an early focusing problem with one of the three cameras used by the NICMOS system seemed to be correcting itself. Although the flaw could limit the life of the system, scientists were confident that NICMOS would still be able to gather and preserve all scientific data. During early testing of the NICMOS system, scientists had uncovered a region of the universe in which young stars eject material into a molecular cloud, a process that researchers had long hypothesized but had been unable to observe.(NASA, “Hubble’s Upgrades Show Birth and Death of Stars; Discover Massive Black Hole,” news release 97-93, 12 May 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Improved Hubble Telescope Gets Rave Reviews at NASA,” Washington Post, 13 May 1997; Reuters, “Hubble Captures Star Birth,” 13 May 1997; Associated Press, “Upgrade Hubble Telescope Dazzles Astronomers,” 12 May 1997.)
Discovery’s crew released the HST from the Shuttle’s cargo bay after nearly a week of maintenance and refurbishing work. The astronauts had conducted a fifth spacewalk, one more than NASA had originally planned, to place a makeshift patch on the HST’s peeling insulation. “It’s not the Hubble Space Telescope. It’s really Hubble Space Telescope II,” remarked NASA’s chief Hubble scientist upon releasing the telescope. NASA deemed the mission a complete success.(Associated Press, “Hubble Released To Search Universe,” 20 February 1997; Associated Press, “Looking for Answers,” 19 February 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, “we don’t need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. It’s called the International Space Station.” GAO’s report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen” (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, “Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, “Space Station,” 11 June 1997.)
A small fire broke out aboard the Mir space station, raising new questions about the fitness of the aging station for occupation and research. The six crew members on board quickly extinguished the fire, the result of a faulty air purification unit. The astronauts and cosmonauts estimated that the fire had burned for about 90 seconds, forcing the crew to don respirator masks. Mir continued to function normally after the fire, although the heat had melted several cables.(NASA, “Small Fire Extinguished on Mir,” news release 97-30, 24 February 1997; Associated Press, “Fire on Russian Space Station Doused, but Raises Concern,” 25 February 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency launched Soyuz TM-25, carrying a crew of two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, and German astronaut Reinhold Ewald to the Mir space station, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The cosmonauts would become Mir’s new, long-term crew, and the German astronaut would return with the retiring crew in two weeks. Germany had paid the Russian Space Agency millions of dollars to carry Reinhold Ewald aboard the Shuttle to Mir.(Reuters, “Russians Launch 3 into Space,” 11 February 1997.)
President William J. Clinton released his budget proposal, which included a request for US$75 million to develop the Space Infrared Telescope Facility. NASA had argued that the infrared telescope would aid scientists in answering some of the universe’s most fundamental questions including, what is the energy source for the universe’s brightest stars? and, where is the universe’s missing dark matter? Presidential support for the initiative led NASA to hope that it might finally receive the funding necessary to begin building the last of four space-based telescopes proposed as a part of the Great Observatories program. In addition to the highly publicized Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had successfully placed in orbit the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and had immediate plans to launch the nearly completed X-ray Astrophysics Facility. NASA expected the four telescopes, using various kinds of cosmic radiation to survey the atmosphere, would provide an unprecedented view of the universe. The four telescopes operating together would allow us “to look at the universe at all ages at once,” explained Michael Werner, a scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Upon the program’s conception in 1991, the National Academy of Sciences had called the Great Observatories the “highest priority for any major new program in space-based astronomy,” but a steady stream of budget cuts had made it increasingly difficult to realize the project.(Paul Hoversten, “NASA Seeks $75 Million for Another Eye in the Sky,” USA Today, 6 February 1997.)
Vladimir Lobachyov, head of Russian Mission Control, explained to reporters that the collision of the robotic cargo craft Progress with the Mir space station had probably punctured one of the space station’s solar batteries, damaging Mir’s power supply. The crew of the damaged Mir turned the space station to face directly toward the Sun, so that Mir would get the jolt of energy necessary to boost its solar-power supply.(Reuters, “Mir Crew Turns to Sun To Help Damaged Space Station,” 26 June 1997.)
NASA announced that, in one week, engineers had completed repairs to the damaged insulation of the Huygens probe, a part of the Cassini Mission to Saturn. Some scientists had feared that the tears to the insulation would set back the ambitious mission indefinitely. NASA engineers, however, had worked rapidly to disassemble the probe, completely inspect the damage, and make the appropriate repairs. Additionally, during the repair period, the project had received a welcome voice of support from the National Space Society, an independent space advocacy organization. The Society had issued a statement expressing its full confidence in NASA and in the mission, offsetting the protests against the mission’s use of nuclear fuel. The National Space Society declared, “saying ‘no’ to Cassini would be saying ‘no’ to knowledge,” defending the use of nuclear power as the only safe and viable option for such a lengthy mission: “Cassini’s Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) . . . have proven their safety and capability in 23 prior missions, including human missions. RTGs are the only realistic option for sending probes great distances from the Sun and will certainly play a part in future human missions.”(NASA, “Repair Work on Cassini Huygens Probe Completed Successfully,” news release 97-198, 12 September 1997; Associated Press, “National Space Society Adds to Support for Saturn Mission,” 9 September 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency paid cosmonauts Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin belated bonuses for their six-month Mir mission, payments that Russia had withheld until investigators had determined the two men’s roles during the troubled mission, which included the crash of a robotic cargo craft into Mir. S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), the company that built Mir, had blamed Tsibliyev and Lazutkin, suggesting that Russia deny the two cosmonauts their salaries. However, once the Russian government had determined that human error had been only one among many causes of the crash, RSC Energia’s President Yuri P. Semyonov had retracted the company’s demand that Russia punish the cosmonauts and had supported their right to receive payment. Tsibliyev received about US$100,000 and Lazutkin about US$80,000. Both men had expressed dismay at the negative reception they had received upon returning to Earth after the difficult mission.(Associated Press, “Mir’s Pay Day,” 25 December 1997.)
The Russian Soyuz spacecraft lifted off from Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov on a mission to repair the disabled Mir space station. Russian space officials tasked the two men with restoring power to Mir after the 25 June collision with a cargo craft cut by half the orbiting research center’s energy. Regarding the importance of the mission, some observers of Russian space activity went so far as to say that the country’s piloted space program depended on Solovyev and Vinogradov’s success.(Associated Press, “2 Russians Blast Off on Mir Repair Mission,” 6 August 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
Astronaut F. Story Musgrave retired from NASA after 30 years of service and six Shuttle flights. During his more than 1,200 hours in space, Musgrave had flown on the first voyage of Challenger and had been a member of the first crew to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Flying aboard STS-80 in 1996, Musgrave became the oldest person to fly in space. NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations David C. Leestma said of Musgrave, “throughout the Shuttle program, from its earliest stages to the present, Story has been instrumental in developing the techniques crew members use to perform spacewalks.”(NASA, “Astronaut Story Musgrave Retires from NASA,” news release 97-188, 2 September 1997.)
NASA announced that the newly refurbished and improved HST had allowed astronomers to observe the fading, visible-light counterpart of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), a process that researchers called “one of the most energetic and mysterious” in the universe. The scientists speculated that the observable counterpart signified the existence of an unobservable, catastrophic burst of gamma rays, unleashing as much energy in a few seconds as the Sun does in 10 billion years. The New Technology Telescope and the W. M. Keck Telescope, added to the HST in 1997, had enabled scientists to make the observation. According to Gerald J. Fishman of Marshall Space Flight Center, the lead investigator of NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, astronomers could not overestimate the significance of the find, even if the visible- light phenomenon was only an indicator of another unobservable phenomenon. “This [discovery] opens up a whole new era in GRB research,” Fishman explained. “We now know that it is possible to see the fading optical emission by rapid follow-up observations with powerful telescopes. With several more of these, we should be able to narrow the models of what could be causing these gigantic outbursts.”(NASA, “Hubble Tracks the Fading Optical Counterpart of a Gamma-Ray Burst,” news release 97-63, 1 April 1997.)
NASA announced the promotion of Gretchen W. McClain to the position of Acting Director of Space Station Requirements. As Director, McClain took over responsibility for establishing policy and standards for the ISS, as NASA continued to plan for the space station, with ongoing support from the Russian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, Japan, and Canada.(NASA, “NASA Names Acting Space Station Director,” news release, 97-15, 23 January 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russia’s successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
NASA announced the retirement of veteran astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman, who had flown on five Shuttle missions. Hoffman planned to continue his NASA service, becoming NASA’s European representative in Paris. Hoffman was one of the four astronauts to take part in the spacewalking mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in 1993. In total, Hoffman had spent more than 1,200 hours in space and traveled more than 21.5 million miles (35 million kilometers).(NASA, “Jeff Hoffman Retires from Astronaut Corps,” new release 97-151, 9 July 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report on the threat of space debris to the planned International Space Station (ISS). According to the report, Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan, NASA’s surveillance capabilities, relying on the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) network of radar and optical sensors for information about possible collisions, had not provided enough information to prevent collisions in space. GAO surmised that DOD had focused most of its attention on military objects, missing many of the smaller pieces of debris that could have caused significant damage to NASA’s Shuttles or the ISS. GAO recommended that NASA, DOD, and the CIA collaborate to upgrade the space surveillance system. According to estimates, more than 110,000 pieces of debris, most measuring about 0.5 inches (1.3 centimeters) in diameter, were floating in space. With a closing velocity of 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour, even such a small object would do significant damage to the ISS, when the station was in a prograde orbit. GAO’s report noted that the fully completed ISS would be 10 times larger than any Shuttle flying in space, and that it would be in orbit for at least 10 years, increasing the chance of a collision occurring. Although they acknowledged the possibility of a collision, NASA scientists argued that the odds favored the ISS’s avoiding such an occurrence. As NASA’s expert, Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris, Nicholas L. Johnson, explained, “The odds are certainly in your favor that nothing will happen at all in those 10 years [of planned space station operation].”(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan” (report no. NSIAD 98-42, Washington, DC, 1 December 1997); Sean Holton, “Worries Rise over Junk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 December 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
NASA announced that astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had identified the most luminous star ever charted. The “celestial mammoth,” large enough to fill the diameter of the Earth’s orbit, reportedly releases up to 10 million times the power of the Sun. The team from the University of California at Los Angeles estimated that the star, possibly as old as 3 million years, weighs up to 200 times the mass of the Sun. The team nicknamed it the Pistol Star because it has a pistol-shaped nebula. Despite the star’s mass and brightness, it was not visible to the naked eye because of the interstellar dust clouds between Earth and the center of the Milky Way. Therefore, astronomers had used infrared technology to observe the star. Team researcher Mark R. Morris argued that the discovery of the massive star near the center of the galaxy would force scientists to rethink their conceptions of how stars formed in the first place.(Associated Press, “Space Monster,” 8 October 1997; NASA, “Hubble Identifies What May Be the Most Luminous Star Known,” news release 97-227, 7 October 1997.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
At Baltimore’s Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA scientists described the long-duration- exposure pictures taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) as the “best picture we have yet of the early universe,” announcing that, approximately 12 billion years ago, the universe had been completely barren of galaxies. Richard S. Ellis of England’s Institute of Astronomy emphasized the significance of science’s new ability to use the HST to view “a time before galaxy formation.” The HST had opened its lens for many hours of exposure, focusing on a tiny wedge of the sky to capture its most probing picture ever, known as the Hubble Deep Field Survey. Focusing only on a small speck of the sky had enabled astronomers to look deeper into the universe than ever before. Mario Livio of the Space Telescope Science Institute estimated that the HST had captured a view of the universe at only about 10 percent of its present age.
Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linenger’s excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttle’s safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in space⎯the second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, “Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit,” 25 May 1997.)
Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey announced that the Galileo spacecraft had captured images revealing iceberg-like structures, suggesting the presence of frozen water on Jupiter’s moon Europa. The discovery provided strong support for the theory that an ocean once existed on the moon’s surface. Astronomers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the discovery “mind-blowing” and “the clearest evidence to date that there is liquid water and melting close to the surface of Europa.” Ronald Greeley, the Arizona State University geologist who managed the Galileo imaging team, described the structures in the Europa images as “blocks of ice, similar to those seen on the Earth’s polar seas during springtime thaws.” Greeley concluded that a “thin icy layer covering water or slushy ice” might possibly exist on Europa’s surface. The images revealed one possible ice formation that spread across Europa’s surface in patches as wide as 4 miles (6.4 kilometers). Scientists disagreed on exactly how to interpret the images and on whether future exploration would be able to prove the presence of an ocean. Nevertheless, excitement over the findings spread throughout the research community. In its use of the Galileo probe to explore Europa, NASA continued its mission to search the universe for other environments suitable for life. The Galileo probe almost lost the images when an antenna on the craft jammed, slowing data transmission to Earth. Galileo came within 363 miles (584 kilometers) of Europa to capture the highly celebrated pictures.(Kathy Sawyer, “Signs of Ocean Found on a Jupiter Moon,” Washington Post, 10 April 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Spot Water on Moon of Jupiter,” 10 April 1997; NASA, “New Images Hint at Wet and Wild History for Europa,” news release 97-66, 9 April 1997.)
As the two cosmonauts worked to repair the failing Mir space station, President Boris N. Yeltsin allowed the Russian government to borrow US$100 million from foreign banks, giving the Russian Space Agency an infusion of capital. Yeltsin announced the decision after touring the construction facilities where Russia planned to build its contributions to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency’s cash-flow problems had resulted in construction delays and failure to meet deadlines, postponing the completion of the entire ISS.(Associated Press, “Government Will Borrow $100 Million for Space Agency,” 9 August 1997.)
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
Two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, returned to Earth after spending more than six months aboard the Mir space station. The New York Times echoed the feelings of many in the space community, calling the six months the Russians had spent in space, “six of the least glorious months in the history of manned space flight.” During their departure from Mir, Tsibliyev and Lazutkin continued to experience the same type of problem that had characterized their tenure on board the space station. The two cosmonauts, scheduled to disengage from Mir in the Soyuz spacecraft and then to circle the space station, cancelled the exercise because of concern that the two spacecraft would collide. After the cosmonauts landed in the desert of Kazakhstan, Tsibliyev recounted to an international press corps the difficult mission that he and Lazutkin had endured aboard Mir, remarking that the two cosmonauts should not become the scapegoats for Russia’s problems in space. The collision
Space News reported that the Italian Space Agency had decided not to participate in construction of the International Space Station (ISS) because of NASA’s insistence that Italy meet previously established deadlines. The Italian firm Alenia Aerospazio had expressed interest in building, on behalf of Italy, two nodes, the pieces of hardware used to connect different sections of the orbiting laboratory. The Italian Space Agency had requested more time to investigate the feasibility of participating, after it determined that funding the $150 million project, solely in return for additional future use of the ISS, might strain its budget for other scientific projects. Gretchen W. McClain, Acting Director of Space Station Requirements, said that, although NASA regretted the loss of Italy’s participation in the ISS, placing the project on hold while the Italian Space Agency made its decision would result in significant schedule shortfalls. The development highlighted the difficulty of fostering international participation and, at the same time, maintaining the target delivery date of the ISS.(Peter B. de Selding and William Harwood, “Italian Nodes for Station Unlikely,” Space News, 3−9 February 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a “once-in-a-career opportunity” for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, “Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94,” news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission,” Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, “Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April,” New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission,” 1 July 1997.)
The unpiloted cargo spacecraft Progress M-33 failed in its planned docking with the Mir space station, forcing Russian space officials to decide whether to allow the cargo craft to burn up in the atmosphere or to try again to connect with Mir. The docking of Progress M-33, which only had some surplus fuel aboard, was not of critical importance to Mir, but Russian Space Agency scientists had planned to use the craft’s docked mass to adjust the trajectory of Mir. News of the failure of the Progress’s docking tempered Russia’s celebration of its first satellite launch from a new cosmodrome in Svobody, occurring on the same day. On 6 March, the saga ended, when Russian officials decided to let the Progress M-33 drift off to burn up in the atmosphere.(Reuters, “Russia May Try New Space Docking or Let Craft Burn,” 5 March 1997; Reuters, “Russian Space Launch Marred by Failed Docking,” 4 March 1996; Reuters, “Russia To Scrap Spacecraft after Docking Snag” 6 March 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, “We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue.” NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASA’s announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, “I told you so.” Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved “15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers,” keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, “Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module,” New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, “Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day,” 11 April 1997.)
The Cassini spacecraft lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a seven-year, 2.2 billion-mile (3.5 billion-kilometer) journey to and around Saturn. After several delays, including a two-day delay immediately before the launch because of high winds, the takeoff was flawless. Before the launch, activists had protested Cassini’s fuel source, 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of radioactive plutonium; to calm public anxiety, NASA planned to sample air quality at 25 stations surrounding the launchpad, including several samples taken as far as 10 miles (16 kilometers) away. Additionally, a U.S. Department of Energy aircraft flew through the trailing gases of the rocket booster to make sure that no radioactive material had leaked. The US$3.4 billion mission set out to survey the planet Saturn, its rings, and its moon Titan. Engineers had programmed the Cassini spacecraft to conduct a number of “gravity-assist swingbys,” flying twice past Venus and once past Earth and Jupiter, to build up the speed necessary to make the long journey to Saturn. About seven years into the mission, NASA planned for Cassini to release a disc-shaped Huygens probe toward Titan. Throughout the mission, Cassini was to make more than 40 close flybys of Titan, gathering far more vivid images of the moon than ever before. NASA intended Cassini’s camera to take more than 300,000 colored pictures of Saturn and its moons. Scientists hoped that the mission would expand considerably the knowledge of the planet gained through the earlier Voyager missions.(NASA, “Cassini Launch,” news release, October 1997; Earl Lane, “Plutonium-Bearing Craft Set for Saturn Trip,” Birmingham News (AL), 5 October 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Nuclear Powered Craft Fuels Fury Before Launch,” USA Today, 13 October 1997; Karl Grossman, “The Risk of Cassini Probe Plutonium,” Christian Science Monitor, 10 October 1997; Associated Press, “Cassini Spacecraft Lifts Off for Saturn,” 16 October 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
Astrophysicists William P. Blair, Robert A. Fesen, and Eric M. Schlegel presented to the American Astronomical Society the first images ever recorded of two supernovas colliding. The team used the Hubble Space Telescope to capture the images of the supernovas, more than 17 million light-years from Earth. Astronomers had suspected that collisions occurred between exploding stars, but had been unable to capture an image of the process, because it was so short- lived. Although the scientific community would continue to debate the implications of the image, Blair offered this assessment of its significance: “It indicates that not only is there a lot of star formation going on, but a lot of those stars are massive. They are evolving quickly, and they are exploding as supernovas.”
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
300Associated Press, “Astronauts Aboard Discovery Test New Japanese Robot Arm,” 9 August 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests a Robot Built To Spacewalk,” 11 August 1997. between the Progress cargo craft and Mir had occurred during the two men’s tenure, and shortly thereafter, doctors had diagnosed Tsibliyev’s irregular heartbeat. Space officials planned extensive debriefings for the two men. Meanwhile, President Boris N. Yeltsin congratulated the cosmonauts for their “persistence, courage, and heroism,” in spite of his having claimed only days earlier that the recent problems with Mir were solely the result of human error.(Daniel Williams, “Cosmonauts Return Safely from Space,” Washington Post, 15 August 1997; Michael Spencer, “Troubled Mir’s Crew Leaves, Landing Safely in Kazakhstan,” New York Times, 15 August 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Returns to Earth Safely, but to Many Questions,” 14 August 1997.)
After widespread speculation concerning the possibility of an indefinite delay of the Cassini Mission to Saturn, NASA announced that it would be able to repair a fuel leak in the spacecraft in time to meet an October 1997 launch date. NASA had enlisted U.S. Air Force engineers to make the repairs. The spacecraft’s need for repairs increased the tension surrounding the ambitious and expensive mission. Lieutenant Ken Hoffman of the U.S. Air Force, who supervised the repairs, attempted to reassure the public that the problem was “a correctable condition.” Nevertheless, opponents of the mission⎯particularly those opposed to the spacecraft’s use of radioactive plutonium⎯worried that the rocket’s launch might release hazardous materials. Michio Kaku, a City University of New York physics professor, said that, despite NASA’s announcement that it could quickly correct the problem, the leak was “just one more indication that NASA does not have things under control.”(Robyn Suriano, “Cassini Won’t Be Delayed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 August 1997.)
As the public anticipation of the appearance of Comet Hale-Bopp heightened, NASA announced that NASA-supported researchers would use its vast resources⎯including spacecraft and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST)⎯to study the comet. Scientists hoped that studying Hale-Bopp would lead to a greater general understanding of comets. Because comets are composed of loosely packed dirt and ice, experts consider them the best-preserved remnants of the early solar system. NASA disclosed that the Wallops Flight Facility would launch four rockets using ultraviolet wavelengths, to study Comet Hale-Bopp. In addition, the Ulysses spacecraft, the joint project of NASA and the ESA, which was already in orbit at the time, would chart the effects of solar-wind conditions on comets. However, scientists also disclosed that the close proximity of Hale-Bopp to the Sun posed a danger to HST’s sensitive detectors; therefore, they had determined to wait until a few months after the comet’s approach to Earth before tracking it with the telescope. JPL planned to host a public event, called Comet Chasers: On the Trail of a Comet, to bring scholars and the public together to discuss the significance of Comet Hale- Bopp.(NASA, “NASA Plans Comet Hale-Bopp Observing Campaign, Activities,” news release N97-17, 13 March 1996.)
A relief crew of two Russian cosmonauts, Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov, arrived at Mir to begin repair work on the damaged space station. On 25 June 1997, Mir had suffered its worst accident, when a robotic supply craft attempting to dock pierced the exterior of one of its research modules. The arriving crew, carrying tools and equipment, also had difficulty docking. As Soyuz approached Mir, its autonomic docking system failed, forcing Solovyev to override the system and pull Soyuz back. Solovyev then successfully docked the relief vehicle using manual controls. The crew planned to repair Mir’s failing oxygen-generating system, before reconnecting the damaged research module to the rest of the station. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency stressed that Mir had sufficient oxygen reserves in the event that the oxygen generator failed altogether. After repairing the oxygen system and the research module, the new crew planned to make as many as six spacewalks to repair the external damage caused by the June collision. Cosmonaut Solovyev brought significant experience to the mission; he had resided on Mir during four earlier missions, spending a total of 456 days in space. NASA planned for British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to remain on Mir, although the Russian Space Agency was replacing its crew aboard the space station.(Baltimore Sun (MD), “Relief Team Reaches Crippled Mir Space Station,” 8 August 1997; Reuters, “Two Cosmonauts Blast Off on Mission To Repair Mir,” 6 August 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Rocket To Repair Station,” 6 August 1997; Reuters, “New Crew Faces Hydra of Woes on Mir Space Station,” 5 August 1997.)
The Galileo spacecraft made the closest ever flyby of Jupiter’s moon Europa and earned a place in space history by becoming the first spacecraft to orbit an outer planet. Galileo came within 124 miles (200 kilometers) of Europa, gathering images of what looked liked an icy ocean beneath the moon’s frozen crust. The prospect of water on the moon’s surface excited scientists, who had identified Europa’s climate as unique among the moons and planets of the galaxy. The images of the possible ocean seemed to show signs of “slushy material” pushing up against the surface ice, a sign of a heated core. The flyby was the first encounter to occur during Galileo’s two-year extension to its original mission. According to press accounts, Galileo, launched in 1989, had already gathered enough data to force scientists to “rewrite textbooks.”(NASA, “Closest Europa Flyby Marks Start of Galileo Mission ‘Part II’,” news release 97-286, 16 December 1997; K. C. Cole, “Galileo Takes Close-Ups of Icy Europa,” Los Angeles Times, 17 December 1997; Associated Press, “Galileo Flies By Europe, Sees Indication of Ocean Under Ice,” 17 December 1997.)
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linenger’s first spacewalk and Tsibliyev’s third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, “U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk,” news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, “American, Russian Take a Spacewalk,” 30 April 1997; Associated Press, “Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk,” 29 April 1997.)
Mir’s main computer failed during a cargo craft docking, setting the Russian space station adrift. The malfunction postponed a planned spacewalk to begin repairs to Mir, forcing the crew to turn its attention to reorienting the space station toward the Sun. The crew shut down most of Mir’s operating systems to conserve power.(Shannon Tangonan, “Computer Shutdown Sends Mir Adrift,” USA Today, 19 August 1997; Michael Specter, “Computer Failure on the Mir Sends It Out of Control,” New York Times, 19 August 1997.)
NASA announced that the construction schedule for the International Space Station (ISS) remained on target to begin delivery launches in December 1998. All 15 nations participating in the building of the ISS had traveled to Johnson Space Center (JSC) to finalize the station’s construction sequence and compare progress updates. The international consortium agreed on a 45-flight sequence for delivering the already-assembled portions of the station from Earth to their orbiting home. To assemble the colossal station completely, NASA and its partners planned five years of steady launch-and-construct missions, expecting to send the U.S.-constructed Node 1 into space sometime during June 1998.(NASA, “Control Board Reports International Space Station Launch on Target, Finalizes Assembly Sequence,” news release 97-222, 1 October 1997.)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a German astronaut returned safely to Russia after tenures aboard the Russian space station Mir. The cosmonauts had spent more than six months in space, and Reinhold Ewald of Germany had spent two weeks aboard Mir as a paying guest of the Russian Space Agency. Ewald conducted geophysical, astrophysical, and medical experiments during his stay. The German Space Agency paid about US$60 million for Ewald’s trip, providing a much- needed infusion of capital for Russia’s space program.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 2 March 1997.)
The embattled effort to launch the Cassini spacecraft suffered a setback when NASA engineers discovered ripped insulation in its Huygens probe, while the craft was sitting on the launchpad in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Investigators concluded that a ground-air-conditioner malfunction had caused the tears. The possibility of a launch delay, even for only a few days, concerned scientists, because Saturn was moving farther and farther from Earth. A longer journey to Saturn would require the spacecraft to use more fuel for transport, leaving less for scientific exploration. The Cassini Mission to Saturn had received significant public criticism because 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of plutonium⎯the largest amount of radioactive material ever rocketed into space⎯powered the probe. Although protesters had organized marches and petitioned government officials to stop the launch, NASA spokesperson Douglas Isbell had pointed out NASA’s perfect record of using nuclear fuel safely. Scientists from the European Space Agency and NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had planned and engineered the building of the 23rd nuclear-powered Cassini for the 11-year mission. Experts from both sides of the Atlantic were optimistic that engineers would repair the insulation damage quickly.(John Noble Wilford, “Delay Expected for Spacecraft Going to Saturn,” New York Times, 4 September 1997; John Kennedy and Seth Borenstein, “Nuclear Launch Draws Protest,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 30 August 1997; Sharon K. Spry, “Danger of Cassini Accident Too Great,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 August 1997; Associated Press, “Mishap May Delay Mission to Saturn,” 4 September 1997.)
A Russian cargo spacecraft docked without incident at the Mir space station, using the craft’s automatic pilot to complete the maneuver. It was the first successful docking after two previous failed attempts, one of which had resulted in the crash that seriously damaged Mir. To address the earlier problem, the Russian Space Agency had reconfigured the mathematical formula guiding the procedure. The Progress M-36 cargo craft carried a backup computer for the space station. Mir’s crew planned to unload the more than 6,000 pounds (2,700 kilograms) of cargo in the days following the delightfully uneventful docking.(Washington Post, “Cargo Ship Docks with Space Station,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Successful Docking Gives Mir a Life in Morale,” 8 October 1997; Reuters, “Mir Crew To Unload Cargo After Text-Book Docking,” 8 October 1997.)
NASA released images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealing more clearly than ever the “final blaze of glory” of aging Sun-like stars. Scientists had long hypothesized that stars gradually dimmed and died out as they cast off a shell of glowing gas. However, the HST revealed instead that dying stars create in space an intricate series of glowing patterns⎯“pinwheels, lawn sprinkler style jets, elegant goblet shapes, and even some that look like a rocket engine’s exhaust.” Astronomers speculated that the new images would lead them to reanalyze “stellar evolution.” According to Howard E. Bond of the Space Telescope Science Institute of Baltimore, Maryland, the images made old ideas about the death of stars seem simplistic. Hubble scientist David S. Leckrone of NASA Headquarters, referring to the eventual burning out of the Sun, went so far as to say, “In a very real way, these images show us our own destiny.” Scientists believed that the images portrayed a complicated but very organized sequence of events, which experts might understand after further study.(NASA, “Hubble Witnesses the Final Blaze of Glory of Sun-Like Stars,” news release 97-287, 17 December 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Hubble Observes Stars’ Swan Songs,” USA Today, 18 December 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Hubble Takes Gaudy Photos of Dying Stars,” New York Times, 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Hubble Previews Death of Earth in 6 Billion Years,” 18 December 1997.)
During the terminal countdown of a demonstration test of the Titan IV-B rocket designed for the Cassini mission to Saturn, engineers noticed liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen leaking from the Centaur stage of the rocket. NASA had scheduled Cassini’s launch for early October 1997. NASA officials delayed the launch until they could complete further tests, offering no immediate estimate of how long that might take. Interested scientists and engineers, however, predicted that the problem could postpone the mission by months or even years. Under the mission’s original timetable, NASA had expected Cassini to launch in October 1997, reaching Saturn in July 2004. Because of the length of the journey from Earth to Saturn, the scientific community expected that NASA would find it difficult to reschedule the flight. Moreover, experts warned that the alignment of planets providing an ideal launch date, such as that in October 1997, would not occur again for 12 to 14 years. At US$3.2 billion, Cassini was one of the last of NASA’s high- stake, multibillion-dollar missions, drawing considerable attention during the climate of steady cost reductions that characterized the 1990s.(NASA, “Countdown Test Reveals Fuel Leaks on Cassini Mission Centaur Upper Stage,” 7 August 1997; Associated Press, “Rocket Leak Could Postpone Landing on Saturn by Years,” 8 August 1997.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, out of contact with ground controllers since 25 June, responded to signals sent by NASA’s Deep Space Tracking Network antennas in Canberra, Australia. Although the signals contained no data, SOHO transmitted a series of short radio bursts, indicating to space scientists that the craft was still able to receive ground commands and, therefore, that they might still have a chance of salvaging it.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Contacted,” news release 98-145, 4 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Contact Re-established with Wayward Satellite,” 4 August 1998.)
A computer failure aboard Mir partially affected the space station’s solar panels, causing the panel to fail to generate sufficient electricity and requiring the crew to use the Soyuz capsule thrusters for steering. To conserve energy, the crew turned off nonessential equipment, including the air conditioner and lights. Although they replaced the computer with a new one, the crew was unable to load the necessary software. The crew feared the failure might delay Space Shuttle Discovery’s launch to Mir, planned for 2 June.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Cosmonauts Replace Mir Computer,” 31 May 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Mir Space Station Has a New Problem—Computer Failure Causes Solar Panels To Turn from Sun,” Seattle Times (WA), 31 May 1998.)
NASA announced that a long-exposure, infrared image, taken with a camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had uncovered the most distant galaxies ever seen. HST’s Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) had detected galaxies that might be over 12 billion light-years away, depending on which cosmological models scientists used. NASA’s Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science, Edward J. Weiler, deemed the discovery a major step toward fulfilling one of HST’s key objectives: to search for the “faintest and farthest objects in the universe.”(NASA, “Hubble Goes to the Limit in Search of Farthest Galaxies,” news release 98-179, 8 October 1998.)
The joint committee of NASA and the European Space Agency investigating the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) incident issued a preliminary report. The committee found that several errors had led to the loss of the satellite’s signal. First, Mission Control had “unknowingly activated” two preprogrammed sequences, which lacked commands to reorient the spacecraft properly. The resulting anomalies had caused SOHO to enter into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR). A “rapid decision” to turn off one of the craft’s gyroscopes had ultimately triggered two more ESRs, sending the spacecraft “flailing out of control.” Controllers also discovered that “undetected failures,” which had occurred sometime earlier in the year, “had taken out three of the four batteries.”(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Investigation Board Focuses on Most Likely Causes,” news release 98-125, 16 July 1998; James Glanz, “Chain of Errors Hurled Probe into Spin,” Science 281, no. 5376 (24 July 1998): 499; United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 28 July 1998.)
NASA and Russian Space Agency officials announced that Russia had agreed to sell research time aboard the International Space Station (ISS) for US$60 million, with payment dependent on the Russian agency’s completion of critical milestones. The ISS collaborators, including representatives of the 16 countries participating in the ISS program, had reached the agreement during a week of meetings in Moscow. Russia had missed three target dates because of insufficient funds. The deal, part of NASA’s efforts to bail out its partner and to “prevent costly new delays” in the construction and launch of the ISS, did not release Russia from its obligations to build the service module. As the Moscow meeting concluded, NASA officials also announced that the launches of the first ISS components, the Zarya and Unity modules, remained on schedule, and that the international partners had agreed to reconvene to refine the ISS assembly sequence, at the launch of the Unity module from Kennedy Space Center (KSC).(NASA, “Statement Following Conclusion of Moscow Meetings,” news release 98-176, 2 October 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Agency Makes Sale,” 5 October 1998; William J. Broad, “To Buy Some Time, Russia To Sell U.S. Some Time in Space,” New York Times, 5 October 1998.)
NASA announced that Boeing Company’s cost overruns for the International Space Station (ISS) had increased by about 30 percent to US$783 million, and that NASA intended to “further cut the company’s bonus fees.” In reporting to NASA the latest cost overruns, Boeing had explained that “continued production and testing and the need to set aside money for contingencies” had caused the latest increase, US$183 million more than the US$600 million previously estimated. Under the terms of NASA’s cost-plus-fee contract, Boeing would lose an additional US$27.5 million in bonus fees, besides the US$78 million reduction that NASA had imposed.(Seattle Times (WA), “Boeing Reports More Space Station Overruns,” 7 August 1998.)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston, astrophysicists Alexander G. Kosovichev of Stanford University and Valentina V. Zharkova of the University of Glasgow in Scotland presented evidence confirming their “solar-bomb theory.” Using sequential images that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft had captured, the two scientists explained that, 20 minutes following the rupture of a solar flare from the surface of the Sun, “a seismic wave front surges across the [S]un’s face like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond.” The SOHO images proved that solar flares not only release energy into the Sun’s atmosphere, but also “trigger huge waves of seismic energy that ripple through the [S]un like earthquakes.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Solar Flares Trigger Sunquakes,” 27 May 1998; A. G. Kosovichev and V. V. Zharkova, “X-ray Flare Sparks Quake Inside Sun,” Nature 383, no. 6683 (28 May 1998): 317.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin returned to Earth from a 207-day sojourn aboard Mir, along with former Kremlin aide Yuri M. Baturin, who had accompanied the cosmonauts’ replacements to the space station, spending 12 days in space. The two cosmonauts arrived in Russia to find a devalued ruble and the return of Viktor S. Chernomyrdin as Acting Prime Minister. Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had not yet fired Chernomyrdin’s government at the time Musabayev and Budarin left for Mir, and the two cosmonauts had missed the entire four-month term of Prime Minister Sergei V. Kiriyenko. Yeltsin had dissolved Kiriyenko’s government the week before the cosmonauts’ return flight to Earth. Because Yeltsin had devalued the ruble, the two cosmonauts also found that their pay had diminished.
The Russian Space Agency announced that the first module of the ISS was completed and ready to ship to the launchpad. Under a contract with Boeing Company, Khrunichev’s Moscow factory had designed and built this first module to hold cargo. The new module was similar to two existing modules in the Mir space station. Russia had originally scheduled the module for launch in November 1997, but fell behind in the production of the second unit. Despite the delay, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev emphasized the importance of the day during a news conference: “This event symbolizes the fact that Russia was, is, and shall be a space nation, capable of realizing large-scale projects penetrating into space.” The ISS project, a joint effort of Russia, the United States, the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan, was especially significant to Russia since the ISS would replace Mir as the only piloted element of Russia’s space program.
Astronomers announced that pictures from a new camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) supported the theory that a new planet was forming around Beta Pictoris. Images focusing on the disc (the halo of dust and gas rotating around the star) revealed that, instead of a smooth flow, one quadrant has a large bulge, indicating the orbital path of a planet that could be many times larger than Jupiter. No actual planet was visible in the images, only the effects of its gravitational pull. Nevertheless, this was the strongest evidence to date in visible light, of the presence of a possible planet. Beta Pictoris is younger (20 million to 100 million years old compared to the Sun’s 4.5 to 5 billion years) and about eight times brighter than the Sun. The formation of planets around a young star suggested that planets form very early in the life of a solar system.(Washington Post, “Images Support Theory of New Planet: Hubble Photos Show Bulge in Star’s Halo Dust—63 Light-Years from Sun,” 9 January 1998.)
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was “the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center.” NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a “whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac,” the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, “so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids” to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, “X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test,” news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, “Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight,” Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
In a spacewalk lasting nearly 7 hours, Mir cosmonauts failed to stabilize the solar panel damaged in a collision in 1997. Russian space officials had postponed this spacewalk from 3 March, when the crew had been unable to unlock the hatch, breaking three wrenches in their attempts. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, spent most of the spacewalk setting up a handrail, left outside the space station by the previous crew. After struggling to unfold and assemble the handrail, the pair only had enough time to install one of two footrests. The cosmonauts returned to Mir after the elapse of 6 hours and 40 minutes; their oxygen tanks only held approximately 7 hours of air. Russian Mission Control had intentionally turned off the audio system during most of the spacewalk. Officials said that Mission Control would no longer allow journalists to listen to radio traffic between Mission Control and spacewalkers, because reporters had become overly critical. Russian officials accused reporters of exaggerating problems on the space station, despite the fact that Mir had been operating relatively trouble free for several months before this spacewalk.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Undertakes Six-Hour Spacewalk To Repair Solar Panel,” 1 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 2 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Runs Out of Time, Fails To Stabilize Solar Panel,”1 April 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
Shuttle Endeavour docked with Mir at an altitude of 214 nautical miles (2,467 miles or 3,970 kilometers), bringing the seventh American astronaut to work on board Mir since the program began in 1995. Andrew S. W. Thomas, a mechanical engineer, replaced David A. Wolf, a physician, who had been on board Mir since September. The hatches opened at 5:25 p.m. (EST), and Thomas's transfer occurred at 6:35 p.m. (EST).(New York Times, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station with Astronaut and Supplies,” 25 January 1998; NASA, “STS- 89.”)
The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshall’s X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFC’s X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), “MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded,” 21 February 1998.)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
NASA officials announced that the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, which had operated the science program for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1983, would also manage the science operations for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST). As one of the cornerstone missions of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems, a major project within its space science program, NASA expected the NGST “to provide a critical follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope.” With capabilities unavailable in existing ground- based or space telescopes, the NGST’s purpose was to observe the first stars and galaxies in the universe, to understand better how the universe formed after the Big Bang. After consulting advisory committees, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, had decided that the “most cost-effective and scientifically sound way to proceed” would be “to expand the [Space Telescope Science] Institute’s responsibilities to include the management” of the new telescope.(NASA, “NASA Selects Home for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 98-96, 8 June 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) and ranking Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA) submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton requesting that he supply a plan within 30 days, “detailing how the [a]dministration expects to resolve the dire problems surrounding the International Space Station.” The two members of Congress asked President Clinton to intervene with President Boris N. Yeltsin to “ensure full Russian compliance with its stated commitments to the space station.” In the aftermath of the announcement of the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force’s findings on the ISS, the members of Congress were attempting to rectify the inadequate budget submission. They asked the President to “direct the Office of Management and Budget to deliver a workable plan to Congress . . . so that the relevant [c]ongressional committees can consider OMB numbers when crafting NASA appropriations and authorization bills.”(Federal Document Clearing House,” Committee Asks Clinton for Space Station Plan,” government news release, 24 June 1998.)
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASA’s purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russia’s failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASA’s proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “NASA Defends Space Station Plans,” 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, “NASA Chief Concedes Space Station Delays—Has Contingency Plans If Russia Can’t Do Its Part,” San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
The crew of the Mir space station replaced the malfunctioning computer block, which had failed on 2 January, and restarted the station’s orientation system. This common type of malfunction, which had occurred seven times in 1997, did not create life-threatening conditions, but it did reduce the power supply to the space station, thereby crippling the gyroscope that oriented the station’s solar panels. Using the Soyuz escape module engines to control its orientation, Mir turned off all nonessential systems, to conserve energy until the crew had completed the repair.(Washington Post, “Mir Crew Replaces Computer Block,” 4 January 1998; Chicago Tribune, “New Year, Old Woe—Mir Computer Glitch,” 3 January 1998.)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
Progress M-38 launched on a Soyuz-V rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying a 900-kilogram (2,000-pound) propulsion unit. Mir’s crew planned to attach the unit to the Quantum module of the space station. The cargo craft also carried 1,500 kilograms (3,300 pounds) of repair tools, replacement parts, food, and water.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 533, 1 April 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx533.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
SPACEHAB Inc., a Virginia-based, commercial space company with a staff of 85, purchased the Johnson Engineering Corporation, a 400-person firm contracted to support NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. SPACEHAB’s chairperson said the company would “expand the use of Johnson Engineering’s larger technical staff to support its plans for expansion into the commercial space arena.” Investors had incorporated SPACEHAB in 1984, to “develop a commercial research module that could accommodate small, private, as well as government- financed science experiments and engineering tests during [S]pace [S]huttle mission[s].” However, when the anticipated commercial market had failed to develop, SPACEHAB “changed its strategy,” winning NASA contracts. NASA used SPACEHAB modules, stored in the Shuttle’s payload bays, as cargo containers for storing “tons of food, clothing, and other gear that was ferried to Russia’s Mir space station aboard a series of recently concluded U.S. [S]huttle flights.”(Mark Carreau, “Spacehab of Virginia Acquires NASA Contractor,” Houston Chronicle, 5 July 1998.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, and the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics to conduct “parallel six-month definition studies of a new small satellite to monitor variations in the amount of radiant solar energy that reaches Earth,” as part of the preparations for the Total Solar Irradiance Mission.(NASA, “Two Studies Will Refine and Expand Solar Monitoring Task,” news release 98-47, 19 March 1998. 444 Brett Davis, “Space Station Costs Irk Congress,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 March 1998; Tamara Lytle, “U.S. Legislators Criticize Increasing Cost of NASA’s Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 20 March 1998.)
NASA modified a contract with Boeing Information, Space and Defense Systems, increasing by US$163.4 million the company’s contract for work on the ISS. Under the modified contract, Boeing would supply additional engineering support and prelaunch testing for the ISS. The original eight-year prime contract, effective since 1995, had a value of US$7.1 billion and covered the construction and integration of the ISS. The modification covered sustained engineering for station elements, engineering support following a component’s delivery to NASA, and support of multielement integrated testing.(NASA, “Engineering and Testing Support To Be Supplied by International Space Station Contract Modification,” contract announcement c98-u, 2 December 1998.)
Russian Space Agency officials reported, for the first time since Zarya’s launch, that the module had experienced malfunctions. At a press conference, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev explained that none of the module’s three minor malfunctions had any impact on the module’s overall operations. Koptev reported that one of the eight batteries storing energy collected from the module’s solar panels had not performed properly, but he emphasized that Zarya needed only four of the eight batteries to operate. Mission Control had detected an “unexpected abundance of humidity” inside the module, but engineers did not yet know its cause. The third problem involved a malfunctioning antenna in the craft’s automatic docking system, a device that the first ISS crew would not need until after their arrival in January 2000.(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Minor Problems Plague New Space Station,” 25 November 1998.)
Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been “personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts.” He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nation’s first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, “William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts,” New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.’s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, “Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science,” news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, “Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive ‘Drizzle’,” USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
Russia announced it would retire the Mir space station during the summer of 1999, six months earlier than originally planned. The decision resulted from a meeting between Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov, who agreed that Russia had insufficient funds to continue to fly the station. The agreement allocated approximately US$100 million for Mir’s final year, including funds for “a series of rockets to direct Mir to an unpopulated area of the Pacific Ocean.” Nemtsov also agreed to pay the Russian Space Agency the US$600 million owed for Mir’s operations in 1997, using “unspecified ‘nonbudgetary sources’.”(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Russia Agrees to Early End for Mir Space Station,” 2 July 1998; Anna Dolgov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 July 1998.)
Phillip Z. Tapper, emergency coordinator for NASA’s GSFC, announced that exposure to smoke and water during the previous day’s fire had damaged parts of two spacecraft. Tapper said that engineers had not yet determined the exact damage to the heat protection panels, which they were planning to install in the Hubble Space Telescope and another spacecraft.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire Damages Spacecraft Parts,” 21 August 1998.)
Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellites⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi⎯in outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment “an impressive feat.” NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japan’s Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating “a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi,” associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, “Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFC’s previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFC’s Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.’s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, “Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center,” revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, “Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait,” 14–20 September 1998.)
NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billion–light-year–long “corridor,” the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a “core sample” of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a “small patch of space near the Big Dipper.”(NASA, “The Universe ‘Down Under’ Is the Target of Hubble’s Latest Deep-View,” news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)
Endeavour lost power to its small forward-maneuvering jets for 30 minutes. Because the jets, which deliver 25 pounds (11 kilograms) of thrust, keep the complex stabilized as it orbits Earth, the loss of power left the Endeavour–Mir complex adrift. During this malfunction, the crew continued its main task, to transfer supplies and equipment from the Shuttle to the space station. NASA officials explained that the crew had never been in danger. However, if the Shuttle’s small maneuvering jets had not regained power, Endeavour would have had to rely on its primary jets, which deliver 875 pounds (397 kilograms) of thrust. Using the primary jets would have risked damage to Mir upon separation of the two spacecraft.(Brad Liston for Reuters, “Faulty Jets Are Fixed, and Space Complex Is Stabilized,” New York Times, 27 January 1998.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin, trying for a third time, successfully stabilized a bent solar panel during a spacewalk of 4 hours and 15 minutes. The solar panel was only one of 10 nonfunctioning panels. The crew had not intended to repair the damaged panel fully, but only to stabilize it, so that it would not break loose and hit the space station. The cosmonauts cut short the spacewalk, scheduled to take 51⁄2 hours, when the thruster engine aligning Mir with the Sun ran out of fuel. Forced to return to the space station early, the cosmonauts were unable to remove some scientific equipment attached to the outside of the station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Mir Crew Shortens Spacewalk After Thruster Fuel Runs Out,” 7 April 1998. 459 Edith M. Lederer for Associated Press, “Europe-Space Water,” 7 April 1998; Washington Times, “Europe’s Space Surveyor Finds Water Vapor Near Stars, Planets,” 8 April 1998.)
At a NASA press conference, Ethan J. Schreier of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and his colleagues discussed new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images. The new images showed in greater clarity an old galaxy’s black hole “feeding on a smaller, younger galaxy that collided with it.” The scientists explained that the new images revealed young stars in the midst of an “obviously old galaxy,” suggesting that a collision had occurred. The merged galaxy complex, known as Centaurus A, was about 10 million light-years away from the Milky Way. The images, taken with HST’s newest infrared camera, also showed gas and dust feeding an apparent large black hole. An inner disc of gas, swirling around the black hole, was behaving in a manner opposite to scientists expectations, based upon the behavior of other galaxies. Hans- Walter Rix of the University of Arizona theorized that the collision could explain the difference, postulating that the HST “may have caught Centaurus A in the midst of trying to realign itself after its spiral companion plowed into it.” Schreier offered an alternative explanation—that the mass of the merged galaxies was greater than the mass of the black hole, causing the gravitational pull to warp the inner disc.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Hubble Reveals Feeding Black Hole,” 14 May 1998; NASA, “Hubble Provides Multiple Views of How To Feed a Black Hole,” news release 98-71, 14 May 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
The U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies, responsible for allocating space funding, voted to back funding for NASA’s ISS obligations but “cautioned the space agency to control costs and ensure Russia’s commitment to the expansive project.” The subcommittee voted for a US$13.6 billion budget for NASA for the fiscal year, including US$2.3 billion for the space station. Senate Subcommittee Chairperson Christopher Bond (R-MO) said that, although the budget was US$150 million more than President William J. Clinton had requested, it was US$33 million less than NASA’s 1998 spending level.(Patrick Connole for Reuters, “US Senate Panel Backs Space Station, Cut Superfund,” 9 June 1998.)
After a delay of more than a year, a Russian Proton booster rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the first module of the International Space Station (ISS), the 41.2-foot (12.6-meter) Zarya. The role of Zarya, translated as Sunrise, would be to act as a “space tugboat” in the early stages of construction, providing propulsion, power, and communications.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Puts First Segment of International Space Station in Orbit,” 20 November 1998.)
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
NASA awarded US$33 million in grants to 48 researchers, to conduct microgravity biotechnology research through NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Science and Applications. To those investigators awarded the 40 grants for ground-based research, NASA provided access to its microgravity research facilities, including aircraft flying parabolic trajectories and sounding rockets. NASA awarded eight grants to flight-definition investigators, to prepare for experiments on the International Space Station (ISS).(NASA, “NASA Announces Research Grants in Microgravity Biotechnology,” news release 98-217, 1 December 1998.)
The investigation board of engineers and officials from NASA and the European Space Agency released their final report, determining how controllers had lost communication with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite on 24 June. The board’s findings, presented at a joint news conference held in Washington, DC, and Paris, concluded that no anomalies existed on the spacecraft; the loss of SOHO “was a direct result of operational errors, a failure to monitor the status of the spacecraft adequately, and the use of insufficiently tested rescue procedures.” However, the board emphasized that no single cause or particular person was responsible for the incident.(Warren E. Leary, “Satellite To Study Sun Is Reviving from Dead,” New York Times, 4 September 1998.)
In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumpers’s (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States’ US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous month’s U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumpers’s arguments against the space station, citing the “incredible scientific possibilities” that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, “International Space Station Survives Senate Vote,” 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station,” government news release, 7 July 1998.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had found the youngest cluster of stars ever observed in a galaxy near the Milky Way. The baby stars were “enveloped in a cloud of luminous gases,” in the galaxy known as the Small Magellanic Cloud, about 200,000 light- years from Earth. The HST had discovered the 50 new stars, each 300,000 times as bright as the Sun, “concentrated in a region only 10 light-years across in a cloud known as N81.” Before the capture of the HST’s high-resolution images, astronomers had referred to the area as The Blob.(NASA, “Nearby Star Cluster Yields Insights into Early Universe,” news release 98-132, 23 July 1998; Washington Times, “Hubble Telescope Finds Family of Stars,” 24 July 1998; New York Times, “Genesis in a Cosmic Firestorm,” 28 July 1998.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, opened a new Collaborative Engineering Center equipped with virtual reality, teleconferencing, and cutting-edge technology. Using a combination of a joystick and computerized voice commands, engineers could control the three-dimensional, virtual space station, which included a docking Space Shuttle orbiter.(Akweli Parker, “NASA Reshaping the Way It Works,” Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, VA), 16 January 1998.)
Scientists studying images taken by NASA’s Galileo spacecraft announced, in a joint teleconference with Cornell University and NASA’s JPL, that Jupiter’s rings appeared to consist of dust, created in the course of millions of years, as asteroids and comets crashed into the four small moons nearest the planet’s surface⎯Metis, Adrastea, Amalthea, and Thebe. The images, captured during several hours in November 1996, when Galileo was able to observe the rings lit up by the Sun, had provided “unprecedented details of the tiny dust particles.” Furthermore, scientists observed that, in the images, “the three rings stopped abruptly at different moons.” Images from a second flyby in September 1997 had confirmed that “the depths of the three rings matched the depths of the moons’ orbits,” and that material in the rings “matched the dark red dust on the moons’ surface.” The scientists said that more moons than rings exist, because some of the moons supply dust to more than one ring.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Jupiter’s Rings Formed by Dust Blasted Off Small Moons,” news release 98-167, 15 September 1998; New York Times, “New Images Clear Up a Jupiter Mystery: Its Rings Are Just Dust,” 16 September 1998; Dennis Cauchon, “Scientists Solve Mystery of Jupiter’s Rings: Pictures Suggest Asteroid Impacts Stirred Moon Dust,” USA Today, 16 September 1998.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
A Progress cargo spacecraft delivering supplies to Mir veered off course while in automatic mode, forcing the space station’s crew to perform a manual docking. Mission Control ordered Commander Talgat A. Musabayev to perform the docking when the two craft were only 65 feet (20 meters) apart. Musabayev steered the cargo craft smoothly and avoided repeating last June’s collision.(Reuters, “Focus: Technical Failure Mars Russian Space Docking,” 17 March 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 17 March 1998.)
The Russian government agreed to pay a US$44.5 million debt to the Russian Space Agency, to ensure that the agency would be able to complete a long-delayed component of the new space station. Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev said that the government had agreed to pay the debt in three installments, in October, November, and December.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russian Government To Pay $44.5 Mln Debt to Space Agency,” 6 October 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
Mir Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev celebrated his 50th birthday⎯in space, enjoying a “semi- officially” sanctioned one-gulp-per-person dose of cognac and a birthday dinner chosen from the space station’s supplies. Solovyev had logged an impressive 80 hours of spacewalking during 17 walks. As of this Mir mission, Solovyev’s fifth, the Russian cosmonaut had spent a cumulative total of approximately 20 months on the space station.(Associated Press, “Mir-50-Year-Old Cosmonaut,” 16 January 1998.)
American astronaut David A. Wolf made his first spacewalk, accompanied by veteran spacewalker Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Commander of the Mir space station. Solovyev, making his 18th spacewalk, set the world’s record for the highest number of spacewalks by one individual.382 The spacewalk began 20 minutes later than scheduled, because of problems opening locks on the malfunctioning outer hatch. The scheduled task had been to assess wear and tear on the exterior of the station using a photoreflectometer designed in the United States. David A. Wolf worked for 2 hours trying to verify whether the device was working properly, but only succeeded in taking readings on the shell of the nine-year-old Kvant-2 module, one of the station’s oldest compartments. Engineers planned to use the data to help make selections for materials and protective coatings for the new ISS. Flight Director Vladimir A. Solovyov explained in a news conference at Mission Control outside Moscow, “the device proved to be far from mature, so it was decided to skip the examination of the core module.” Instead, the two men studied the holes in the Spektr module, which had suffered punctures during a collision with a cargo craft on 25 June 1997.(USA Today, “American Looks at Mir from Outside,” 15 January 1998; Oleg Shchedrov for Reuters, “Hitches Marred Mir Crew Space Walk, Says Official,” 15 January 1998; Houston Chronicle, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Take Short Spacewalk: Excursion Marked by a Few Small Difficulties,” 15 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, “Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew,” news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
Astronomers at the University of Manchester in England and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) announced that six radio telescopes, in concert with the HST, had “captured the first image ever recorded of an unbroken ‘Einstein ring’,” a “circle of light created by the gravitational warping of space between a very distant galaxy and the earth.” Physicist Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity had predicted that “light from a distant object would travel a curving path if it passed close to a massive object along the line of sight from Earth.” The radio image showed a fragmented group of bright arcs, but the HST showed that the galaxy’s infrared emission region was perfectly in line with the gravitational lens and Earth, confirming the existence of the Einstein ring.(Malcolm W. Browne, “‘Einstein Ring’ Caused by Space Warping Is Found,” New York Times, 31 March 1998. 127)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin submitted a 29-page report to lawmakers of the U.S. House of Representatives, officially responding to “an independent review panel’s damning assessment that the [ISS] could cost US$7.3 billion more than NASA estimated.” The panel had also reported that NASA would likely complete the ISS more than four years behind schedule. Goldin acknowledged significant budget and schedule problems but maintained that NASA’s plan remained manageable, despite its shortcomings.(Larry Wheeler for Gannett News Service, “NASA Chief Admits Space Station Project Has Major Woes,” 17 June 1998.)
At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States’ role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, “at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage.” The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASA’s decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAO’s report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division,” testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, “Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says,” 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
The Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, an independent task force convened at the request of NASA and charged with analyzing the cost and schedule of constructing and maintaining the ISS, released its official report. The task force concluded that “program size, complexity, and ambitious schedule goals were beyond that which could be reasonably achieved within the [US]$2.1 billion annual cap or [US]$17.4 billion total cap.” The task force concluded that “the International Space Station will be delayed by up to three years and cost as much as [US]$250 million more per year relative to the FY 1999 budget submission,” recommending that NASA “revise the current [s]tation plan so that it is achievable with the funds available.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who had appointed Jay Chabrow to lead the task force, told members of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies that he would not accept the task force’s conclusions, because he had not yet fully reviewed the report. Goldin told the panel that everyone involved in the space station program was very concerned about cost overruns and schedule slips, but that if Congress imposed a cap on ISS funding, it could affect the schedule significantly, delaying the project up to two years. Goldin warned, “such a funding shortfall would hurt relations with the international partners.” The report also placed much of the blame for the budget and schedule issues on Russia. In 1993 the Clinton administration and top officials at NASA had advised Congress that, were Russia not involved in the project, NASA would “save an estimated [US]$2 billion, expand the station’s capabilities and enable the research station to be completed sooner.” However, the task force’s report concluded that “those assumptions were faulty.”(NASA Advisory Council, “Report on the Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force on the International Space Station,” 21 April 1998, http://history.nasa.gov/32999.pdf (accessed 24 September 2007); Larry Wheeler, “Russia’s Role in Station Has Project over Budget, Behind Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 April 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Goldin Not Sold on Report Finding Space Station Overruns,” 24 April 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev announced that Russia had found the funds needed to continue participating in the ISS project. Although the Russian Cabinet had rejected Koptev’s request for additional funds, a meeting with Finance Minister Mikhail M. Zadornov and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov had led to an agreement that funding for the ISS would come from a “special budget section.” However, the Russian Space Agency provided no details of the funding plan. Koptev also announced that the Russian Space Agency might scrap the Mir space station in the fall, a year ahead of schedule, to make more cash available for the ISS. Koptev suggested that the space agency would look for revenue sources outside of the government.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 29 May 1998.)
The Soyuz landing capsule, carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a French astronaut returning from Mir, landed safely in the snow and bitter cold (-22°F or -30°C) about 20 miles (32 kilometers) from the northern Kazakhstan village of Arkalyk. Only one of eight rescue helicopters was able to meet the crew because of wind, clouds, and thick snow, limiting visibility to less than 160 feet (49 meters). Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov returned to Earth after a six-month mission on Mir. During their stay on Mir, the cosmonauts had focused on repairing the aging space station. Léopold Eyharts returned to Earth with six salamanders. The two cosmonauts who had replaced Solovyev and Vinogradov had flown the salamanders to Mir, carrying them on board the space station in January. While in space, Eyharts had conducted experiments on the salamanders, including monitoring the effects of antigravity on the reptiles’ egg-laying capabilities.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Focus: Russia-France Space Crew Returns to Deep Cold,” 20 February 1998.)
The two Russian crew members of the Mir space station completed a record-breaking spacewalk. Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov dismantled and retrieved in record time the Kristall module’s optical-monitoring equipment made by the United States. The scheduled 6-hour spacewalk took only 3 hours and 8 minutes. However, it was unclear whether the cosmonauts had been able to repair a leaky hatch. The problem was not with the rubber sealing, as Russian ground control had suspected, but rather with a malfunctioning lock that was preventing the hatch from sealing hermetically. The cosmonauts activated 10 reserve locks and pumped air into the airlock, planning to monitor the hatch for leaks over the next 24 hours. The spacewalk was Commander Solovyev’s 16th in five flights over 10 years. He had spent more than 70 hours in free space, more than any other person had accrued.(Washington Post, “Mir Commander Walks into Spaceflight History,” 10 January 1998; Washington Times, “Cosmonauts Possibly Fix Leaky Hatch, Do Spacewalk in Record-Short Time,” 10 January 1998.)
The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, “House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel,” Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
A Soyuz TM-28 spacecraft blasted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying the penultimate crew of the Russian space station Mir. The three-member crew was composed of former presidential defense adviser Yuri M. Baturin, Flight Commander Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Engineer Gennady I. Padalka.564 Baturin was the first Russian bureaucrat to travel into space, and his inclusion in the mission attracted “unusually heavy Russian media coverage.” The former Kremlin adviser had trained alongside professional cosmonauts, passing all examinations. Earlier in the year, President Boris N. Yeltsin had fired space physicist Baturin without an explanation, and Baturin had focused since then on training for the mission to Mir.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia Blasts First Bureaucrat into Space,” 13 August 1998; Associated Press, “Mir Mission Under Way Despite Russian Economic Troubles,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 August 1998.)
Controllers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), “activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun.” Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHO’s mission was to track “major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space.” The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Sun’s atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted,” news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears It’s Lost,” USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedman’s team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedman’s international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the “Hubble constant,” used in mathematical equations to “gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other.” Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The team’s findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedman’s team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman team’s conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the team’s methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that “what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.”(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe,” news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, “Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years,” Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
Scientists Peter Smith of the University of Arizona and Justin Maki of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory published a report in the Journal of Geophysical Research summarizing the results of the Mars Pathfinder Mission. After an exhaustive review of more than 17,000 images from the Pathfinder’s 1997 mission, the report had concluded that Mars’s air and dirt are yellowish-brown in color, not red. Viking probes of the 1970s had likewise indicated that Mars is not red, but rather yellowish-brown. However, Mars appears red to the naked eye from Earth, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) data had indicated that Mars is red. The scientists reported that the detailed analysis using Pathfinder data had revealed that the HST, not Pathfinder, needed to be recalibrated.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), “The Red Planet? Mars Is Really Yellowing Brown: Pathfinder Discovers What Hubble Missed,” 24 April 1999.)
NASA officials announced that the Galileo spacecraft was operating normally again after entering safe mode on 31 January. Galileo’s computer had become confused while flying past Jupiter’s moon Europa. David A. Senske, a member of the Galileo imaging team at NASA’s JPL, explained that the unusual angle Galileo required for studying Europa had caused the computer to malfunction.(Associated Press, “Galileo Craft Resumes Its Jupiter Mission,” 13 February 1999.)
NASA announced that new analysis of data from the Galileo spacecraft suggested that Jupiter is possibly much older and colder than previously thought. Upon reaching the planet on 7 December 1995, Galileo had dropped a probe carrying a mass spectrometer into Jupiter’s atmosphere to measure its chemical composition. The spectrometer had “detected surprisingly high concentrations of argon, krypton, and xenon,” raising questions about the noble gases’ provenance. Because Jupiter would have trapped the gases through condensation or freezing, scientists did not believe Jupiter’s atmosphere had trapped the gases at its present site. As positioned at present, Jupiter is too close to the Sun and too warm to have trapped the gases. Tobias Owen, an astronomy professor at the Institute for Astronomy of the University of Hawaii and a member of the Galileo probe Neutral Mass Spectrometer team, suggested three hypotheses to explain how the gases had been trapped within the Jovian atmosphere: 1) Jupiter had formed in the area around the Kuiper Belt829 and was dragged inward to its present location; 2) the solar nebula, the cloud of gas and dust that formed the solar system, had been much colder than scientists had previously believed; and 3) the solid materials that had brought the gases to Jupiter had begun to form in the original interstellar cloud of gas and dust, before the cloud had collapsed to form the solar nebula. Owen remarked further that, if either of the last two hypotheses were correct, then giant planets might be able to form closer to their stars than current theories had predicted. Such a finding could help explain “the new observations of planetary systems around other stars, in which such close-in giant planets are relatively common.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Probe Results Suggest Jupiter Had an Ancient, Chilly Past,” news release 99-096, 17 November 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/glprobeargon.html (accessed 12 March 2008); Tobias Owen et al., “A Low-Temperature Origin for the Planetesimals that Formed Jupiter,” Nature 402, no. 6759 (18 November 1999): 269–270.)
SPACEHAB Inc. and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) signed a contract granting SPACEHAB the use of one of the CSA’s experiment lockers on the International Space Station (ISS), beginning in May 2001. According to the agreement between the two organizations, the CSA had committed to commercializing half of its allocated space aboard the space station, a global first in space commercialization.
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that the plutonium-powered Cassini spacecraft, en route to Saturn, had entered safe mode on 11 January. The craft, NASA’s largest and most complex interplanetary probe, had detected a possible error in its orientation, which prompted it to halt all “non-critical” activity, while maintaining its communications link with Earth.(Associated Press, “Saturn-Bound Spacecraft Develops Problem, JPL Says,” Los Angeles Times, 14 January 1999. 651 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cunningham, Cook Named to Mars Posts,” news release 99-03, 13 January 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/marsappts.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
Discovery astronauts placed the HST back in orbit using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Astronaut Jean-François Clervoy operated the arm, grabbing a handle on the telescope’s side. After releasing the latches securing the observatory inside the Shuttle’s bay, the robotic arm lifted the telescope above the spacecraft, and ground controllers opened the door covering HST’s telescopic eye. Once ground controllers gave the command, Discovery’s robotic arm released the telescope. Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and Pilot Scott J. Kelly fired the Shuttle’s thrusters to move away from the telescope slowly.(Robyn Suriano, “Hubble Set Free: Discovery’s Crew Ready for Monday Landing at KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 December 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASA’s Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiter’s moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, “recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data.” James K. Erickson of NASA’s JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileo’s instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, “If we didn’t have the automatic restart software, we wouldn’t be getting any data at the encounters.”(Michael A. Dornheim, “Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
After having agreed in June 1998 to abandon the space station within a year, Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny M. Primakov issued a decree to keep Mir in space for three more years, using private funds, so that Russia could dedicate its insufficient space budget to its ISS commitments. The decree reportedly mentioned that Russian and foreign contractors and investors would develop a plan allowing Mir to remain in orbit without using ISS-allocated funds.(Peter N. Spotts, “Saving Mir: At What Cost to New Space Station? Russians Decree That They Will Keep Aging Orbital Outpost Raises Questions in U.S. About Their Ability To Fund International Project,” Christian Science Monitor, 25 January 1999.)
The Russian Space Agency’s “space mirror” failed to unfurl properly at the Mir space station, and Russia officially terminated the experiment. Crew attached the mirror to a cargo spacecraft filled with trash, sending it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. Engineers had intended the 83-foot (25-meter) mirror to “work like an artificial [M]oon,” acting as a prototype for larger mirrors that “could illuminate [S]un-starved northern cities through the long Arctic nights and spotlight disaster areas.” The experiment’s failure was a “big disappointment” for the Russian Space Agency, which had hoped to display “its ability to conduct pioneering, ambitious projects despite a lack of funds.”(Vladimir Isachenkov for the Associated Press, “Russia-Space Mirror,” 5 February 1999.)
GAO published a report, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems,” reiterating its previous recommendation to NASA to plan for a scenario in which Russia was unable to fulfill its commitments to the ISS. Although the report recognized that NASA was in the process of drafting such a plan, GAO’s sole recommendation to NASA was to ensure the contingency plan’s completion before the launch of the Russian-built Service Module.(Jonathan Lipman, “GAO Warns NASA About the Russians,” Space.com, 30 August 1999, http://www.space. com/news/spacestation/gao_30.html (accessed 9 April 2008); U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems” (report no. GAO/NSIAD-99-175, Washington, DC, August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99175.pdf (accessed 25 February 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, established by Congress after the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire on 27 January 1967, submitted its annual report to NASA. The panel found Shuttle safety satisfactory, but cautioned that cutbacks, such as hiring freezes and budgetary restrictions, had created a “looming crisis” of future shortfalls in the workforce. The panel warned that NASA was at risk of “losing the core competencies needed to conduct the nation’s spaceflight and aerospace programs in a safe and effective manner.” Budgetary constraints had also caused NASA to postpone planned improvements to the Shuttle fleet and the International Space Station (ISS). The panel’s chairperson remarked that both programs were operating at an “acceptable level of risk,” but that updating Shuttle computers and refurbishing the supply of spare parts would make the programs safer.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel To Present Report to NASA,” news release N99-8, 4 February 1999; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Space Safety,” 5 February 1999.)
NASA released new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of the cores of spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, and astronomers studying the images for clues about galactic development discussed their findings at a briefing at NASA Headquarters. Two complementary surveys by independent research teams had concluded that the Hubble images confirmed the evolutionary link between a disc-like cloud of dust and gas at the center of a galaxy and a bulge of millions of stars at the center of the disc-like cloud. The central bulge stabilizes a galaxy’s development, controls the birth of stars in the galaxy’s core, and “holds secrets as to how and when a galaxy formed.” Reynier F. Peletier of the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom confirmed that central bulges of “more tightly wound spirals” formed at approximately the same time in the early universe. C. Marcello Carollo of Columbia University, who had led a team studying galaxies with small bulges and “bar-like structures that bisect the nucleus,” had discovered that such galaxies developed more recently. Both teams had used HST’s visible-light and infrared cameras to determine the stars’ true colors, a measure of the age of the stars inside the galaxies’ core.(NASA, “Starry Bulges Yield Secrets to Galaxy Growth,” news release 99-107, 6 October 1999; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Tackles Questions About Cosmic Bulges,” 6 October 1999.)
An international team of scientists published findings based on research using data from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. The team had sought to locate the origin of solar wind, which interacts with Earth’s magnetic field, creating auroral displays like the Northern Lights, as well as disrupting satellites and communications equipment. The SOHO team believed that the solar wind originated from honeycomb-shaped areas called convection cells, located beneath the coronal holes. Using data from the spectrometer, the scientists had measured for the first time the structure and motion of gases inside the coronal holes. The team reported that, in some places above coronal holes, magnetic field lines do not loop back to the Sun’s surface, but rather, the magnetic lines shoot upward without returning to the Sun, thereby originating the solar wind.(Donald Hassler et al., “Solar Wind Outflow and the Chromospheric Magnetic Network,” Science 283, no. 5403 (5 February 1999): 810; United Press International, “Source of Solar Wind Believed Found,” 4 February.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
Researchers reported in the journal Science that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had detected hydrogen peroxide on Jupiter’s moon Europa. Hydrogen peroxide does not occur naturally on Earth. A scientific instrument aboard the craft⎯the Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (NIMS)⎯had aided scientists in their study of Europa’s surface. Working like a prism, the instrument had broken up infrared light, detecting dark areas of hydrogen peroxide. The scientists reported that the chemical was forming constantly on Europa, through the process of radiolysis; in this case, the process involved “intense particle radiation” emanating from Jupiter. Principal Investigator for NIMS Robert W. Carlson explained that hydrogen peroxide begins breaking down almost as soon as it forms and, therefore, its life on Europa spans no more than a few months. The short lifespan of the chemical limited the scientists’ ability to study the long- term chemical history of Europa. However, scientists would be able to apply their observations of short-term chemical changes on Jupiter to the study of how the moons of Jupiter interact with the planet, as well as to the study of similar processes elsewhere in the solar system.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Galileo Finds ‘Bottle Blonde’ Chemical on Europa,” news release 99-022, 25 March 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/europaperoxide.html (accessed 21 December 2007); R. W. Carlson et al., “Hydrogen Peroxide on the Surface of Europa,” Science 283, no. 5410 (26 March 1999): 2062– 2064.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
President Nursultan Nazarbayev set Kazakhstan’s conditions for permitting Russia to launch a Progress cargo craft carrying supplies to the Mir space station, scheduled to lift off from Baikonur Cosmodrome on 14 July. Kazakhstan had suspended all Russian launches from the facility, following the crash of a Russian Proton-K rocket on 5 July. Nazarbayev’s terms for permitting the launch of the Progress craft included Russia’s payment of its US$300 million debt for the lease of Baikonur Cosmodrome and a visit of high-level Russian officials to the Proton-K rocket’s crash site.(Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Sets Terms for Russian Space Launch,” 13 July 1999.)
NASA announced the departure of Gretchen W. McClain, a senior space station official at NASA Headquarters, naming as her replacement in an acting capacity, W. Michael Hawes, NASA’s Chief Engineer for the ISS. In 1997 NASA had appointed McClain as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station). In that position, she was responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and undertaking liaison activities with the executive branch, Congress, industry, and international partners. McClain left NASA to return to private industry.(NASA, “McClain To Leave NASA; Hawes Named Acting Chief of Space Station,” news release 99-50, 8 April 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
Astronaut Charles P. “Pete” Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who “combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet.” As an example of Conrad’s wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” Conrad had been a member of NASA’s second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident,” news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
The National Research Council (NRC) published a NASA-funded study, which found that NASA needed more safeguards to protect astronauts from potentially cancer-causing radiation during spacewalks they would make while building the International Space Station (ISS). The study recommended that NASA change flight rules, improve space-weather forecasting, and install a radiation-monitoring device outside the ISS. The NRC recommended the extra precautions because the station’s assembly schedule, consisting of more than three dozen flights and 1,500 hours of spacewalks over four years, would coincide with the most active part of the 11-year solar cycle. Moreover, the report estimated a nearly 100 percent chance that at least two assembly missions would overlap with a serious solar storm and a 50 percent chance that five flights would overlap with such a storm. Additionally, the NRC predicted that a change in the station’s planned orbit, which the Russian Space Agency had requested to accommodate Russian launches to help build and resupply the station, would increase the level of radiation exposure. George L. Siscoe, a Boston University physics professor and chairperson of the study, remarked that, although the radiation levels were not life threatening, they exceeded the 30-day and 60-day limits set to protect the skin and eyes. To safeguard crew from exposure to the increased risk of developing cancer later in life, countries participating in the ISS program would have to pay careful attention to flight schedules and crew rotation. Furthermore, the amount of radiation exposure sustained during ISS missions might affect an astronaut’s chances of assignment to additional spacewalks and their selection for future missions.(Michael Cabbage for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Study Urges NASA To Increase Radiation Safeguards,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1999.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft was unable to record its closest encounter with Jupiter’s moon Io, as it passed within 186 miles (299 kilometers) of the volcanic moon’s surface. Although radiation shut down the craft’s instruments, NASA was able to restart the instruments 4 minutes later, permitting Galileo to complete more than half of its planned observations. The craft had encountered a similar problem when it had flown within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Io in October. NASA had added the close flybys of Io, located deep within the Jovian system’s radiation belts, to the end of Galileo’s two-year extended mission. The spacecraft had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis on 18 October 1989, had begun orbiting Jupiter in December 1995, and had completed its primary mission in December 1997, thereafter, continuing an extended mission focused on Jupiter’s moon Europa, with flybys of the planet’s moons Callisto and Io, as well.(John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo’s Moon Shots Impeded by Radiation,” Washington Times, 27 November 1999; John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo Spacecraft Faces Huge Doses of Radiation,” USA Today, 26 November 1999.)
NASA announced that new findings from the Galileo spacecraft indicated the presence of sulfuric acid on the frozen surface of Jupiter’s moon Europa. Sulfuric acid is a corrosive chemical found in car batteries. Robert W. Carlson of NASA’s JPL, the lead author of a paper published in the journal Science, was Principal Investigator for Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer, which located the chemical. The new findings corroborated Galileo’s earlier spectrometer data analyses, suggesting the presence of sulfate salts on Europa. Despite indications that a liquid ocean may exist under Europa’s crust, Carlson had initially thought the presence of sulfuric acid would end debate over whether it was possible for Europa to contain biological life. However, his colleague Kenneth H. Nealson suggested the opposite, remarking that sulfur and sulfuric acid are oxidants⎯energy sources known to us on Earth. Therefore, Nealson proposed that the findings should encourage scientists to search for “any possible links between the sulfur oxidants on Europa’s surface and natural fuels produced from Europa’s hot interior.”(NASA, “Battery Acid Chemical Found on Jupiter’s Moon Europa,” news release 99-112, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-112.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); R. W. Carlson et al., “Sulfuric Acid on Europa and the Radiolytic Sulfur Cycle,” Science 286, no. 5437 (1 October 1999): 97–99.)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
NASA disclosed that a sequence of computer commands issued by flight controllers on the ground had failed to fire the ISS’s engines, placing the uninhabited space station in potential danger. The cause of the failure was human error. Flight controllers had sent commands directing the new space station to move out of the path of a piece of space junk, which posed a danger to the craft. A U.S. military organization tracking such objects had predicted that the “fairly large” piece of space junk of Russian origin would pass within 0.6 miles (1 kilometer) of the space station on 13 June. However, the debris came no closer to the new ISS than 4.5 miles (7.2 kilometers). A collision could have destroyed the uninhabited space station. NASA’s Deputy Program Manager for Space Station Operations, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., explained that, because the space station’s computers had rejected the flight controllers’ faulty commands, the station had no motion control for an entire orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 18 June 1999.)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robot’s components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASA’s ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiment’s success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts’ hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine “housekeeping chores,” such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions,” news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
Kazakhstan partially lifted its ban on launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, permitting a Russian Progress cargo spacecraft to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Kazakhstan had agreed to permit the Progress launch after receiving Russia’s promise to pay a US$115 million fee for the use of the launch facility. Russia had agreed to pay US$50 million in cash by November 1999 and US$65 million in goods by 2000. Kazakhstan’s launch ban on Proton-K rockets remained in effect.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan Lifts Space Ban, Russian Launch Cleared,” 14 July 1999; Associated Press, “Russia- Kazakhstan-Space,” 14 July 1999.)
GAO reported that NASA had “inadvertently exported radiation-hardened, microcircuit, optical coupler parts to Russia,” relying on the manufacturer’s statement that the so-called rad-hard parts were not on the U.S. Department of State’s Munitions List and that, therefore, NASA was not required to obtain an export license. GAO also reported that NASA was “preparing to export sensitive encryption technology to Japan and Europe,” technology transfers related to building the International Space Station (ISS). Under international agreements related to the space station, NASA was obligated to deliver, disclose, or transfer certain technology, data, and commodities to other nations involved in building the ISS. GAO had investigated NASA’s export-control procedures after members of Congress expressed concern about safeguards to protect technology and information exported to support the ISS. GAO evaluators’ conclusions were similar to those of NASA’s Inspector General, who had reported earlier that NASA’s export-control procedures were likely inadequate for the technology exchanges necessary under the ISS program.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Export Controls: International Space Station Technology Transfers” (report no. NSIAD-00-14, Washington, DC, 3 November 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ns00014.pdf (accessed 21 March 2008); Aerospace Daily, “NASA Illegally Exported Technology for Space Station, GAO reports,” 22 November 1999.)
A Russian Progress M42 cargo spacecraft launched with a Soyuz-U rocket to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Supplies included equipment necessary to keep an uninhabited station operational and equipment for conducting a controlled reentry, in the event that Russia could not obtain the resources necessary to continue operation. The launch was the first since Kazakhstan’s partial relaxation of a launch ban at Baikonur Cosmodrome.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 549, 1 August 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx549.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
An Israeli court indicted Israeli teenager Ehud Tenenbaum and four accomplices⎯Guy Fleisher, Ariel Rosenfeld, Barak Abutbul, and Rafael Ohana⎯for illegal entry of computers in the United States and Israel. The group allegedly hacked into the computer systems of the Pentagon and NASA, as well as those of academic institutions in Israel and Israel’s Knesset.(Chicago Tribune, “5 Are Indicted for Hacking in the U.S.,” 10 February 1999. 667 Associated Press, “Hubble May Have Early Planet Images,” 10 February 1999.)
The Russian Space Agency announced another delay in the launch of the crew compartment for the International Space Station (ISS), after two Proton rockets exploded when metal and mineral particles contaminated their engines. The Russian Space Agency had planned to use a Proton rocket to launch the ISS module. The S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, which built the boosters, promised to replace the Proton rocket’s faulty parts. Funding problems had previously slowed construction of the crew compartment, disrupting the timeline for the international project.(Associated Press, “Russia Again Delays Launch of Space Station Unit,” 12 January 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Launch Delayed,” 12 January 2000.)
NASA suspended all of Cassini’s observations of Jupiter that required the spacecraft to point⎯to take magnetic-field measurements⎯in order to capture images, after the craft developed a problem with a maneuvering system. NASA permitted Cassini to continue making observations that did not requiring pointing. On 17 December, Cassini’s No. 2 reaction wheel had begun to require extra force to turn, prompting the craft to switch from electrical power to a hydrazine- thrusting system, which Cassini needed to conserve for use in its primary Saturn mission. Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell remarked that, if tests of the maneuvering system were favorable, the craft could begin its observations again in a week to 10 days.(Los Angeles Times, “NASA Halts Spacecraft’s Observation of Jupiter,” 21 December 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000.)
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, only the 14th time that a NASA Shuttle had landed in darkness. NASA controllers used infrared cameras to monitor the Shuttle’s final descent. The return of the Shuttle ended the crucial mission to repair the ISS and reset the space station’s orbit to an optimal altitude. NASA’s Mission Control, congratulating the crew on a “super mission,” began almost immediately to anticipate the flurry of missions that would finally complete construction on the ISS. Atlantis had sustained minor damage during the trip, mainly dents and scratches on its wings caused by ice. Three members of the returning crew, astronauts Susan J. Helms and James S. Voss and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, had a special interest in monitoring the ISS’s completion, because they had been selected for the second research crew to the ISS and would make a long-term stay aboard the research station.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Ends Repair Trip to Station,” Washington Post, 30 May 2000; USA Today, “Shuttle Crew Returns from Space Station Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000; Associated Press, “Nighttime Landing Ends Shuttle Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000.)
Russian space officials announced a decision to alter plans for the Enterprise module of the ISS, which the company RSC Energia was building in conjunction with the U.S. company SPACEHAB. In the original plans, the module had been noncommercial, providing docking and cargo space, but in an effort to increase revenue, RSC Energia had revised the plans to allow the module to hold multimedia equipment for various business projects.(Associated Press, “Russia Seeks Space Station Revenue,” 23 August 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
Russia launched a Progress supply spacecraft to deliver fuel to the uninhabited Mir space station, which was slipping from orbit. Increased solar flare activity had expanded the atmosphere, creating friction between Mir and the thin gases above Earth and causing the station to descend steadily, ever since its last crew had returned to Earth in June after a 73-day mission. The fuel would enable the station to achieve a higher orbit, preventing it from falling into thicker layers of the atmosphere and burning up. Some Russian politicians had called for disposal of the station, and U.S. space officials had urged the Russian government to dedicate its “scarce space funds” to the ISS. However, MirCorp, a private company based in the Netherlands, had leased time on Mir and agreed to fund the Progress launch, thereby saving the station.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches Progress Cargo Space Ship,” 17 October 2000.)
In another escalation of the increasingly tense debate over how to handle Russia’s repeated delays in building and launching the service module of the International Space Station (ISS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, if Russia did not meet a July 2000 deadline, the United States would provide a substitute module. Russia was already more than two years behind schedule, affecting the ISS’s timeline and hampering the cooperative international effort. Goldin’s decision followed Russia’s announcement of its plan to direct more resources to the failing Mir space station. Some space experts perceived Russia’s designation of scarce financial funds to Mir, rather than to the ISS, as a signal of Russia’s reluctance to participate fully in the international space consortium. In his strongest criticism to date, Goldin said of Russia’s ISS involvement: “To say we are frustrated and disappointed is an understatement . . . We want the Russians to be there, but we felt we had to be responsible custodians to keep the program on track.”(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Dictates Date for Russia on Station Port,” New York Times, 4 February 2000; Associated Press, “NASA: We’ll Launch if Russia Fails,” 4 February 2000.)
Cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri conducted a 5-hour spacewalk to repair tiny cracks weakening the hull of the Mir space station. The cracks, the result of the June 1997 collision of a cargo craft with the station, had caused the module to lose air pressure steadily. The spacewalk was not the first attempt to solve the problem, but previous teams had been unable to locate the cracks. Zalyotin and Kaleri tested a new “cosmic version of super glue,” designed to seal the fractures even in the harsh environment of space. The Russian Space Agency clarified that the cracks were not crippling to the space station, and that the crew could maintain acceptable levels of air pressure by manipulating oxygen outflow inside Mir. However, the agency hoped to solve the problem permanently, because Russia planned to use the aging space station for commercial purposes. The Netherlands-based MirCorp, which had committed nearly US$20 million to leasing Mir, observed the cosmonauts’ activities, calling the mission the first privately funded spacewalk in history.(Reuters, “Russia: Russian Cosmonauts Leave Mir and Start Spacewalk,” 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Experiment with Space Glue To Seal Cracks,” 12 May 2000.)
Soyuz successfully docked with the unoccupied Mir space station. At the last minute, cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri docked Soyuz manually, because Russian space officials feared the autopilot was about to malfunction. The cosmonauts planned to concentrate on plugging a small air leak and conducting several scientific experiments during a spacewalk.(Associated Press, “Latest Space Crew Docks Flawlessly with Mir Space Station,” 6 April 2000.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) issued a report stating that the Russian components for the International Space Station (ISS) did not meet NASA’s standard safety requirements. GAO’s findings were the latest in a long series of controversies, particularly between the United States and Russia, in the international effort to build the space station. Most significant of its safety deficits, the Russian crew module did not have adequate shielding to protect the ISS crew from orbiting space debris. At the time of the report, the Russians were already more than two years behind in delivering the crew module.(Patty Reinhert, “Space Station Safety at Center of Debate,” Houston Chronicle, 17 March 2000; Associated Press, “General Accounting Office Slams Russian Modules,” 17 March 2000.)
NASA announced that follow-up studies had determined that the distant mass known as TMR- 1C, discovered in 1997, was probably not a protoplanet⎯a young, still-forming precursor of one of the giant planets. In 1998 astronomer Susan Terebey of the Extrasolar Research Corporation had published findings suggesting that the body was a protoplanet several times larger than Jupiter. Terebey’s research had received widespread attention. However, although NASA had released the images of TMR-1C captured by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had urged scientists to obtain further verification before identifying the body as a protoplanet. After observing the body over several months, astronomers had concluded that TMR-1C was a bright star, rather than a planet. Reflective dust had likely increased the brightness of the star, located approximately 135 billion miles (217 billion kilometers) from Earth, making it appear to be a planet. After her initial high-profile announcement, Terebey had continued to study the star using the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii and had amended her own hypothesis, reporting, “the new data do not lend weight to the protoplanet interpretation and the results remain consistent with the explanation that TMR-1C may be a background star.” Most newspapers gave as much coverage to the news of the changing assessment as they had given to the original discovery.(James Glanz, “Scientists Retract Claim of Planet Discovery,” New York Times, 7 April 2000; Associated Press, “Presumed Protoplanet May Be a Background Star,” 7 April 2000; NASA, “Suspected Protoplanet May Really Be a Distant Star,” news release 00-58, 6 April 2000.)
Ground controllers in Russia restored communication with Mir, after they had been unable to contact the uninhabited space station for 24 hours. Spokesperson for Russian Mission Control Valery Lyndin allayed fears that Mir would crash to Earth shortly, announcing that Russia had received no indication that the space station was losing pressure. Mission Control Chief Vladimir A. Solovyov explained that the station’s batteries had lost power and no longer had sufficient energy to communicate with ground controllers. Once ground controllers had identified the problem, they had switched off specific systems to direct more energy to ground communications. Although Mir’s solar panels were recharging the batteries, the cause of the power shortage remained unclear.(Washington Times, “Contact with Mir Restored After Loss of Battery Power: Mission Control Allays Fears of Crash,” 27 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
After spending more than two months aboard the Mir space station, Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth. According to MirCorp, the mission had been the first privately funded crewed mission to Mir. Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri landed safely in Kazakhstan, having spent most of their time aboard the Russian spacecraft conducting crucial repairs. To keep the station running, MirCorp had signed a lease agreement for Mir and paid for the mission. However, with the return of Zalyotin and Kaleri, Russia placed on hold the prospect of continuing Mir, even if supported with private funds. “If there is no money, Mir will not fly,” Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev stated at the end of the mission. Russian officials indicated that the Russian Space Agency would leave the space station unpiloted once again, until private investors could fund another mission. The continuing focus on Mir, while the building of Russia’s ISS module ran far behind schedule, agitated some NASA officials and international space leaders.(Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Prepare To Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; CNN.com, “First Privately Funded Manned Space Mission Blasts Off for Mir, 4 April 2000, http://archives.cnn.com/2000/TECH/space/04/04/russia.mir.01 (accessed 15 July 2008).)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
Engineers at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) successfully tested a prototype for the “flying lifeboat” that would transport astronauts to and from the ISS. DFRC officials launched a robotic X-38 from under the wing of a B-52 flying at 39,000 feet (12,000 meters). It free fell for more than 40 seconds before deploying a 5,500-square-foot (511-square-meter) parachute, which provided a soft landing for the spacecraft. The test was a significant step in evaluating the technology planned for the crew return vehicle, a low-cost ISS initiative.(Associated Press, “Space Station ‘Lifeboat’ Prototype Successfully Tested,” 30 March 2000.)
When the automatic docking system failed, cosmonaut Yuri P. Gidzenko used remote control to dock the first Progress cargo spacecraft arriving at the ISS. The craft, loaded with food, boots, and supplies, had traveled smoothly to the ISS until within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the station. When the spacecraft’s automatic docking system failed to lock onto the space station, Gidzenko took control, guiding the craft to within 15 feet (4.6 meters) of the station. Glaring sunlight and a fogged camera lens forced him to wait 40 minutes, before he was able to complete the maneuver safely.(Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonaut Forced To Dock Cargo Ship by Remote Control,” 19 November 2000.)
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttle’s robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crew’s sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed,” New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
Laurence Vico released a study on astronauts’ loss of bone density because of time spent in space. Vico and his team of researchers had examined the bone-mineral density of 15 cosmonauts who had spent from one to six months aboard the Mir space station. They had found a “striking” loss of bone density, in some cases as serious as that experienced by paraplegic patients. The team of doctors suggested that physicians should examine astronauts more closely for susceptibility to bone-weakening conditions such as osteoporosis, before they traveled into space, and that postflight recovery periods should be much longer than previous standards dictated. The sample study found that astronauts experienced an average bone-density loss of more than 5 percent, and that the lost bone did not immediately regenerate after postflight recovery periods. Scientists had long been aware of the physical challenges posed by the lack of gravity in the space environment. Therefore, NASA and the space agencies of other countries had carefully dictated diet and exercise programs for astronauts. The study had special relevance, however, because the international space community was continuing work on the ISS and anticipating even longer stays in space.
NASA announced a partnership with Dreamtime Holdings Inc., a start-up company backed by Lockheed Martin to provide the International Space Station (ISS) with high-definition television and to create digital archives for NASA. The agreement was NASA’s first involving a commercial partner that would provide support for the ISS. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the partnership at NASA’s Ames Research Center, located in the high-technology hub of California’s Silicon Valley, predicting that the partnership would move NASA to the forefront of the information age and terming it “innovative government at its best.” Dreamtime planned to spend US$100 million on the project, which would give civilians access to neverbefore-seen images of the Space Shuttles and of NASA missions. The pact resulted from the Commercial Space Act of 1998, enacted to increase commercial involvement in and funding for the ISS.(NASA, “NASA, Dreamtime Partnership Propels Space Information Age to New Heights,” news release 00-87, 2 June 2000; Frank Morring Jr., “Startup To Spend $100 Million Digitizing Station, NASA Archives,” Aerospace Daily, 2 June 2000.)
The Zvezda service module successfully docked at the ISS, immediately increasing the size of the space station by 50 percent. Through a series of rocket firings, Zvezda had drawn steadily closer to the ISS during its two-week journey to its new home 220 miles (354 kilometers) from Earth. Experts had deemed the successful launch and docking of the Russian component of the ISS vital to the long-term success of the collaborative venture. The Russian-built Zvezda, nearly identical to a core section of the Russian Mir space station, was to provide living quarters for researchers on the station, as well as vital electronic, computer, and communications systems. Anticipating significant interest in the historic linkup, NASA provided information on its Web site explaining how to view the space station as it traveled over Earth.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Is Connected to Module from Russia,” New York Times, 26 July 2000; NASA, “No Telescopes Needed: NASA Web Sites Let Stargazers Track Impending Space Station ‘Nuptuals’,” news release)
Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mir’s days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russia’s commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today,” 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
The Netherlands-based MirCorp, the company originally established to keep the Mir space station in orbit for commercial purposes, announced that, following a board meeting during the previous week, the company had decided to “retool the company to work with other Russian space equipment.” The company planned to develop a new orbiter capable of docking with the ISS, to market existing space technologies, such as cargo spacecraft, and to explore commercial projects involving access to a future Russian module on the ISS.
The first International Space Station (ISS) crew, Expedition I, arrived at the new station where they planned to live for the next four and one-half months. The crew’s Soyuz craft automatically docked at a port on the Zvezda habitation module. The Russian-built, NASA-financed Zarya propulsion-and-storage module, attached to the other end of Zvezda, was loaded with supplies and equipment delivered by recent Shuttle missions. Unless an emergency or breakdown occurred, the multi-hatch Unity module would remain off limits. A Shuttle crew had installed a structural truss on the Unity module in October, and during a mission scheduled for early December, another crew would attach a set of solar arrays to the truss. Without the solar arrays, the station did not have enough power to heat the module properly or to control the dew point, to prevent dangerous condensation. The ISS crew and their U.S. and Russian managers temporarily named the station Alpha, at least for the duration of the Expedition I mission.(William Harwood, “Crew of ‘Alpha’ Males Moves into Space Station: Docking Complete, NASA Chief Allows Name’s Use for Now,” Washington Post, 3 November 2000.)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross reported that the Boeing Company would have to forfeit most of its profit from the ISS contract because of its nearly US$1 billion in cost overruns. NASA’s incentive-laden contract with Boeing allowed for significant bonuses for meeting timeline and cost limits. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had ordered an audit of the NASA-Boeing contract in 1999, because projected cost overages had continued to rise. Nonetheless, as Boeing neared completion of the construction of its portion of the ISS, both NASA and the aerospace giant were optimistic that cost overruns had stabilized, and that the space station hardware would perform well in space.(Tony Capaccio, “Boeing Overruns on Space Station Near $1Billion,” Los Angeles Times, 23 February 2000.)
Three astronauts attached a new docking port to the ISS, with two of the crew spacewalking and one operating Discovery’s robotic arm from inside the Shuttle. Astronauts Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff and Michael Lopez-Alegria, assigned to work outside the ISS, had difficulty loosening the latches securing the docking port inside Discovery’s cargo bay. However, once they had freed it, Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata lifted the 2,700-pound (1,200-kilogram) port using the Shuttle’s robotic arm and positioned it on the space station. When the port was within 1 foot (0.3 meters) of its position, the astronauts outside gave Wakata “invaluable” instructions, necessary because the crew was working without the assistance of the camera at the end of the robotic arm. The camera had been out of commission since the short circuit on 14 October.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Docking Port Nudged Carefully into Place,” Sun-Sentinel (Ft. Lauderdale, FL), 17 October 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery arrived at the ISS. Shuttle Commander Brian Duffy successfully executed the rendezvous without the Shuttle’s radar, relying on a star-tracking system and on handheld lasers operated by his crew. The Ku-band antenna had failed after launch, disrupting the radar and television link. The Shuttle docking was NASA’s first conducted without radar.(Associated Press, “Bad Antenna Blacks Out Shuttle’s Television,” Charleston Gazette (SC), 13 October 2000; New York Times, “Astronauts Rendezvous with Space Station,” 14 October 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Discovery Docks Safely with Space Station,” 14 October 2000.)
00-114, 20 July 2000; NASA, “First Opportunity Tonight for Zvezda To Dock with International Space Station,” news release N00-36, 25 July 2000. satellite because it was able to meet challenging demands for bandwidth, power, and in-orbit flexibility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Build First Interactive Broadband Multimedia Spacecraft for New Skies Satellites,” news release, 4 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedContractBuildF.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rocket’s successful launch confirmed Russia’s ability to transport its Zvezda module: “This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS.” The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, “Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab,” 5 July 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
The Russian government decided that it could no longer afford to maintain the Mir space station and would destroy it in February 2001 during a controlled descent. The Russian government had previously decided to abandon Mir, but had extended the space station’s time in orbit after the private MirCorp, based in the Netherlands, had leased time on the station, financing its operation. According to the Russian government, a primary factor in its decision to end Mir’s orbit had been increasing skepticism over MirCorp’s continued ability to finance Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia To Dump Mir Space Station,” 16 November 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega worked outside the ISS to connect power lines, correcting an electrical shortage that had restricted the station’s first crew to two of three habitable modules. The two astronauts also inspected the first solar panel that they had unfurled, to determine whether the crew could correct its tension. Wearing a small TV camera on his helmet, Noriega beamed down to Mission Control images of the loose tension cables on the array’s right wing. The cables had slipped off their pulleys during the solar panel’s deployment on 3 December. Tanner remarked that an astronaut could place one tension cable back on its pulley without too much trouble, but that the other cable would require more work. Mission Control instructed the spacewalkers to try to fix the cables on their third and final spacewalk the following day.(Chicago Tribune, “Space Station Gets an Electrical Boost from Solar Wings,” 6 December 2000; Associated Press, “Live from Space, ‘Carlos Cam’,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 6 December 2000.)
Scientists at the American Astronomical Society convention also unveiled the first detailed map of the region of the universe inhabited by Earth. Using an Australian robotic telescope, which measured distances between more than 100,000 galaxies, researchers had charted the locations of galaxies, dark regions, and cosmic clusters. Perhaps most significantly, the new map supported a long-standing theory regarding the size limits of cosmic structures. Because of the relatively small scope of previous mapping surveys, scientists had questioned whether the known standards of cosmic size were representative. The newest map, however, did not reveal any cosmic structure outside of previous standards. Therefore, scientists could support with greater conviction the idea that size limits existed as the universe evolved. The researchers termed the limits the “end of greatness.”(James Glanz, “Robotic Telescope Affirms Assumption on Universe’s Birth,” New York Times, 7 June 2000. 933 Mark Carreau, “Rocket Gives Space Station a Life,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 2000.)
NASA released time-lapse movies created from images produced by the Hubble Space Telescope, showing “spectacular outbursts from young stars,” changing “dramatically over a period of just weeks or months.” NASA had combined individual images of young star systems XZ Tauri and HH 30 in the Taurus-Auriga molecular cloud, captured over several years, to create the time-lapse movies. Documenting the activity of the early stages of stars’ lives, the movies demonstrated that images “taken of the universe today won’t necessarily look the same as those snapped a few months from now.”(NASA, “Hubble Movies Show the Changing Faces of Young Stars,” news release N00-044, 21 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/2000/n00-044.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
NASA released the first HST images taken after the Shuttle’s Mission STS-103, in which the crew of Discovery realigned and refurbished the telescope. The stunning clarity of the new images suggested that the mission specialists had succeeded in their sensitive work. According to Steven Beckwith, Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the work returned HST to “a condition that was better than it was even before the fourth gyroscope failed.” Astronomers had focused on targets more than 5,000 light-years away to test the upgraded telescope. During the servicing mission, astronauts had also installed a Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 and a Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, new instruments that would contribute to the already formidable strength of the HST.(NASA, “Hubble Reopens Eye on the Universe,” news release 00-16, 24 January 2000.)
A Russian Progress cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying fuel to the uninhabited ISS for use in adjusting the station’s orbit. The craft also carried scientific instruments, linens, and personal-hygiene supplies in preparation for the October arrival of the station’s first permanent crew.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Ship with Supplies for Space Station Launches,” 7 August 2000.)
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev reiterated Russia’s commitment to the international community, stating that Russia definitely would bring Mir safely down in February 2001. Koptev “angrily dismissed Communist demands to keep the nearly 15-year-old station in orbit,” referring to the 20-hour loss of contact earlier in the week as a “final warning that time was up” and an indicator of the level of the station’s wear and tear. Communist lawmakers, including cosmonaut Svetlana Y. Savitskaya, who called the move a concession to NASA, had criticized the government’s decision to destroy the space station. However, Koptev had countered the criticism, saying that, if Mir spun out of control, the Russian president and government would have to explain to the world where the station would fall and how much damage it would cause.(Vladimir Iachenkov for Associated Press, “Space Officials Say Mir Back Under Control, Will Be Dumped in February,” 27 December 2000.)
European Space Agency (ESA) engineers announced the discovery of a flaw in the European receiver on NASA’s Cassini spacecraft, prompting an inquiry into why engineers had not identified the problem before NASA had launched the craft, and how the issue could be resolved before the craft reached its destination. Cassini’s probe data relay subsystem (PDRS) lacked sufficient bandwidth to navigate the Doppler shift with the Huygens probe as the probe parachuted toward the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan. Therefore, the system would be unable to recover all of the data that Huygens’s six instruments would generate. Cassini and Huygens launched on 15 October 1997, with Huygens scheduled to separate from Cassini on 6 November 2004, break through Titan’s atmosphere on 27 November 2004, and descend to the moon’s surface using a parachute system. The mission plan called for Huygens to measure the composition and winds of Titan’s atmosphere and to collect images. The probe would send the data via the S-band PDRS to Cassini, which would then transmit the data to Earth. However, the ESA stated that the inadequate bandwidth of the PDRS meant that link margins would degrade, because the Doppler shift on the data subcarrier would be outside the bandwidth of the receiver- phase lock loop, leading to a potential loss in the link of 10dB over what engineers had assumed for the mission.(Frank Morring Jr., “ESA Sets Inquiry After Tests Reveal Flaw in Titan Probe Link,” Aerospace Daily, 6 October 2000.)
After a lengthy legislative battle, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a US$60 million increase for NASA in its FY 2001 budget. Although the amount was less than the Clinton administration had requested for NASA, the spending proposal marked the end of several years of cost cutting for NASA. Even during a period of budget surpluses, NASA had not achieved the victory without a fight. Some members of Congress, concerned over the delay in the completion of the ISS, had introduced a floor amendment to delete all funding for the ISS. However, the House had roundly defeated the budget-slashing amendment, as it had in previous years, with a vote of 325 to 98. Noting that the ISS was nearly complete, Representative Robert E. Cramer (D- AL) spoke for NASA proponents when he said, “This is not the time to pull the rug out from under this program.”(Tamara Lytle, “House OKs Giving NASA $13.7 Billion in 2001 Fiscal Year,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 June 2000; Gannett News Service, “House Votes Down Measure To Cut Space Station,” 22 June 2000.)
Russian space experts agreed that the Mir space station was in fine condition to continue orbiting Earth, and the Russian government extended the station’s time in space indefinitely, after the Netherlands-based MirCorp agreed to fund a new mission. Russia’s council of space engineers, known as the Council of Chief Designers, authorized plans to launch a Progress cargo spacecraft, in the middle of October, to deliver fuel and equipment to Mir.(MirCorp, “MirCorp Statement on the Mir Space Station’s Future,” news release, 3 October 2000; Associated Press, “Russian Space Experts Determine Mir Fit To Continue Orbital Flight,” 3 October 2000.)
The Russian government earmarked funds to send two Progress cargo spacecraft to the Mir space station, announcing that it would wait until February 2001 to make a final decision about the station’s fate. Earlier, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya I. Klebanov had explained that the decision the Russian government had been wavering about for more than a year rested on the availability of private funds to keep the station in orbit. Executives from MirCorp had promised the Russian government that the company would raise between US$100 million and US$170 million by next year, but Russian space officials were skeptical of MirCorp’s ability to meet this commitment. MirCorp had yet to pay the US$10 million it owed Russia for the 17 October launch of a Progress cargo spacecraft delivering fuel to Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Earmarks Funds for Mir,” 26 October 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
NASA released recently obtained images that further supported the possibility that Jupiter’s moon Europa might be home to a liquid ocean. The Galileo spacecraft had captured the images when passing Europa’s north pole. Using a magnetometer instrument, Galileo had recorded changing currents in the moon’s magnetic field⎯a finding consistent with the presence of a conducting material such as a watery liquid.(NASA, “Galileo Findings Boost Idea of Other-Worldly Ocean,” news release 00-7, 10 January 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour docked successfully with the International Space Station (ISS), the first Shuttle docking at an inhabited ISS. William M. Shepherd, Commander of the ISS, noted the festive mood at the space station, even though the two crews would not meet in person until later in the mission. Soon after Endeavour docked, Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to lift the 49-foot-long (15-meter-long) tower containing the solar array out of the cargo bay, where it would remain suspended 10 feet (3 meters) above the Shuttle while the crew slept.(Steven Siceloff, “Endeavour Docks at Station: Astronauts To Attach Arrays Today,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 December 2000.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had located a “small armada of ‘mini- comets’,” the fragmented remains of the nucleus of the comet LINEAR. When it had disappeared behind the Sun on 27 July 2000, astronomers initially thought that LINEAR had disintegrated entirely. Upon losing sight of the comet’s core, ground-based observers had suggested that the nucleus had disintegrated into a “pile of dust,” and, consequently, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute had reprogrammed the HST to search for the nucleus. The exceptional resolution and sensitivity of the HST had revealed the nuclei of a half-dozen mini-comets at a level of detail never before observed in a disintegrating comet. Some astronomers had suggested that the fragments the HST revealed were the “primordial building blocks of the original nucleus.” If so, studying them could help scientists understand how the comet had originally formed.(NASA, “Hubble Discovers Missing Pieces of Comet Linear,” news release 00-122, 7 August 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-122.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had captured an image of a lone neutron star traveling close to Earth, one of several hundred million neutron stars that scientists believed to exist in the Milky Way. Hubble scientists believed that, at 200 light-years away, this neutron star was the nearest to Earth. No companion star affected its appearance, allowing astronomers to more easily test and confirm stellar theories against its physical properties, such as size, brightness, and true age. Frederick M. Walter of State University of New York at Stony Brook remarked that, as the closest and brightest of the few known isolated neutron stars, this star would be “the easiest to study and is an excellent test bed for nuclear astrophysical theories.”(NASA, “Hubble Sees Lone Neutron Star Streaking Across Galaxy,” news release 00-176, 9 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-176.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Sun’s atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets,” news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)
Hatches between the ISS and Space Shuttle Endeavour opened for the first time, and the three members of the space station crew, who had been living aboard the ISS for five weeks, received their first visitors. ISS Commander William M. Shepherd commended Endeavour’s crew for their installation of the giant solar array on the space station. The two crews spent their day together transferring supplies, such as food, water, mail, and gifts, to the space station and removing trash, damaged items, and unneeded items for return to Earth.(Reuters, “Hatch Is Opened; Endeavour, Space Station Crews Become One,” Chicago Tribune, 9 December 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Crew Visits Space Station,” 9 December 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Crew Greets First Visitors,” New York Times, 9 December 2000.)
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiter’s solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileo’s magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelson’s team had measured the moon’s magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings “best explained by a thick layer of water⎯about as salty as Earth’s oceans⎯hidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath” the moon’s surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared “to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface.” Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiter’s intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Solar System’s Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean,” news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, “Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiter’s Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life,” Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
Space Media Inc. and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), prime contractor of the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS), announced a new multimedia partnership called Enermedia LLC. Under the new partnership, Space Media Inc. would use the Russian Space Program archives to develop and provide multimedia, which the Russian service module would broadcast on television and the Internet.(SPACEHAB, “Space Media Inc and RSC Energia Join Forces Forming New Multimedia Partnership,” news release, 2 August 2000, http://www.spacehab.com/news/2000/00_08_02.htm (accessed 8 May 2008).)
Astronomers using images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered what they believed to be the first examples of “isolated stellar-mass black holes adrift among the stars of our galaxy.” They announced their discovery at a convention of the American Astronomical Society. The findings supported a long-standing theory that black holes could form with the collapse of just one massive star, although an opposing theory had concluded that multiple stars must collapse in tandem. Moreover, the researchers’ contribution was the latest in a string of recent findings illuminating the relatively commonplace nature of black holes.(NASA, “Lone Black Holes Discovered Adrift in the Galaxy,” news release 00-4, 13 January 2000.)
NASA’s JPL announced that the Cassini spacecraft, after successfully undergoing a series of tests, was resuming the use of its electrically powered reaction wheels to control its orientation. Although mission scientists were uncertain of the cause of the spacecraft’s switch to a different maneuvering system, they suggested that a small piece of material, perhaps from the motor’s magnets, might have lodged in an area where it caused friction. Because the scientists were unable actually to detect any such material, they speculated further that either centrifugal force had subsequently forced the material out, or the motor had ground it up. Scientists also suggested that reduced lubrication in the bearings, during prolonged operation at reduced speeds, might have caused the problem, and that, perhaps, the increased motor speeds used during the tests had restored the lubrication.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Resuming Use of Reaction Wheels,” news release, 21 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=6 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
With resident astronaut James S. Voss performing most of the work, the ISS crew completed repairs on the space station’s computers and installed a replacement for the most damaged of the three command and control machines. With the repairs completed, the ISS regained the unfettered ability to steer, regulate, and communicate for the first time since the computer breakdown had occurred during the installation of the Canadian robotic arm in April 2001. NASA experts believed that the complex computer problems had stemmed from a failed hard drive but could not rule out software problems as the root cause. The computer outages had delayed testing of the new 57-foot (17-meter) arm; NASA resumed the testing only after officials had determined that they had corrected the computer malfunctions.(Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete Repairs to Computers/ Station Equipment Back at Full Force,” Houston Chronicle, 12 May 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, when wind and rain caused the diversion of the Shuttle and its seven-person crew from its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. The completed mission had been unique, with NASA deliberately paring down its research goals because of the anticipated arrival during Endeavour’s stay at the ISS of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft carrying space tourist Dennis A. Tito. Shuttle Commander Kent V. Rominger greeted the press upon landing, commenting on the crew’s installation of the ISS’s robotic arm and the computer problems that had plagued the space station during the visit. Rominger explained that he and the other astronauts had worked with 500 computer experts on the ground to achieve partial restoration of the ISS’s hard drives and software applications.(Warren E. Leary, “As Shuttle Returns to Earth, Tourist Adjusts to Space Station,” New York Times, 2 May 2001; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Diverted to California Due to Bad Weather,” 1 May 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lands in Clear California/Cloud Hangs Over Russia Relations,” Houston Chronicle, 2 May 2001.)
Cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS to clear an obstruction that had prevented the pilotless Progress Russian supply ship from docking securely to the space station. The crew believed that the obstruction was a rubber seal from a supply ship that had left the ISS on 22 November. NASA had delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour for five days because of concern that Endeavour’s arrival at the space station could cause the insecurely docked supply ship to wobble, possibly damaging the ISS. However, Dezhurov and Tyurin were able to remove the obstruction during their 3-hour spacewalk, thereby clearing the way for Endeavour to launch on 5 December.(Warren E. Leary, “Endeavour Is Set for Launching After Docking Problem Is Solved,” New York Times, 4 December 2001; Los Angeles Times, “With Space Debris Cleared, Shuttle Launch Set,” 4 December 2001.)
Continuing to gather data long after it had completed its original mission, the Galileo spacecraft made the closest ever pass of Jupiter’s largest moon, Callisto. Although regarded as the ugly duckling of Jupiter’s moons because it does not appear to have ever had liquid water present, Callisto still interested scientists who hoped to gather enough data to determine the size and number of craters on the moon’s surface. In the days leading up to the close pass of Callisto, problems with Galileo’s cameras had worried NASA controllers. Galileo scientists had anticipated the complications, however, predicting that the flyby, within 100 miles (161 kilometers) of the moon, would expose the probe to strong gravitational pulls and radiation belts. Galileo had originally begun orbiting Jupiter in 1995 and had already made 30 flybys of Jupiter’s largest moons.
Spain’s Prince of Asturias Foundation granted the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation to the ISS partnership, in recognition of the cooperation among the partnering space agencies that had created the orbiting space station. The Prince of Asturias Felipe de Borbón was the heir to the throne of Spain. The foundation granted the Award for International Cooperation to recognize the cultural, humanitarian, scientific, social, and technical efforts of individuals, groups, and institutions. The prince presented the award to officials representing the space agencies participating in the ISS, namely the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. Earlier in the day, the prince had called the astronauts at the ISS to congratulate them on their efforts.(NASA, “International Space Station Receives 2001 Prince of Asturias Award,” news release 01-206, 26 October 2001; Fundación Príncipe de Asturias, “The Aims of the Foundation,” http://www.fundacionprincipedeasturias.org/ing/00/objetivos.html (accessed 28 November 2008).)
NASA announced that astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had discovered a supernova blast located farther away from Earth than any previously observed object. The discovery provided support for the theory that the universe might be expanding more rapidly than in the past. The supernova, approximately 10 billion light-years away from Earth, was relatively bright. According to Adam Riess of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the researcher who made the find, the discovery was significant because scientists would now be able, not only to observe the activities of the universe, but also to understand why it behaves as it does. “This supernova shows us the universe is behaving like a driver who slows down approaching a red stoplight and then hits the accelerator when the light turns green,” Riess explained.(NASA, “Farthest Supernova Ever Seen Sheds Light on Dark Universe,” news release 01-58, 2 April 2001.)
The first changing of the guard took place aboard the ISS Discovery when the crew of Expedition 2, which included astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, replaced the first ISS research team, Expedition 1. The new crew planned to spend four and one-half months aboard the space station, with Usachev serving as the outpost’s Commander. With the official beginning of her mission on the ISS, Helms became the first long- term female occupant of the space station. The new crew anticipated working well together, having trained as a unit for nearly four years. Because the first crew had completed many of the ISS’s final construction tasks, crew of Expedition 2 looked forward to having more research time than their predecessors had enjoyed.(Todd Halvorson, “Space Crews Ceremoniously Switch Places,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 March 2001; NASA, “Space Station ShiftChange Set with Next Shuttle Launch,” news release, 01-30, 28 February 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Alpha About To Get Its First Female Resident,” 5 March 2001; Juan A. Lozano for Associated Press, “New Space Station Crew Moves into Orbiting Outpost,” 14 March 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California after three days of bad weather had prevented its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew received a congratulatory call from President George W. Bush, praising their successful 13- day mission. By the time that Atlantis and its crew departed the ISS, the Shuttle had significantly boosted the space station’s orbit, leaving the ISS orbiting at about 237 miles (381 kilometers) above Earth. While attached to the space station, Atlantis had used a series of engine bursts to push the ISS approximately 16 miles (26 kilometers) higher than its previous position. Shuttle crew had also unloaded food and supplies, including an enormous Russian carbon-dioxide removal unit, for the use of the three-person ISS crew during their visit.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back on Earth After Dismal Three Days,” 21 February 2001; Associated Press, “Atlantis Leaves Space Station in a Higher Orbit,” 16 February 2001.)
The crews of Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS conducted the first successful test of the massive Canadarm2. Because of the size and weight of the robotic arm, the crew had never moved the completely assembled Canadarm2 until its arrival at the ISS. However, they installed the arm, composed of high-strength metals and weighing 3,618 pounds (1,640 kilograms), without any problems. Astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms, both in the middle of a four-month stay aboard the ISS, led the test of the new instrument. Voss explained that the robotic arm was vital to the station: “This was one of those linchpins that had to work, and it looks like it’s going to work. We’re looking forward to using it to keep building the station.” As testing continued, the ISS crew was troubled with some computer malfunctions. However, cooperating with NASA’s engineers, the astronauts eventually solved the problems.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Robot Comes to Life: With ‘Inchworm’ Moves, 58-Foot Arm Passes Test,” 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Get Robot Arm Going After 4 Days,” 29 April 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a cargo ship headed for the aging Mir space station. The mission’s aim was simple: to remove the 15-year-old space station from orbit safely, by propelling it into Earth’s atmosphere. To accomplish the task, Russia selected an unpiloted Progress M1-5 cargo ship, carrying enough fuel for its own journey and to fire Mir’s thrusters. A series of mechanical problems, including a fire and a collision with another cargo craft in 1997, combined with Russia’s shortage of funds for space endeavors, had led to the Russian government’s decision to end Mir’s successful run. With the launch of the Progress craft, some cosmonauts and Russian space officials protested the destruction of the last remaining symbol of the space heyday of the Soviet Union. Amateur astronomers aimed their telescopes toward the skies to glimpse Mir one last time as it orbited Earth.(Associated Press, “Cargo Ship Intended To Dump Mir Blasts Off Successfully,” 24 January 2001; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia To Launch Ship To Bring Mir Era to End,” 17 January 2001; Agence France-Presse, “Russia Sets January 18 as Date for Mir’s Final Appointment in Space,” 4 January 2001; Michael Alicea, “See Mir in FlightBefore It’s Gone,” Palm Beach Post (FL), 21 January 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched an automatic cargo carrier to the ISS from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:24 p.m. (UT). A Soyuz-FG booster lifted the Progress M1-7 cargo carrier. Progress M1-7 was to deliver 2.5 tonnes (2.8 tons or 5,511 pounds) of equipment, food, and fuel to the space station, as well as a microsatellite called Klibri, which the crew would release after the carrier had docked with the ISS.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 577, 1 December 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx577.html (accessed 12 December 2001).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:23 p.m. (CDT), marking the end of Mission STS-105. During the mission, the Shuttle crew had delivered supplies and equipment to the ISS, carried Expedition 3 crew members to the ISS, and transported the Expedition 2 crew back to Earth. In addition, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick G. Forrester had each performed two spacewalks to attach equipment to the exterior of the ISS, spending a total of 11 hours and 45 minutes outside the space station. STS-105’s total duration was 11 days, 21 hours, and 13 minutes.(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 10 November 2008).)
In a letter to Acting NASA Administrator Daniel Mulville, NASA Advisory Council (NAC) issued its recommendations on the management and future development of the ISS. NAC provided the recommendations two weeks after it had received an assessment created by the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force. NASA and the OMB had created the IMCE to perform an independent external review of the ISS. In its letter, NAC stated that NASA needed to resolve budgetary and management problems with the space station. NAC also recommended that NASA clarify its scientific priorities for the ISS and focus on a reduced configuration of the ISS that could serve three crew members. However, NAC also recommended that NASA continue funding components of the ISS that could serve a larger crew, such as a lifeboat vehicle and crew quarters.(New York Times, “NASA Report Endorses Cuts at Space Station,” 21 December 2001; NASA, “NASA Advisory Council Releases Space Station Recommendations,” news release N01-76, 20 December 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASA’s rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russia’s agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Tito’s crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, “Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff,” Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains,” 20 March 2001.)
NASA announced that it would delay Shuttle Missions STS-104 and STS-105 for several weeks because of a series of computer problems on the ISS. The computer difficulties had limited the control of the new robotic arm delivered to the ISS in April 2001. Despite the efforts of the astronauts aboard the ISS and of hundreds of experts on the ground, the malfunctions had continued to render control of the Canadian-built robotic arm impossible. NASA officials had determined that, until the situation was resolved, NASA would have to delay an Atlantis mission, scheduled for 20 June, and a Discovery mission, scheduled for 12 July, both carrying cargo that the arm must move. The delay also meant that the ISS crewYury V. Usachev, James S. Voss, and Susan J. Helmswould remain aboard ISS longer than originally planned.(Warren E. Leary, “Problems with Space Station’s Robotic Arm Delay Shuttle Visits,” New York Times, 1 June 2001; Mark Carreau, “Glitch Postpones 2 Space Station Missions,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2001.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis accomplished the primary objective of Mission STS- 104, successfully installing the Joint Airlock on the ISS. The crew used the space station’s massive, Canadian-made robotic arm, which had not operated properly for several months, to hoist the enormous entryway out of the Shuttle’s cargo bay and to move it into position for installation. Astronaut Susan J. Helms commanded the robotic arm, while spacewalking astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt and James F. Reilly helped line up the hatch for its final installation. The robotic arm successfully accomplished its first construction task, drawing applause from NASA’s Mission Control, as did the opening of the US$164 million Joint Airlock. Although the ISS Partnership planned improvements and additions to the space station far into the future, the mission marked the end of a major stage of assembly for the ISS.(New York Times, “2nd Entry Installed on Space Station,” 16 July 2001.)
Responding to the ongoing reductions in the budget for NASA and for the ISS, the Boeing Company announced that it would lay off 400 workers who had been working on the development of ISS modules, including those workers who would have built the living quarters for the space station’s researchers. At the time of Boeing’s cuts, NASA had trimmed nearly US$1 billion from its ISS funding.(Associated Press, “Boeing Laying Off 400 on NASA’s International Space Station,” 17 March 2001.)
NASA opened a new command and control center that would allow researchers on Earth to participate in scientific research conducted aboard the ISS. The new facility, located at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, featured state-of-the-art communication and research technologies. Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson described the new center as a significant part of NASA’s ongoing plan to make space research more efficient and useful: “From this facility we will manage fundamental scientific research that can only be done in spaceresearch that will lead to knowledge to benefit all humanity here on Earth.” NASA planned to staff the 13,000-square-foot (1,200-square-meter) facility 24 hours per day to support research aboard ISS. In addition to its link to the ISS, the new facility was equipped to monitor payload resources, facilitate data transfer, and communicate with universities and research centers throughout the world. The new command post opened only days before Space Shuttle Atlantis’s scheduled trip into space to carry the Destiny research laboratory module to the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Opens Space Station Command Post,” news release 01-15, 2 February 2001; Shelby G. Spires, “MSFC Opens Science ‘Mission Control’ Today,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 February 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a module of the ISS designed to expand the space station’s size and provide other capabilities. The module, called Docking Compartment One (DC-1) or Pirs (Russian for pier), launched at 11:44 p.m. (UT), on a Soyuz-U rocket, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. A cargo craft called Progress M-SO1 would transport the module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency intended the DC-1 to provide additional stowage space for the ISS, an airlock for spacewalks, and an additional docking port for future Soyuz and Progress vehicles. The 8,000-pound (3,600-kilogram), 16-foot-long (4.9-meter-long) module would increase the total mass of the space station to 303,500 pounds (138,000 kilograms).(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001”; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575, 1 October 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx575.html (accessed 14 November 2008).)
NASA named Nelson H. Keeler Director of its Independent Verification and Validation Facility (IVVF) in Fairmont, West Virginia, giving Keeler the responsibility for safeguarding the facility’s mission-critical software. Keeler also assumed the task of evaluating the cost- effectiveness of NASA’s technology and software. Before joining NASA, Keeler had served in the U.S. Coast Guard, amassing more than 6,000 flight hours in search-and-rescue and law- enforcement missions. During a stint at the U.S. Coast Guard’s Research and Development Center, he had won the Legion of Merit medal. Keeler had served in NASA’s Space Station Freedom program, in the NASA Office of Space Flight’s Advanced Launch Technology and Advanced Flight Systems programs, as well is in private industry, before becoming Director of the IVVF.(NASA, “NASA Names Nelson Keeler Independent Verification and Validation Facility Director,” news release 01-117, 7 June 2001.)
The Task Force assigned to assess NASA’s management of the ISS program released a report of its findings and recommendations. NASA and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) had established the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force to analyze the space station’s cost, budget, and management and to recommend how the numerous space agencies supporting the project could derive maximum benefit from their investment. The Task Force’s report stated that, although the ISS program’s technical achievements to date had been extraordinary, problems concerning the program’s budget, management, and other matters threatened future development of the ISS. In addition, the IMCE Task Force recommended numerous changes to establish a core-complete program for the ISS, including altering program management; identifying and applying additional funding; and implementing more clearly defined programs to build the ISS so that its crew would be able to conduct high-priority research at the space station. With regard to maximizing research under the proposed FY 2002 budget, the Task Force recommended establishing research priorities, implementing a plan to execute them, and allocating more ISS crew time to high-priority research.(NASA, “Report by the International Space Station Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force to the NASA Advisory Council” (report, Washington, DC, 1 November 2001), http://history.nasa.gov/youngrep.pdf (accessed 26 November 2008).)
On the 15th anniversary of the launch of the Mir space station and with its doom imminent, Russian scientists and other space enthusiasts protested the plan to use a controlled descent to destroy the aging vessel. Once a point of pride for the Soviet space program, Mir had remained in use far beyond its planned lifespan and had fallen into disrepair. Russian Space Agency Chief Yuri Koptev attempted once again to explain why Mir had to come down: “The Mir has lived a wonderful life and must end it in a graceful way. We must discard it while we are still capable of controlling it, not turn its descent into roulette that threatens the entire global community.” Russia had planned to initiate Mir’s final descent in mid-March 2001.(Associated Press, “Report: Russia Puts Off Dumping of Mir for a Week,” 15 February 2001; Associated Press, “Russia Marks Mir’s 15th Anniversary by Assuaging Fears of Its Demise,” 19 February 2001; Associated Press, “Scientists Protest on Mir’s 15th Anniversary,” 20 February 2001.)
The ISS Management and Cost Evaluation Task Force (IMCE) held its first meeting on 20 and 21 August at NASA Headquarters. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had created the IMCE in July 2001 to consider the ISS program’s budget and management challenges and to determine a more efficient and effective method for NASA and its partners to construct the orbiting space station. Goldin had appointed A. Thomas Young, former president of Martin Marietta, to chair the 20-member Task Force, composed of Nobel Laureates and a highly regarded surgeon. In addition, a Financial Management Team and a Cost Analysis Support Team would support the IMCE in its efforts. On 1 November 2001, the Task Force would report its findings to the NASA Advisory Council, which would, in turn, present its recommendations to the NASA Administrator for NASA’s official response.(NASA, “Space Station Program Review Team To Meet Aug. [20–21]; Reporters Invited To Attend,” news release N01-047, 16 August 2001; NASA, “NASA Administrator Announces Distinguished Team To Review International Space Station Program,” news release 01-152, 31 July 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 12:55 p.m. (EST), bringing to an end Mission STS-108. During the mission, Endeavour had transported crew members of Expedition 4 to the ISS to begin their residency on the orbiting space station and had returned to Earth the Expedition 3 crew members, ending their 117-day stay aboard the ISS. In addition, astronauts Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani had completed numerous tasks during a 4-hour spacewalk, including installation of insulation on mechanisms that rotated the station’s main solar arrays. The crews of Endeavour and the ISS had collectively transferred more than 5,000 pounds (2,270 kilograms) of crew provisions, experiments, and other supplies to the ISS from Endeavour’s mid-deck and from the Raffaello MPLM. The mission’s total duration had been 11 days, 19 hours, and 55 minutes.(NASA KSC, “Space Shuttle, Mission Archives: STS-108,” http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
Endeavour crew members Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani completed a 4-hour spacewalk to repair the rotating mechanisms on the solar arrays attached to the outside of the ISS. The solar-powered module provided electrical power for the space station’s communications, life- support, and steering systems, as well as for scientific experiments conducted aboard the ISS. However, flight-control personnel had found that the solar arrays were consuming more electrical power than expected. Project engineers attributed this to temperature-induced contraction and expansion in the bearings within the motors that rotated the solar arrays. Contraction and expansion was occurring because of the temperatures outside of the ISS, which ranged from 200oF to 200o below 0oF (93.3oC to -128.9oC), during each orbit of Earth. Therefore, Godwin and Tani were installing insulation around the motors in an effort to stop the bearings from undergoing contraction and expansion.(Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Make Breathtaking Repair Trip,” Houston Chronicle, 11 December 2001.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed to allow the transport of space tourists to the ISS. Although the two agencies did not sign a formal agreement on the matter, media reported that they had agreed to the procedures and standards that spaceflight participantsindividuals who are not professional astronauts or cosmonautsmust satisfy when they visit the space station. NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed that such visitors must demonstrate foreign language ability, undergo specified physical training, and pass a personal suitability test. The issue of spaceflight participants had become a source of contention between NASA and the Russian Space Agency after American businessman Dennis A. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency to transport him to the ISS in April 2001.(Peter Baker, “U.S., Russia Agree To Allow ‘Space Tourists’,” Washington Post, 10 August 2001; ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers” (statement of criteria, Paris, November 2001), http://esamultimedia.esa.int/docs/isscrewcriteria.pdf (accessed 5 November 2008).)
In preparation for the final descent of the Mir space station, the Russian Space Agency negotiated a US$200 million insurance policy covering any damage that might occur if pieces of the craft landed in populated areas. Russian officials planned to fire the engines of the cargo ship attached to the space station, thereby pulling Mir from orbit and sending the space station hurtling into Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists predicted that intense heat would destroy most of the station during reentry, but that some fragments would hit Earth. Although space agencies had successfully deorbited many rockets and satellites to final resting places in the ocean, Russia faced increasing international consternation regarding the damage Mir’s reentry might cause. Japan was at higher risk from fragments of Mir than other countries, because the space station would pass over Japan in its final, low orbit.
At 4:51 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time (EDT), the Sun released one of the most powerful flares of the past 25 years. The flare originated from a region of the Sun known as active region 9393 and, almost immediately after its generation, began orbiting with the Sun. The flare, equal to the well- known X-20 flare of 16 August 1989, resulted from an explosion within the Sun’s atmosphere. Both the 1989 and 2001 solar flares disrupted radio communications. The flare of 3 April 2001 caused an R4 radio blackout on the sunlit side of Earth and released energy equal to 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT. Had it occurred on the side of the Sun facing Earth, it would probably have caused major power failures on Earth. ESA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spotted the record-setting sun flare and several smaller X-class flares, which occurred during the following days.(NASA, “Sun Unleashes Record Superflare, Earth Dodges Solar Bullet,” news release 01-66, 3 April 2001; NASA, “Sun Takes Another Solar Shot, This Time at Earth,” news release 01-71, 11 April 2001.)
After months of debate over whether Russia should bring Mir out of orbit and what damage the space station might cause when it fell to Earth, the 15-year-old Mir space station plunged into Earth’s atmosphere, spraying some of its remnants into the Pacific Ocean. The splashdown marked the end of a 2.2 billion-mile journey for Mir. Witnesses in Fiji reported seeing streaks of gold and silver lights across the sky when Mir fell, but nobody reported any damage from pieces of the falling space station. U.S. officials at the Pentagon tracked the descent, while Japan’s public safety chief urged people to stay indoors to avoid falling debris. Anatoly Y. Solovyev, a Russian cosmonaut who had spent 651 days aboard Mir, remarked that he was sad to see the end of the pathbreaking space station: “An entire era of our Soviet space program is ending, into which we invested not only our money, but what is more important, our intellectual potential.” Once Mir had descended safely, officials of the Russian Space Agency praised the precise sequence of maneuvers that had brought the space station safely from orbit.(Patrick E. Tyler, “Mir Space Station Sizzles To Ending Over Pacific,” New York Times, 23 March 2001; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Officials Exultant After Flawlessly Bringing Down Mir,” 23 March 2001; Peter Baker, “Mir’s Fall to Earth Marks a Fiery End to Bumpy Mission,” Washington Post, 23 March 2001; Associated Press, “Japan’s Public Safety Chief Urges People To Stay Inside To Avoid Mir Debris,” 16 March 2001; World Reporter, “Pentagon To Track Mir Station’s Descent from Orbit,” 10 March 2001.)
The Russian cargo craft Progress M1-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, carrying 2.5 tons (2.3 tonnes or 2,300 kilograms) of supplies for the ISS crew. Along with food, research materials, and a new computer system to replace the damaged control machines, the cargo carrier also hauled 1 ton (0.9 tonnes or 907 kilograms) of extra fuel to the space station, so that Progress M1-6 could push the ISS into a higher orbit. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the spacecraft to dock with the ISS two days after launch. The launch was the first using the newly improved Soyuz-FG rocket, a booster designed to use 5 percent less fuel than previous models.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571; Mark Wade, “Progress M1,” Encyclopaedia Astronautica, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/proessm1.htm (accessed 29 July 2008).)
A team of astronomers using the HST published results of the first direct detection and chemical analysis of the atmosphere of a planet located outside of the solar system. The scientists had used Hubble to examine the planet’s atmosphere as it passed in front of its parent star―called HD 209458―a technique that enabled them to see the star’s light filtered through the planet’s atmosphere. During the analysis, the astronomers had detected sodium in the planet’s atmosphere. They hoped that the observation was a harbinger of a new phase in analyses of extrasolar planets, often referred to as exoplanets. Scientists also hoped that this type of analysis would enable them to measure any unusual abundance of atmospheric gases created by living organisms, thereby offering them a method of acquiring direct evidence of life on other planets.(NASA, “Hubble Measures Atmosphere on World Around Another Star,” news release 01-232, 27 November 2001.)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri would replace Sergei I. Moschenko as a member of the ISS Expedition 7 crew. Russian officials had proposed the change to the Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, which formally certified and assigned ISS crew, and the panel had formally approved the proposal on 10 October 2002. Kaleri had served three separate missions on the Russian space station Mir between 1992 and 2000. In addition to Kaleri, the Expedition 7 crew would include U.S. astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko.(NASA, “Expedition Five Backup Crewmember Named to Expedition Seven,” news release 02-235, 3 December 2002; NASA, “Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America and the Russian Space Agency Concerning the Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station” (MOU, Washington, DC, 29 January 1998), Article 11.3, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/reports/1998/nasa_russian.html (accessed 5 November 2008).)
Scientists announced an estimate of the universe’s age based on new HST images of very faint white dwarf stars in Messier 4 (M4), a cluster of stars in the constellation Scorpius. The researchers had closely examined M4’s white dwarf starslow-mass stars that have exhausted their fuel sources for thermonuclear fusion. Although white dwarfs cool at a predictable rate, enabling scientists to estimate their age, they become progressively fainter as they cool, making them difficult to observe. The HST had provided the first deep exposures of these dim stars, which the astronomers discovered were M4’s oldest white dwarf stars, at around 12 to 13 billion years old. Earlier Hubble observations had revealed that the first stars in the universe had formed less than 1 billion years after the universe’s emergence from the Big Bang. Thus, the researchers had discovered that the age of these M4 white dwarfs supported the previous estimates that the universe’s age is 13 to 14 billion years old. The use of this new methodology to estimate the universe’s age represented a major departure from those used previously.(NASA, “Hubble Uncovers Oldest ‘Clocks’ in Space To Read Age of Universe,” news release 02-73, 24 April 2004; Brad M. S. Hansen et al., “The White Dwarf Cooling Sequence of the Globular Cluster Messier 4,” Astrophysical Journal 574, no. 2 (1 August 2002): L155–L158.)
NASA announced the backup crew members for ISS Expedition 10, including Jeffrey N. Williams, acting as backup for the ISS station commander, Russian cosmonaut Konstantin M. Kozeev, and U.S. astronaut Sunita L. Williams. The primary crew members for Expedition 10 were ISS Commander Leroy Chiao, U.S. astronaut John L. Phillips, and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov.(NASA, “Space Station Expedition Backup Crew Named,” news release 02-258, 23 December 2002.)
The five partner space agencies of the ISSthe Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency approved the 2002 Program Action Plan for the ISS at a meeting held in Tokyo, Japan. The partner agencies agreed to expand the station’s capabilities, to increase the number of permanent ISS crew members, and to provide additional crew rescue vehicles. They also agreed to a process for selecting an ISS configuration, once the ISS had accommodated the remaining components. In this process, each of the station’s partner agencies would make additional programmatic and technical assessments, cost estimations, and internal budget reviews. In addition, the agencies announced that they would approve a station configuration option by March 2003, select a revised configuration by June or July 2003, and agree upon a final configuration by December 2003.(NASA, “Space Station Action Plan Approved,” news release 02-241, 6 December 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing’s Delta 2 expendable launch vehicle to launch medium-class payloads between 2006 and 2009. The selection was part of an existing NASA launch-services contract with Boeing that had a maximum value of US$1.2 billion, if NASA exercised all options. The procurement contract called for 12 definite launches, with options for an additional seven. Boeing’s rockets would launch both NASA’s payloads and NASA- sponsored payloads.(NASA, “NASA Picks Delta II To Launch Medium-Class Payloads,” news release C02-ii, 6 December 2002. 335 NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 31 October 2008).)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, “Major Component of Space Station Is Attached,” New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
The GAO submitted a report to Congress examining the reasons for the increasing costs of the ISS and the potential effects of those costs on the station’s ability to conduct scientific research. The report stated that changes in the program, scheduling delays, and other issues had substantially increased the program’s costs, and that NASA’s management had not taken steps to address cost growth. Consequently, the ISS’s scientific research capabilities had diminished, raising concerns among the station’s international partners. Although GAO made no formal recommendations, it cited NASA’s own newly established management and cost-estimation reforms, noted challenges NASA faced in implementing those reforms, and suggested that NASA develop a credible budget to complete the ISS. NASA formally responded that the report reasonably portrayed the problems with the ISS, as well as NASA’s efforts to address them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Actions Under Way To Manage Cost, But Significant Challenges Remain” (report no. GAO-02-735, Washington, DC, 17 July 2002), www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO- 02-735 (accessed 26 September 2008).)
of two objects that orbit around a common center of mass as they both orbit the Sunwith a highly eccentric orbit and a long period. However, they had found that 1998 WW31 is very different from the Pluto/Charon system, which was previously the only known binary in the Kuiper Belt. The Kuiper Belt is the region of space that extends from Neptune, at 30 AU (astronomical units)the approximate mean distance between Earth and the Sun) to more than 100 AU. Since its discovery in 1992, the Kuiper Belt has helped scientists understand the solar system’s formation. Although scientists had discovered 1998 WW31 in 1998, they had reported it as a single Kuiper Belt object. However, analysis of observations made in 2000 indicated that the object might contain two components. Further analysis, using ground-based and HST observations made in 2001 and 2002, confirmed 1998 WW31’s binarity.(Christian Veillet, “The Binary Kuiper-Belt Object 1998 WW31,” Nature 416, no. 6882 (18 April 2002): 711– 713; NASA, “Hubble Hunts Down Odd Couples at the Fringes of Our Solar System,” news release 02-70, 17 April 2002.)
NASA scientist Zdenek Sekanina published new findings challenging existing ideas about comets. Existing theory had posited that comets rarely break up and that, when they do, the fragmentation usually occurs in close proximity to the Sun. However, basing his research on the analysis of images taken by the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), operated jointly by NASA and ESA, Sekanina had discovered that comets fragment throughout their lifetimes, often at distances far from the Sun. Moreover, Sekanina had found that such fragmentation generally occurs in a somewhat orderly pattern, with a single comet fragmenting into clusters of smaller comets. Sekanina had analyzed a type of very small comet called a sungrazer and discovered that sungrazers are actually fragments of other comets that have broken apart during a previous encounter with the Sun. Moreover, he had found that sungrazers continue to break into pieces throughout their orbits around the Sun. Sekanina had also examined another type of comet―57P/du Toit-Neujmin-Delaporte, finding that this type of comet shows the same pattern of fragmenting into smaller comets as it moves farther from the Sun.(NASA, “Comets Break Up Far and Near,” news release 02-158, 5 September 2002; Zdenek Sekanina, “Runaway Fragmentation of Sungrazing Comets Observed with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory,” Astrophysical Journal 576, no. 2 (10 September 2002): 1085–1089.)
Using the most sensitive images ever taken by the HST, scientists found new evidence of star creation, challenging the findings of much of the existing research on the origin of the universe. Although the HST had captured images of portions of the skies that appear empty to the naked eye, the images revealed nearly 5,000 galaxies. Led by Kenneth M. Lanzetta of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, a team of scientists had examined approximately 150 of those galaxies spectroscopically, inferring from color variations their actual distance from Earth, as well as the properties of less visible light from even fainter and more distant galaxies. The scientists had also conducted spectroscopic analysis of remote quasars to measure the early universe’s gas density, because high gas density implies high creation rates of stars, which are the building blocks of galaxies and the birthplaces of solar systems. The new images indicated that countless stars had begun forming at a period closer to the birth of the universe than previous research had suggested. Although the HST had captured the images in 1995 and 1998, using the most advanced available technology, the findings suggested that the peak of star creation had occurred earlier than Hubble’s ability to detect it. However, the scientists believed that they could date the peak of star creation to within a few hundred million years after the Big Bang.(NASA, “Hubble Suggests First Stars Opened in a Blaze of Glory,” news release 02-01, 8 January 2002; William Harwood, “Stars May Have Brightened Infant Universe,” Washington Post, 9 January 2002.)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASA’s SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the “One NASA” initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASA’s various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASA’s MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFC’s Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASA’s KSC.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director,” news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic “wrist roll” joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, “Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced,” Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, “STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18,” 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
NASA announced the assignment of three crew members to begin training for the ninth expedition to the ISS. The three were Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. NASA assigned American astronaut Daniel M. Tani to serve as backup for his fellow compatriot Fincke and selected cosmonauts Alexander F. Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko to serve as backups for fellow Russians Kononenko and Padalka.(NASA, “Astronauts Assigned for Space Station Expedition Training,” news release 02-55, 18 March 2002.)
Crew of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 finished installing several new instruments on the 12- year-old HST and sent the observatory back into orbit. During a series of five spacewalks conducted in as many days, Columbia’s crew had installed a new power-shunting unit, an improved solar panel, and a cooling unit that would restore the Near-Infrared Camera and Multi- Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) to operational status. In addition, Columbia’s crew had installed a new main camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), which NASA had designed to give the telescope unprecedented ability to observe distant galaxies and other objects.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Returning to Mission Able To Peer Deeper Into Space,” New York Times, 10 March 2002.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft took its last pictures, images of Io, a planet-sized moon orbiting Jupiter. Galileo had launched in 1989 from Space Shuttle Atlantis and had entered Jupiter’s orbit six years later. The spacecraft had eventually made 33 orbits around Jupiter, capturing nearly 14,000 images of the planet and the objects around it.(NASA, “Farewell, Io; Galileo Paying Last Visit to a Restless Moon,” news release 02-10, 15 January 2002; NASA, “Solar System ExplorationGalileo: Overview,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/ /index.cfm (accessed 31 July 2008); Andrew Bridges, “NASA Awaits Last Photographs from Jupiter Probe’s Long Trip,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2002.)
The leaders of the space agencies participating in the ISS met at ESA’s headquarters in Paris to discuss the program’s status. The attendees included representatives of NASA, the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. All of the agencies reaffirmed their commitment to work on developing, assembling, and using the ISS for both applied and scientific research. In addition, the agencies agreed on a timeline for the next measures they would undertake to ensure that the construction and operation of the ISS met system engineering and safety requirements, so that participants could use it for various research objectives.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 02-105, 3 June 2002.)
NASA awarded Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems a US$936 million modification to its contract for the ISS. Under the contract, which had commenced in 1995, Boeing was providing construction, integration, and operations for the ISS. The modification extended Boeing’s integration and operation work until 31 December 2003 and increased the total contract value to US$10.7 billion.(NASA, “NASA Awards $936 Million Modification to Boeing Space Station Contract,” news release c02-d, 7 February 2002.)
Scientists from California Institute of Technology announced that they had used NASA’s HST to measure the true size of an orbiting, planet-like body beyond Pluto. The sphere was the most distant object that a telescope had measured within Earth’s solar system. Like its neighbor Pluto, the object, which is nearly 4 billion miles (6.4 billion kilometers) from Earth, lies in the Kuiper Belt, an icy debris field that extends 7 billion miles (11.3 billion kilometers) beyond the orbit of Neptune. Using the HST, scientists Michael E. Brown and Chadwick A. Trujillo were able to determine several properties of the sphere, including its diameter of 780 miles (1,250 kilometers). Although too small to be a planet, the sphere, which Brown and Trujillo named Quaoarafter a creation deity of the Native American Tongva peoplehas planet-like traits that Pluto lacks. For example, Brown and Trujillo found that Quaoar has a circular orbit around the Sun and is in the same plane as the other planets in Earth’s solar system. Brown and Trujillo announced their findings at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences.(NASA, “Hubble Spots an Icy World Far Beyond Pluto,” news release 02-190, 7 October 2002; Usha Lee McFarling, “Pluto’s Not So Alone Out There, It Appears,” Los Angeles Times, 8 October 2002.)
The National Research Council (NRC), the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences, released a report on the ISS, outlining NASA’s efforts to limit cost overruns on the project. The report concluded that, if NASA proceeded with its plans to halt construction, once the ISS’s core was complete, and to limit the station’s crew, equipment, and other components, the ISS would be unlikely to become a first-class laboratory. NRC reported that capping the crew to three persons would have a highly detrimental impact on the quality of scientific research conducted on board the ISS, because a crew of such a small size would have to devote most of its time to station maintenance and operation. In addition, NRC stated that NASA had made its decision to cancel or delay equipment for experiments without assessing scientific priorities or determining which research plans the curtailments would affect most. NASA’s official representative responded that NASA was committed to building the ISS beyond the core-complete stage. Moreover, NASA intended to continue developing the ISS based on decisions concerning the station’s scientific priorities and planned to take any steps necessary to achieve those goalsfor example, increasing the size of the station’s crew.(Warren E. Leary, “Cuts Lessen Space Station’s Value to Science, Report Says,” New York Times, 20 September 2002.)
The ISS’s international partners made several decisions during a meeting held in Houston, Texas. The meeting’s purpose was to discuss the provision of crew return vehicles (CRVs) for the ISS and plans for the station’s construction, through 2008. NASA announced that the collaborating space agencies had agreed to a modified launch schedule for components provided by Canada, Japan, and ESA. In addition, they had discussed the possibility of Russia’s continuing to provide Soyuz CRVs until NASA had completed the construction of a replacement vehicle.(John Kelly, “International Space Station Partners OK Modified Launch Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 October 2002.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 and the ISS installed the first Starboard truss segment, the S1 Truss, connecting it with the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Installation of the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long) S1 Truss was the mission’s main objective. Astronauts David A. Wolf and Piers J. Sellers accomplished the task during three spacewalks, with astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Sandra H. Magnus operating the ISS’s robotic arm to attach the S1 to the central truss segment, the S0 Truss. The astronauts also installed the Crew and Equipment Translation Aid, a cart that runs on rails along the top of the truss.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Install Girder on Space Station,” New York Times, 11 October 2002; NASA, “ISS Assembly Mission 9A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/ iss_assembly_9a.html (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Observations from the HST revealed the existence of medium-sized black holes. According to scientists, the discovery provided important information about the creation of many types of celestial bodies. Scientists were surprised to find that the black holes in the cores of globular star clusters―bright clusters of stars that orbit galaxies, including the Milky Way―are nearly 10,000 times less massive than galaxies. The HST data revealed that black holes in globular star clusters are proportionally smaller than massive black holes found in galaxies, demonstrating that the mass of a black hole is proportional to its stellar surroundings. The results also indicated that when the globular star clusters had formed they had black holes, suggesting that, to form large star clusters, black holes must act as gravitational anchors. Scientists believed these findings might illuminate the process by which galaxies and globular clusters formed. The discovery also suggested that black holes are more ubiquitous than scientists had previously thought.(NASA, “Hubble Discovers Black Holes in Unexpected Places,” news release 02-174, 17 September 2002; William Harwood, “Finding May Connect Dots on How Galaxies Form; Mid-size Black Holes Are Discovered,” Washington Post, 18 September 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
For the first time, scientists made combined internal and external observations of Jupiter’s magnetosphere, the biggest object with distinct boundaries within the solar system. In the first conjunction of two spacecraft at an outer planet, the Galileo spacecraft conducted observations from inside Jupiter’s magnetosphere, a comet-shaped region of space filled by the planet’s magnetic field. Meanwhile, on the outside of the magnetosphere, the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft monitored the effects of solar windparticles that flow from the Sun through the solar system. Scientists augmented the data gathered during these observations with data from near- simultaneous observations collected from radio telescopes on Earth and from spacecraft orbiting Earth, namely the HST and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Researchers found that, although Jupiter’s magnetosphere deflects solar winds, shock waves carried by solar winds compress the magnetosphere, stimulate radio emissions from within it, and brighten auroras at the planet’s poles. The observations helped bolster researchers’ confidence in their understanding of Earth’s own protective magnetosphere.(NASA JPL, “Solar Wind Buffets Vast Jupiter Region, Team Approach Reveals,” news release, 27 February 2002; Thomas W. Hill, “Magnetic Moments at Jupiter,” Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 965–966.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space record―Foale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russia’s former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walz’s previous record for an American in space―230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight―196 days.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record,” news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Michael Foale’s 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, “Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space,” 9 December 2003.)
Progress M-47 launched atop a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome one day after the loss of Space Shuttle Columbia “threw future missions to the orbiting complex in doubt.” The launch, scheduled long in advance, took place as “stunned Russian space officials offered condolences to their American colleagues.” Russian officials also expressed concern that the loss of Columbia and the ensuing suspension of Shuttle missions might place Russia’s “cash-strapped space program under more pressure to deliver crews and supplies to the station.” Sergei Gorbunov, a spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency, explained that Russia had no reserve of Soyuz spacecraft. He pointed out that if the U.S. space program intended to use Russian craft to transport crews to the ISS, NASA would need to buy Russian Soyuz TMAs, the type of craft designed to carry cosmonauts to the ISS. Russia had routinely built only two Soyuz spacecraft per year.(Associated Press, “Russians Send Supply Ship on Way to Space Station,” 2 February 2003.)
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched on STS-107 from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:39 a.m. (EST). NASA had postponed the launch, originally scheduled for July 2001, because of technical and scheduling problems. Flying an orbital mission, a rare event since the ISS partners had begun construction of the space station in 1998, STS-107 was a “pure research mission.” The crew would conduct scientific investigations in two 12-hour shifts each day in the laboratory module of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. The crew included Shuttle Commander Rick D. Husband; Pilot William C. McCool; Payload Commander Michael P. Anderson; Payload Specialist Ilan Ramon, Israel’s first astronaut and a fighter pilot with the rank of colonel in Israel’s Air Force; Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, an aerospace engineer originally from India; and Mission Specialists David M. Brown and Laurel B. Clark, both physicians. The launch occurred under exceptionally tight security with more than 300 dignitaries and guests from Israel in attendance.(Broward Liston for Reuters, “Space Shuttle Launches with First Israeli Astronaut,” 16 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “Columbia Takes Off Under Tight Security,” New York Times, 16 January 2003.)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASA’s plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, “Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition,” news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, “Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary” (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, “Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission,” Space News, 19 August 2003.)
NASA’s Galileo mission ended when the Galileo spacecraft disintegrated in Jupiter’s atmosphere. NASA had managed the course of the craft’s demise to prevent its becoming uncontrollable once it had depleted its propellant. Galileo had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, following multiyear delays―originally, NASA had planned for the craft to launch in 1982 aboard a Centaur rocket. The probe had made significant contributions to scientists’ knowledge of Jupiter and its moons, including collecting evidence of the possibility of life on Europa. Galileo had outlasted its prime mission by six years, despite enduring numerous technical problems and more than four times the amount of radiation that engineers had designed the spacecraft to withstand.(NASA JPL, “Galileo End of Mission Status,” news release, 21 September 2003, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=129 (accessed 2 February 2009); Usha Lee McFarling, “Stalwart Galileo Is Vaporized near Jupiter,” Los Angeles Times, 22 September 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleet’s grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the station’s two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the station―completed and ready to launch―had reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASA’s ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAO’s September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAO’s findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Shuttle Fleet’s Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress” (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 1–11, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, “Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says,” Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Report: Shuttle’s Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in ‘Survival Mode’,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
The ISS marked its five-year anniversary in space. Since the Russian Zarya control module had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 20 November 1998, the ISS had grown from an uninhabited module to a permanently staffed research facility the size of a three- bedroom house. After five years, the ISS was not completely constructed―NASA was preparing more than 80 tons (72,575 kilograms or 72.58 tonnes) of equipment and hardware, including solar arrays and support structures, for launch at the Space Station Processing Facility at its KSC. Also in launch preparation at KSC was the Node 2 module, which would connect the U.S., European, and Japanese research laboratories; and the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module. The eventual launch of the European Columbus laboratory under construction in Bremen, Germany, would expand the station’s volume to that of a five-bedroom house. The first crew to live aboard the orbiting facility had arrived on 2 November 2000, and since that date, eight successive crews―22 people―had staffed the ISS, conducting research in bioastronautics, physical sciences, fundamental space biology, space product development, and spaceflight disciplines.(NASA, “International Space Station Marks Five Years in Orbit,” news release 03-374, 19 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03374_iss_five_yrs.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
The Canadian Space Agency awarded a four-year, US$116 million contract to MD Robotics to provide engineering services for robotic elements for the ISS. Under the contract, MD Robotics, a subsidiary of MacDonald, Dettweiler and Associates Ltd., would maintain and upgrade software for robotic components and would continue developing and testing a two-armed robot called Dextre, scheduled for installation at the ISS in 2005. MD Robotics had designed Dextre for attachment to the ISS, either at the end of the robotic arm currently in place―Canadarm 2―or on the mobile base station. Dextre would perform external maintenance tasks at the ISS.(Jason Bates, “MacDonald Dettweiler Nabs Space Station Contract,” Space News, 3 June 2003.)
NASA released an 84-page report, “Implementation Plan for the International Space Station Continuing Flight,” detailing NASA’s plans to improve exterior inspections of the ISS and to shield the station from debris strikes, while continuing to maintain a crew aboard the ISS during the disruption of Space Shuttle flights. Before the Columbia accident, Space Shuttle crews visiting the ISS had routinely photographed the exterior of the station; NASA expressed concern that in the absence of Shuttle flights, external damage would go undetected. The report outlined plans to conduct thorough inspections of external surfaces of the ISS using external cameras and classified satellite images, as well as to inspect more closely the wiring and equipment inside the station.(Patty Reinert, “Armed with Lessons, NASA Outlines Safer Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 November 2003; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “NASA: Space Station Safety Can Be Better,” 7 November 2003.)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
Japan’s Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japan’s NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, “Next International Space Station Crew Named,” news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
NASA announced that astronaut Leroy Chiao would replace William S. McArthur Jr. as Commander of Expedition 9, the next mission to the ISS. NASA had disqualified McArthur from Expedition 9 because of an unspecified medical issue. Chiao, who had trained as McArthur’s substitute, would join Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev for the mission, scheduled to launch in April 2004.(NASA, “Chiao Replaces McArthur as Next Space Station Commander,” news release 04-019, 12 January 2004. 581 Mark Carreau, “Leak on Space Station Stopped,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 2004.)
NASA’s Cassini spacecraft provided data revealing two previously unknown moons orbiting Saturn―a new total of 33 identified moons orbiting the planet. The two moons―designated S/2004-S1 and S/2004-S2, until receiving their formal names―measured 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) and 21⁄2 miles (4 kilometers) in diameter. Because of the moons’ diminutive size, scientists suspected that they might be fragments from a larger moon.(Mark Carreau, “Cassini Finds Two More Saturn Moons,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2004; New York Times, “2 Little Saturn Moons,” 17 August 2004.)
The ISS’s main oxygen generator stopped working, but the equipment failure posed no immediate danger to the station’s crew members. ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka stated that the crew could repair the generator, which had failed on previous occasions. The malfunction did not pose an immediate threat to Padalka or his fellow crew member E. Michael Fincke, because they could access several alternative sources of oxygen stored in the orbiting space station.(New York Times, “Oxygen Generator on Space Station Fails,” 10 September 2004.)
After more than six months in space, the crew members of ISS Expedition 8 returned to Earth, safely landing in Kazakhstan at 8:12 p.m. (EDT). The crew of Expedition 8 consisted of NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri. During their tenure at the ISS, Foale and Kaleri had conducted scientific research. Expedition 8 had been the second- longest expedition to the ISS, with the two men spending a total of 194 days, 18 hours, and 35 minutes in space. Returning with them to Earth was ESA astronaut André Kuipers, who had spent nine days on the space station conducting research as part of ISS Expedition 9. The other two members of Expedition 9, Gennady I. Padalka and E. Michael Fincke, remained at the ISS for a mission scheduled to last nearly six months.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-007, 29 April 2004. 195)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
NASA officials announced that the crew members of the ISS were experiencing a food shortage and would have to eat less until a Russian supply capsule could bring additional food supplies. Russia had scheduled the resupply capsule to arrive at the ISS on 25 December 2004, but if it missed the delivery, crew members Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov would have to return to Earth aboard the Russian Soyuz capsule docked at the ISS. NASA also noted that, if the crew members had to evacuate the space station, Russia and the United States could continue to operate the ISS from Earth. Officials cited a number of reasons for the supply shortage on the ISS, including the postponement of regular supply missions after the Columbia accident and the necessary removal of some food supplies from an August 2004 resupply flight, to make room for equipment to monitor air quality in the ISS.(Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Endures Food Shortage,” Houston Chronicle, 10 December 2004.)
ISS crew members repaired an air leak in the space station. Astronaut C. Michael Foale and cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri fixed a leak in a flex hose located in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. The orbiting space station had begun to lose air on 22 December 2003. After examining the station’s air pressure readings, NASA’s Mission Control had informed ISS crew members of the leak on 5 January 2004. The air leak had not endangered either the ISS crew or operations. By systematically isolating the ISS’s compartments and using an ultrasound device to determine the location of a hissing sound emitted by the faulty hose, Foale and Kaleri had discovered the source of the air loss.
A group of astronomers announced the most detailed telescopic view ever taken of the visible universe. NASA’s HST had captured a 1 million-second-long exposure of a small portion of dark sky, with a resulting image containing an estimated 10,000 galaxies, some so far away that astronomers had never before seen them. Astronomers called the image the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. They believed that the Hubble Ultra Deep Field might have revealed light from galaxies created near the time of the Big Bang and hoped that the image would provide information about the creation of the universe.(NASA, “Hubble’s Deep View of the Universe Unveils Earliest Galaxies,” news release 04-086, 9 March 2004; Dennis Overbye, “Images Reveal Deepest Glance into Universe,” New York Times, 10 March 2004.)
Data from NASA’s Cassini spacecraft revealed a new radiation belt around Saturn. Researchers already knew that Saturn had radiation belts―ring-shaped concentrations of ionized particles―outside the orbit of the planet’s rings. However, the newly discovered rings were inside Saturn’s rings. Previously, scientists had thought that a radiation belt could not exist inside the planet’s rings, because they believed that the rings would absorb any ionized particles that approached Saturn. The presence of radiation within the orbit of the rings indicated that the radiation belt’s particles are able to move through Saturn’s rings.(John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Finds Belt Around Saturn Unlike Any Ever Seen Before,” New York Times, 6 August 2004.)
Representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States―the nations participating in the ISS project―met to discuss their cooperative activities for the station. At the meeting at ESA’s Technical Centre in the Netherlands, ESA officials reviewed ISS operations and plans, unanimously endorsing a new technical configuration for the space station that would incorporate components from each of the ISS partner space agencies. Upon completion, the ISS would have improved research capabilities and would accommodate more crew members than the current maximum of three.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 04-237, 23 July 2004; Warren E. Leary, “More Astronauts Approved for Space Station,” New York Times, 24 July 2004.)
NASA and the ISS partners announced crew assignments for the next two expeditions to the space station. NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka would serve on Expedition 9, and NASA astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov would provide the crew for Expedition 10. In addition, Chiao and Sharipov would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 9, while NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 10. Although NASA and its partners had previously scheduled Tokarev to pair with Chaio on Expedition 10, the ISS partners had decided to replace Tokarev with Sharipov, because Sharipov had previously trained with Chiao.(NASA, “New Crews Named for 2004 Space Station Missions,” news release 04-056, 6 February 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, “Station Crew Returns to Earth,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, “Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station,” New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Gennady I. Padalka performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the arrival of new unpiloted cargo ships, scheduled to launch in late 2005. ESA had created the new cargo vessels, formally called Automated Transfer Vehicles (ATVs). Fincke and Padalka installed new communications antennas and laser reflectors to facilitate the docking of the ATVs at the ISS. During the 41⁄2-hour excursion, the two men also replaced a circuit breaker and rotated scientific experiments.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-024,” news release SS04-024, 3 August 2004.)
Passing by Saturn’s furthest moon Phoebe, the Cassini spacecraft returned analyses of the moon indicating that Phoebe’s chemical composition is similar to the composition of comets, a finding that supported previous scientific theories about the enigmatic Phoebe. Because Phoebe has an unusually dark appearance and orbits Saturn in a direction opposite that of the planet’s other moons, scientists had theorized that the moon is a captive object of Saturn. Cassini’s analyses of Phoebe indicated that the diminutive moon’s surface is composed of carbon dioxide, water ice, water-bearing minerals, and various organic chemicals. The results indicated possible chemical similarities between Phoebe’s composite materials and materials observed in comets. The Cassini spacecraft was one of two in the Cassini-Huygens mission, a joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA. Besides Cassini―an orbiter designed to orbit Saturn, studying the planet and its system of moons―the project included the probe Huygens, created to examine Saturn’s largest moon Titan. (Richard A. Kerr, “Dirty Old Ice Ball Found at Saturn,” Science 304, no. 5678 (18 June 2004): 1727; Warren E. Leary, “Craft Confirms a Comet Link for Peculiar Moon of Saturn,” New York Times, 24 June 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035,” news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members’ spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, “Finally, Spacewalk a Success,” Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
Scientists using NASA’s HST announced the discovery of two new rings and two new moons around the planet Uranus. The newly discovered rings―faint bands of dust that undergo continual change, with dust spiraling out of the rings―are replenished by debris from collisions between asteroids and the newly discovered Uranian moon called Mab. The discovery of the rings increased the number of known Uranian rings to 13. The discovery of the two moons, which the scientists named Cupid and Mab after mythological and Shakespearean characters, increased the number of known Uranian moons to 27, the most of any planet in the solar system. Scientists also remarked that the orbits of known Uranian moons had changed since Voyager 2 had last observed them in 1986. Scientists described the dynamic nature of Uranus’s moons and rings as indicative of dynamism throughout the solar system. Scientists hoped that observing Uranus would help them better understand this dynamism.(Mark R. Showalter and Jack J. Lissauer, “The Second Ring-Moon System of Uranus: Discovery and Dynamics,” Science 311, no. 5763 (17 February 2006): 973–977; Frank D. Roylance, “Hubble Images Show More Rings, Moons Around Uranus,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 23 December 2005.)
NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASA’s HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenite―composed of iron, oxygen, and titanium―as a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source,” New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, “Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals,” Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
James D. Wetherbee, the only U.S. astronaut to command five Space Shuttle flights, announced his plans to retire from NASA. Wetherbee had participated in six Space Shuttle missions since becoming an astronaut in 1984, serving as pilot aboard Mission STS-32 in 1990 and commanding STS-52 in 1992, STS-63 in 1995, STS-86 in 1997, STS-102 in 2001, and STS-113 in 2002. His missions had included flights both to the Russian Mir space station, including the first Shuttle–Mir rendezvous, and to the ISS. Just before retiring, Wetherbee had worked as Space Shuttle Lead in the Independent Technical Authority at NASA’s JSC, a group responsible for identifying and analyzing possible hazards and determining launch readiness. Wetherbee had also served for two years as Director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC and for five years as Deputy Director of JSC.(NASA, “Veteran NASA Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” news release 05-017, 11 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/archives/2005-all-archives.html (accessed 13 August 2009); Associated Press, “Veteran Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” 12 January 2005.)
The Soyuz TMA-6 crew arrived at the ISS. After greeting the new arrivals, the Expedition 10 crew held a safety briefing to familiarize the Expedition 11 crew and Roberto Vittori, the Italian astronaut visiting the ISS, with emergency escape procedures. The mission was Commander Sergei K. Krikalev’s third long-term space assignment and his second aboard the ISS. Krikalev was the first person to serve more than one tour at the station.(NASA, “11th Crew Arrives at Space Station” (International Space Station Status Report SS05-020, 17 April 2005), http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “New Crew Arrives at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2005.)
NASA celebrated the HST’s 15th anniversary with the release of new images of the Eagle Nebula and the Whirlpool galaxy (spiral galaxy M51), two of the most well-known objects that the Hubble had observed to date. The new images, made with the HST’s newest camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), were among the largest and sharpest the Hubble had yet captured, so sharp that, even if enlarged to billboard size, the image would preserve the stunning details. The new image of the Eagle Nebula revealed ultraviolet light originating from a group of massive hot stars and sculpting a tall, dense tower of gas. The new image of the Whirlpool galaxy, in addition to displaying its classic features, revealed a companion galaxy located at the end of one of the Whirlpool galaxy’s arms. The launch of the HST in 1990 had ushered in a new era in astronomy. Before the existence of the HST, no telescope had viewed the universe in visible light from above Earth’s atmosphere, which blurs light and causes images to appear fuzzy. Among its many achievements, the HST had helped astronomers calculate the precise age of the universe; helped confirm the existence of dark energy; detected small protogalaxies; proved the existence of supermassive black holes; provided sharp views of a comet hitting Jupiter; and demonstrated that the process of planetary system formation is common throughout the galaxy.(NASA, “Hubble Celebrates 15th Anniversary with Spectacular New Images,” news release 05-104, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05104_HST_anniversary.html (accessed 29 June 2009). 782 NASA, “NASA Establishes Exploration Systems Advisory Committee,” news release 05-106, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05106_esac_meeting.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
ISS Expedition 12 crew members William S. McArthur Jr. and Valery I. Tokarev left the ISS temporarily unoccupied so that they could relocate the orbiting station’s Soyuz spacecraft from the Pirs module’s docking compartment to the Zarya module’s docking port. The Soyuz spacecraft had remained docked at the ISS to serve as a return vehicle to Earth and an emergency escape vehicle. McArthur and Tokarev were relocating the Soyuz so that Pirs could serve as an airlock for future spacewalks.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-054,” status report SS05-054, 18 November 2005. 858 H.R. Rep. 109-272, at 169 (2005) (Conf. Rep.); NASA, “NASA Administrator’s Statement of Passage of FY 2006 Budget,” news release 05-407, 16 November 2005.)
ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov completed the second and final spacewalk of their mission 1 hour ahead of schedule, returning into the ISS after 4.5 hours. To help in navigation, Chiao and Sharipov installed a set of space-to- space antennas around a section of Zvezda, the Russian service module that would aid in the docking operations of Europe’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) during a future cargo mission. The crew also attached a GPS unit to the Zvezda module to help the ATV. The ATV, scheduled to arrive during the next year, had the capability to deliver up to 8.5 tons (7,711 kilograms or 7.71 tonnes) of cargo, including 10,000 pounds (4,536 kilograms or 4.54 tonnes) of propellant. After the crew finished connecting the antennas, Sharipov returned to the Pirs docking compartment to retrieve a small satellite called NanoSputnik. The satellite, which weighed just 11 pounds (5 kilograms) and measured only 1 foot (0.31 meter) long, carried a transmitter designed to test control and orientation systems for small spacecraft during its 100- day mission. Sharipov released the satellite into a retrograde orbit by hand, while Chiao photographed the launch.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalking Astronauts Outfit ISS for New Cargo Ship,” Space.com, 29 March 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva2_050328.html (accessed 3 September 2009); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Two Astronauts Complete Spacewalk Work,” 29 March 2005.)
Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, “Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station,” news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, “Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe,” 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
NASA announced a major discovery: images from the Cassini spacecraft had revealed geological activity on Saturn’s moon Enceladus. ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA had jointly created Cassini to study Saturn and its moons. Although scientists had previously believed that Enceladus is too small to be geologically active, data from Cassini had revealed that the moon is one of the solar system’s most geologically dynamic objects. The images showed surface features such as deep canyons and flowing material, a south polar hot spot, and jets of icy particles supplying matter to one of Saturn’s rings.(NASA, “NASA’s Cassini Images Reveal Spectacular Evidence of an Active Moon,” news release 05-422, 6 December 2005; Jeffrey S. Kargel, “Enceladus: Cosmic Gymnast, Volatile Miniworld,” Science 311, no. 5766 (10 March 2006): 1389–1391.)
Scientists announced that NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had detected water vapor on Enceladus, one of Saturn’s moons. Scientists described this as one of the most important findings in planetary science, because the discovery suggested that liquid water might exist on Enceladus. Liquid water is a prerequisite for the formation of life. Scientists had already known that Enceladus has a crystalline ice covering, the most reflective type of surface in the solar system, making Enceladus the brightest object in the solar system with the exception of the Sun. In addition, scientists had already known that diminutive Enceladus, which is only 310 miles (500 kilometers) in diameter, is the smallest object in the solar system to have volcanic activity. However, scientists were surprised to discover water vapor over Enceladus’s south pole, and they were unable to explain the finding. NASA and ESA had launched Cassini in 1997 to survey Saturn and its moons.(Guy Gugliotta, “Water Vapor Discovered on Tiny Moon of Saturn,” Washington Post, 19 September 2005. 838 NASA, “NASA Releases Plans for Next Generation Spacecraft,” news release 05-226, 19 September 2005; NASA, “NASA’s Exploration Systems Architecture Study,” November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/exploration/news/ESAS_report.html (accessed 10 July 2009).)
NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar storms―extremely powerful explosions in the Sun’s atmosphere―can affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmosphere―currents associated with changes in solar magnetic fields―are the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts,” news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., “The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field,” Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501–513.)
ESA announced that its Huygens probe, which had undertaken a seven-year journey through the solar system, aboard NASA’s Cassini spacecraft, had successfully landed on the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan. ESA intended Huygens to provide the first direct and detailed sampling of Titan’s atmospheric chemistry, the first photographs of its surface, and a detailed weather report of the moon. ESA had selected Titan as the probe’s destination because Titan’s nitrogen atmosphere is rich in methane, and scientists believe its surface may contain chemicals similar to those that existed on the young Earth, before life evolved. Before the landing of Huygens, scientists had been unable to see Titan’s surface, because the methane in the atmosphere reacts with sunlight, creating a permanent blanket of smog. ESA had designed the Huygens probe specifically to breach that shroud.(ESA, “Europe Reaches New FrontierHuygens Lands on Titan,” ESA news release PR 03-2005, 14 January 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_3_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 14 August 2009); NASA JPL, “NASA Salutes Successful Huygens Probe,” news release 2005-017, 14 January 2005, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/newsreleases/newsrelease20050114-3/ (accessed 14 August 2009); Guy Gugliotta, “Probe Lands on Moon of Saturn: A First Glimpse of Smog-Covered Titan,” Washington Post, 15 January 2005. 731 Agence-France Presse, “Russia and Europe Sign Space Agreement,” 20 January 2005.)
The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, “Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station,” news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
NASA’s Cassini spacecraft made a close pass of Saturn’s moon Iapetus, flying within 123,400 kilometers (76,677 miles) on its closest approach, and coming about 10 times closer to the moon than Voyager 2 had come in 1981. Cassini’s closest approach had occurred over the moon’s mysterious dark terrain, which scientists had never before seen at close range. Scientists described the dark coating, the origin of which was unknown, as rich in carbon-based molecules. The dark terrain blankets the side of Iapetus that leads in the direction of the orbital motion
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States’ access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make “extraordinary payments” to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, “U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved,” Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC at 5:32 p.m. (EST), marking the end of the 13- day Mission STS-116, the 20th Shuttle flight to the ISS. The mission had been among the most challenging ever made to the space station. In addition to transporting 2.9 tons (2.6 tonnes or 2,631 kilograms) of equipment and supplies to the ISS, Discovery’s crew had rewired the ISS’s power system and installed an additional truss segment to the station’s Integrated Truss Structure. Rewiring the power system had proved particularly onerous because the crew had experienced difficulty retracting one set of solar arrays, to enable a different set of arrays to begin tracking the Sun’s motion. Crew members had conducted four spacewalks to work on the exterior of the ISS.(NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power.”)
A team of researchers reported in the journal Science that images from NASA’s Cassini spacecraft revealed evidence of towering plumes of water vapor and ice particles erupting from the surface of Saturn’s moon Enceladus. Cassini had conducted three flybys of the moon in 2005. According to Carolyn C. Porco, leader of the Cassini Imaging Team at the Space Science Institute, Boulder, Colorado, the scientists surmised that Enceladus possessed water reservoirs under high pressure below its icy exterior. When the ice ruptured, the subsurface water shot out and froze into icy crystals. Porco stated that, if this assumption were correct, the discovery had “significantly broadened the diversity of solar system environments where we might possibly have conditions suitable for living organisms.” The Imaging Team reported that the discovery of water plumes on Enceladus was unique because the “pockets of liquid water may be no more
NASA announced the crew for International Space Station (ISS) Expedition 13, scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in March 2006. Russian cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov would command the mission, and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams would serve as Flight Engineer and NASA Science Officer. Expedition 13 would also include the first Brazilian astronaut to fly in space, Marcos Cesar Pontes, who would engage in scientific experiments aboard the ISS for approximately one week. Williams had flown aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-101 as Mission Specialist in May 2000, performing a spacewalk that lasted almost 7 hours. As Flight Engineer for the 1997 mission to the Russian Mir space station, Vinogradov had completed five spacewalks. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 13: American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Fyodor N. Yurchikhin.(NASA, “NASA Announces Next International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-002, 5 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06002_Expedition_13_crew.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 5 January 2006, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/060105_exp13_crew_announcement.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
Scientists announced that images from the Cassini spacecraft had revealed the presence of lakes on Saturn’s moon Titan, the first time that astronomers had located lakes anywhere other than Earth. Cassini, a joint mission of NASA and ESA, had captured the images during a 22 July flyby of a region of Titan called Xanadu. The pictures indicated that Titan might have topographic features similar to those found on Earth, such as hills, valleys, and rivers emptying into lakes. NASA scientists theorized that, because temperatures on Titan are approximately - 180oC (-292oF), the liquid in the lakes is likely either methane or a combination of ethane and methane. Scientists speculated that the lakes could be the source of the hydrocarbon smog found in Titan’s frigid and thick atmosphere. NASA and ESA had created Cassini to explore Saturn and its system of moons, and Titan’s atmosphere was one of the mission’s major research topics.(Caitlin A. Griffith, “Planetary Science: Titan’s Exotic Weather,” Nature (London) 362, no. 1 (27 July 2006): 362– 363, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v442/n7101/full/442362a.html (DOI 10.1038/442362a; accessed 15 March 2010); NASA, “Cassini Finds Lakes on Titan’s Arctic Region,” news release 06-274, 28 July 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jul/HQ_06274_cassini_lakes_itan_prt.htm (accessed 15 March 2010).)
Eileen M. Collins, who had joined the astronaut corps in 1990, announced her retirement from NASA. In February 1995, Collins had served as NASA’s first female Shuttle pilot on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-63, the first Shuttle mission to rendezvous with the Russian Mir space station. In May 1997, she had served as pilot on Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-84 flight to Mir, and in July 1999, she had become NASA’s first female Shuttle commander on Space Shuttle Columbia STS-93, which had launched the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. In July–August 2005, she had served as commander of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-114, the first Shuttle flight since the 2003 loss of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin described Collins as a “brave, superb pilot,” and NASA Flight Crew Operations Director Kenneth D. Bowersox called her a “gifted leader.”(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Eileen Collins Completes Career of Space Firsts,” news release 06-208, 1 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06208_Collins_retires.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s First Female Shuttle Commander Retires from Spaceflight,” Space.com, 1 May 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060501_collins_retirement.html (accessed 18 June 2010).)
During a 6-hour spacewalk, ISS crew members Jeffrey N. Williams and Thomas A. Reiter completed both scheduled tasks and additional assignments. The scheduled tasks included installation of a device to minimize hazards associated with electrical currents and replacement of a computer on the ISS’s S1 truss. In addition, the astronauts installed new samples of materials for the Materials on International Space Station Experiment (MISSE), an ongoing experiment studying how prolonged exposure to an outer space environment affects various materials. The additional tasks included the removal of a malfunctioning GPS antenna and the installation of a vacuum-system valve on the station’s Destiny laboratory, among other projects.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS06–036,” status report SS06-036, 3 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_SS06036_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
The crew of ISS Expedition 13 returned to Earth. Commander Pavel V. Vinogradov and Science Officer Jeffrey N. Williams landed in their Soyuz TMA-8 spacecraft near the Russian city of Arkalyk. Accompanying Vinogradov and Williams was spaceflight participant Anousheh Ansari, who had flown to the ISS with the crew of Expedition 14 on 18 September 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” status report SS06-042, 28 September 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/sep/HQ_SS06042_station_status.html (accessed 18 March 2010).)
NASA’s Discovery returned to Earth, landing at NASA’s KSC at 9:14 a.m. (EDT) to complete the 13-day Mission STS-121. During STS-121, the crew had tested the use of Discovery’s robotic arm boom extension as a work platform, performed repairs to the exterior of the ISS, delivered 14 tons (12.7 tonnes or 12,700 kilograms) of equipment and supplies to the orbiting space station, and transported ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter to the ISS. Reiter joined Russian Pavel V. Vinogradov and American Jeffrey N. Williams as an ISS crew member, marking the first time since May 2003 that the ISS had three crew members. Discovery crew had also tested improved safety procedures and equipment for the Shuttle. Furthermore, the flight had verified the safety of a significant aerodynamic modification to the Shuttle’s external fuel tank. More specifically, NASA had removed protuberance air load ramps from the external fuel tank, because a piece of foam had jettisoned from that area of the tank during Discovery’s launch for the Return to Flight Mission (STS-114) in 2005.(NASA, “NASA Welcomes Space Shuttle Crew Back to Earth,” news release 06-280, 17 July 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/sep/HQ_06321_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
Data from NASA’s HST revealed 16 objects, possibly the most distant planets ever observed by the HST. Scientists believed that the objects were extrasolar planets—planets located outside of Earth’s solar system—orbiting various stars in the Milky Way’s central region, 26,000 light- years away from Earth. Because of the distance and faintness of the objects’ star systems, scientists could acquire mass measurements for only two of the planets. Therefore, they designated the objects as “candidate” extrasolar planets. The HST data also revealed that five of the newly discovered planets were Ultra-Short-Period Planets (USPPs), a type of planet not found in searches of neighboring areas of the Milky Way. USPPs orbit their stars in less than one Earth day.(NASA, “Hubble Finds Extrasolar Planets Far Across Galaxy,” news release 06-326, 4 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06326_Extra_planets.html (accessed 31 March 2010).)
An international team of scientists led by Giacomo Giampieri of NASA’s JPL reported in Nature the results of their study measuring Saturn’s rotation period. Using magnetic field data collected by NASA’s Cassini spacecraft in 2003 and 2004, the researchers estimated that the rotation rate of Saturn is almost 8 minutes longer than the 10 hours, 39 minutes, and 22.4 seconds calculated in 1980. Scientists had based the 1980 measurement on the Voyager spacecraft’s observations of the radio waves generated when solar radiation hits Saturn’s atmosphere. Whereas scientists were able to measure the rotation period of other planets by comparing their magnetic and rotational axes, they could not use this procedure for Saturn, because its rotational axis is nearly identical to the axis of its magnetic field. Instead, scientists had measured distortions in the radio signals that Saturn emits—distortions that they believed were related to the planet’s magnetic field—to estimate the planet’s rotation rate. According to Giampieri, a planet’s rotation rate indicates the amount of centrifugal force acting on the interior of the planet, data that provides “a very important ingredient for planetary modeling.”(Giacomo Giampieri et al., “A Regular Period for Saturn’s Magnetic Field that May Track its Internal Rotation,” Nature 441, no. 7089 (4 May 2006): 62–64; Ker Than, “Length of Saturn’s Day Updated Based on Mystery Signal,” Space.com, 3 May 2006.)
NASA announced the appointment of two new Flight Directors, Ron Spencer and Heather Rarick, who would direct human spaceflights from Mission Control at NASA’s JSC. The appointments increased to 28 the number of active Space Shuttle and ISS flight directors, including those in training. From 1990 to 1994, Spencer had worked as a contractor at JSC, during which time he had developed the space station assembly sequence for the Space Station Program Office. In 1994 he had become a NASA civil servant, and, beginning in 1997, he had worked in Mission Control as a Shuttle flight dynamics officer. Rarick had also worked as a contractor for NASA in various capacities until 2001, including working as the operations lead and Russian interface officer in the International Liaison Office of Mission Control. She had become a NASA employee in 2001, continuing her previous assignment, as well as assuming the technical lead for the Russian interface officers. In 2003 NASA had named Rarick chairperson of the Russian Joint Operations Panel, which would address long-term resolution of U.S.-Russian operational issues. NASA Flight Director Office Chief Phil Engelauf praised Spencer and Rarick as “possessing the leadership skills necessary to ensure NASA accomplishes the near-term exploration goals of completing the space station, safely flying the shuttle through retirement and returning to the moon.”(NASA, Johnson Space Center, “Two New Flight Directors Chosen To Lead NASA’s Mission Control,” news release J06-069, 14 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2006/J06-069.html (accessed 11 August 2010).)
A privately funded experimental spacecraft called Genesis I launched from Russia’s Ural Mountains at 12:53 (UT). The launch was the first for Bigelow Aerospace, a United States–based company founded by American Robert T. Bigelow. The company had designed Genesis I as an inflatable spacecraft. Bigelow Aerospace planned to launch similar spacecraft and to connect them to Genesis I to form an expandable space station. The company reportedly planned to use the completed structure as a hotel, scientific laboratory, or sports arena, providing services for a commercial spaceflight business.(Alicia Chang, “Private Spacecraft Takes Off,” Houston Chronicle, 13 July 2006.)
During a spacewalk of 6 hours and 31 minutes, which lasted longer than scheduled, ISS crew members Pavel V. Vinogradov and Jeffrey N. Williams performed several tasks to repair, retrieve, and replace hardware on the U.S. and Russian segments of the space complex. Vinogradov replaced the clogged nozzle of a valve that helped vent hydrogen into space from the Elektron oxygen-generator in the Zvezda service module. Vinogradov and Williams replaced a faulty video camera on the ISS’s Mobile Base System, which rests upon a rail car that moves up and down the station’s truss, to position the robotic arm for assembly work. The two crew members also photographed navigation antennas on the aft side of the service module that the European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) would use in the future for unpiloted docking.(Tariq Malik, “Extended EVA: Astronauts Make ISS Repairs in Long Spacewalk,” Space.com, 2 June 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060602_exp13_eval.html (accessed 13 August 2010); NASA, “International Space Station Status Report no. SS06-026,” 2 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_ SSO6026_station_stauts.html (accessed 15 April 2010).)
Scientists led by University of Iowa professor Donald A. Gurnett, Principal Investigator for the Radio and Plasma Wave Science Investigation, announced that, since 23 January 2006, the team had been using instruments aboard NASA’s Cassini spacecraft to track a lightning storm on Saturn. Cassini had detected radio emissions from the lightning but, at first, had been unable to image the storm because of the storm’s position on the night side of the planet. Amateur astronomers had succeeded in capturing the first images of the storm, and Cassini had acquired subsequent images. Gurnett described the storm as larger than the continental United States, with lightning bolts over 1,000 times the strength of conventional lightning, the strongest lightening that his team had observed since Cassini entered Saturn’s orbit in 2006.(University of Iowa News Services, “UI Researchers, Colleagues Find Giant Lightning Storm at Saturn,” news release, 14 February 2006, http://news- releases.uiowa.edu/2006/February/ releases.uiowa.edu/2006/february/ 021406saturn_lightning.html, (accessed 13 August 2010).)
NASA announced that its Cassini spacecraft had captured the first images ever taken of a hurricane-like storm on another planet. The images revealed a storm on Saturn with an eye ringed by towering clouds, winds blowing at a speed around 550 kilometers per hour (350 miles per hour), and a width of nearly 8,000 kilometers (5,000 miles)—nearly two thirds of the diameter of Earth. Despite its hurricane-like appearance, scientists did not classify the storm as a hurricane, because hurricanes on Earth form over water and drift around Earth’s surface. The storm on Saturn remained at the planet’s south pole and could not have formed over water, since Saturn is primarily composed of gases. Cassini had obtained the photographs over a 3-hour period on 11 October 2006.(Will Dunham, “An Eye on Saturn Drawing the Focus of Astrophysicists,” Houston Chronicle, 12 November 2006; NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA Sees into the Eye of a Monster Storm on Saturn,” 9 November 2006, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/newsreleases/newsrelease20061109/ (accessed 21 April 2010).)
Researchers announced at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) that, using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had been able for the first time to observe directly the close companion star to Polaris (the North Star). The newly observed star, one of two in the near vicinity of Polaris, is approximately 3.2 billion kilometers (2 billion miles) from Polaris and hundreds of times fainter. Polaris is Earth’s nearest example of a Cepheid variable star. Scientists use the variations in the brightness of Cepheid stars to judge the distances of galaxies and the expansion rate of the universe. Imaging its companion star had enabled scientists to estimate Polaris’s mass at 4.3 times that of the Sun, but future measurements of the companion star’s motion during its 30-year orbit would enable scientists to make a more accurate determination of Polaris’s mass. Knowledge of mass size is critical to understanding the composition and evolution of Cepheids.(NASA, “There’s More to the North Star Than Meets the Eye,” news release 06-004, 9 January 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/ja/HQ_06004_hubble.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Maggie McKee, “Hubble Reveals Pole Star’s Closest Companion,” New Scientist, 10 January 2006.)
NASA and the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos announced the crew members for Expedition 15, the next expedition to the ISS: American astronauts Clayton C. Anderson and Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonauts Oleg V. Kotov and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The ISS partners had scheduled Kotov and Yurchikhin to fly to the ISS in March 2007; Anderson would travel to the ISS in June 2007, and Tani would go in August 2007. Yurchikhin would command Expedition 15, and the remaining three crew members would serve as flight engineers.(NASA, “NASA Announced New International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-337, 18 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06337_new_station_crew.html (accessed 20 April 2010).)
structures would double the ISS’s electrical power to an estimated total power of 75 to 110 kilowatts. The ISS’s international partners intended for the additional power to support European, Japanese, Russian, and U.S. laboratory modules and to enable the ISS’s life-support system to support up to six astronauts.(Mark Carreau, “NASA Unfurls Set of Solar Panels To Power Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 15 September 2006; NASA, “STS-115.”)
The heads of space agencies from Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at the ESA headquarters in Paris to review International Space Station (ISS) cooperation. The ISS partners discussed the significant accomplishments and milestones in implementing the ISS’s configuration and assembly sequence, as endorsed at the previous meeting of the partners in March 2006. Milestones for the ISS included reestablishing a three-person crew, reinitiating station-assembly activities, and completing three extremely challenging Space Shuttle missions, which included the extravehicular accomplishments of American, Canadian, European, and Russian astronauts.(NASA, “Heads of Agency International Space Station Joint Statement,” news release 07-013, 23 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07013_HOA_Joint_Statement.html (accessed 14 October 2009). 11 Edward Cody, “China Confirms Firing Missile To Destroy Satellite,” Washington Post, 24 January 2007; Jason Dean, “China Verifies Antisatellite-Missile Test,” Wall Street Journal, 24 January 2007.)
it with wire ties, leaving 6 inches (15 centimeters) of clearance, a distance adequate for undocking. Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin also photographed a Russian satellite navigation antenna, changed out a Russian materials experiment, photographed a German robotics experiment, and inspected and photographed an antenna and the docking targets for the European cargo craft, the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV). The ATV, designed with greater capacity than the Russian Progress craft, had not yet made its first trip to the ISS.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-10,” 22 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0710_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson conducted a fourth unscheduled spacewalk outside the ISS, to wrap up incomplete tasks. During the spacewalk, which lasted 6 hours and 29 minutes, Forrester and Swanson completed their primary task of activating the SARJ, a rotating joint on the ISS’s new power module; installed a new camera stanchion on the S3 Truss; and linked a computer-network cable between the U.S. and Russian sides of the stations. The two astronauts were unable to bolt down the debris shields that Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov had installed on the Zvezda module during the spacewalk on 6 June. Instead, they opted to tether the two panels in place.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Astronauts Complete 4th Spacewalk,” 18 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Finish Power Upgrades to Station,” Houston Chronicle, 18 June 2007.)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
107U. S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA’s Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs: Status and Issues, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 24 July 2007, 14, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE% 2FCommittee+on+Science+and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg36737&packageId=CHRG- 110hhrg36737&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Subcommittee Examines Challenges Facing Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs,” press release, 24 July 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle. aspx?NewsID=1928 (accessed 29 October 2010); Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Future in Doubt,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 26 July 2007.
for a new module scheduled to arrive later in the year. ISS Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineers Oleg V. Kotov and Clayton C. Anderson worked from inside the space station to move the Pressurized Mating Adapter-3 (PMA-3) from its port-side perch on NASA’s Unity module to a berth facing Earth. The crew had delayed the relocation process by approximately 1 hour, because three of the sixteen bolts securing the PMA had returned intermittent fault messages. However, Mission Control determined that the error messages would not affect the relocation or the installation of the Harmony node later in the year. Kotov assisted Anderson in operating the ISS’s robotic arm, while Yurchkhin oversaw the bolt-latching systems, alternately freeing and securing the module during its relocation. PMA-3 detached from Unity at 8:23 a.m. (EDT) and, at 9:07 a.m. (EDT), the crew successfully reattached the port to its new berth. NASA’s lead Expedition 15 Flight Director Robert C. Dempsey acknowledged the cooperation between the Russian and American crew members. Dempsey remarked that Expedition 15’s crew was one of the first truly integrated crews that he had seen, noting that the mission marked the first time that Russian cosmonauts had operated NASA-controlled components, such as the Canadian-built robotic arm.(Tariq Malik, “Space Station Crew Clears Port for New Module,” Space.com, 30 August 2007, http://www.space. com/missionlaunches/070830_exp15_pma3move.html (accessed 30 June 2010).)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) released images of “an odd, six-sided, honeycomb- shaped feature circling the entire north pole of Saturn.” NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had collected the images in thermal-infrared light during a 12-day period beginning on 30 October 2006. NASA’s Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft had also collected images of the hexagon-shaped feature more than 20 years before, indicating the long-lived nature of the feature. The Cassini images also revealed that the hexagon, which is 25,000 kilometers (15,000 miles) across, extends approximately 100 kilometers (60 miles) into the atmosphere, much deeper than previously thought. Kevin H. Baines, an atmospheric expert and member of Cassini’s visual and infrared mapping spectrometer team at NASA’s JPL, remarked that scientists had never seen a feature like the hexagon on any other planet. Because of its thick atmosphere, where circularly shaped waves and convective cells dominate, Saturn was the last place scientists had expected to see such a feature.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), “Cassini Images Bizarre Hexagon on Saturn,” news release 2007-034, 27 March 2007, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-034 (accessed 1 February 2010).)
“Alvin” Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffe’s backup during NASA’s teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavour’s payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavour’s 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavour’s time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavour’s heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, “STS-118: Endeavour,” NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, “Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter,” NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, “Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off,” New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko undertook a spacewalk to prepare the space station for the relocation of the Harmony module, a pressurized compartment designed to serve as a docking port for European and Japanese laboratories. NASA had scheduled the Discovery astronauts to conduct this spacewalk as the fifth and final EVA of their mission to the ISS. However, the discovery and repair of tears in a critical solar-power module had taken precedence. During this EVA, Whitson and Malenchenko cleared cables from Harmony’s destined location and disconnected electrical and fluid connections. Mission STS- 120 had delivered the module to the ISS in October, and the crew had installed Harmony at a temporary location. Completion of Harmony’s transfer would require three spacewalks and extensive robotic work. Astronauts living aboard the ISS would need to reposition the module before NASA launched its next Shuttle mission, scheduled for early December 2010. That mission would carry Europe’s laboratory Columbus to the ISS.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk at Station,” 9 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Tackles Next Phase of Remodeling,” Houston Chronicle, 10 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010).)
NASA announced that it had signed a US$46 million fixed-price basic contract with S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation (RSC Energia) to provide various hardware items and to integrate them into the structure of the ISS. The contract included the purchase of a spare depress air pump, enabling air conservation when the crew exited the Quest airlock for spacewalks; technical and engineering support for the mechanism enabling Shuttles to dock with the station; software updates for the ISS’s inventory-management system; certification of additional computer hardware for use on the station; and a Russian-designed toilet system that would automatically transfer urine to a U.S. device that generated potable water. Adding the toilet system to the structure was necessary to enable the ISS partners to increase the station crew from three to six members in 2009.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Space Station Hardware,” news release C07-028, 3 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_C07028_station_hardware.html (accessed 11 June 2010).)
spend approximately six months aboard the space station.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russia’s Federal Space Agency,” contract release C07-18, 9 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C07-18_Roscosmos.html (accessed 2 March 2010); Rob Coppinger, “NASA Signs Five-Year $719 Million International Space Station Crew and Cargo Contract with Russia’s Federal Space Agency,” Flight International, 10 April 2007.)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used data from NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to create the first three-dimensional map of the distribution of dark matter in the universe, an undertaking fundamental to understanding how galaxies have grown and clustered over billions of years. The research team had focused HST’s camera on an area of the sky 2° wide during 600 HST orbits, the largest investment of viewing time for a single project since the telescope had launched in 1990. Astronomers had measured the shapes of half a million faraway galaxies, constructing a map of dark matter that “stretches halfway back to the beginning of the universe and shows how dark matter has grown increasingly ‘clumpy’ as it collapses under gravity.” The map provided the best evidence to date that normal matter, such as that composing galaxies, collects along the densest concentration of dark matter, thereby revealing a loose network of filaments that intersect in massive structures at the locations of clusters of galaxies. One of the researchers, Richard Massey of the California Institute of Technology, described the dark matter as “scaffolding,” stating that the stars and galaxies had assembled themselves inside of the scaffolding.(NASA, “Hubble Maps the Cosmic Web of ‘Clumpy’ Dark Matter in 3-D,” news release 07-02, 7 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07002_Hubble_Dark_Matter.html (accessed 7 January 2007); Richard Massey et al., “Dark Matter Maps Reveal Cosmic Scaffolding,” Nature 445 (18 January 2007): 286–290, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v445/n7125/full/nature05497.html (DOI 10.1038/nature05497; accessed 4 March 2010); John Johnson Jr., “Dark Matter Is Mapped Unseen,” Los Angeles Times, 8 January 2007.)
Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the second EVA of STS-120, disconnecting cables from the P6 truss, to remove the P6 truss from the Z1 truss. Tani and Parazynski made progress outfitting the new Harmony module, mating the power and data grapple fixture, and reconfiguring connectors on the S1 truss, in preparation for the later deployment of the radiator on S1. Tani also inspected the SARJ, collecting fine metal shavings on part of a wheel with solar panels attached to it. The discovery of the metal shavings enabled engineers to identify the source of friction that had caused the wheel to begin slowing down in September. Engineers had designed the wheel to spin freely so that the solar panels pointed toward the Sun; the panels generated electricity to operate the ISS’s computers, oxygen- producing machine, and other systems. Tani reported that, in addition to collecting the metal shavings, he had observed that parts of the wheel’s surface appeared discolored, a possible sign of corrosion. To prevent further damage to the wheel, engineers stopped it from spinning, thereby reducing the amount of electricity that the panels generated. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 33 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120”; Traci Watson, “Damaged Component Could Thwart Space Station Plans,” USA Today, 29 October 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronauts Discover Damage to Space Station,” 29 October 2007.)
NASA announced the successful activation and operation of its new oxygen-generation system, which it had tested aboard the ISS between 11 and 14 July. Space Shuttle Discovery had delivered the 1,800-pound (816.5-kilogram) component during Mission STS-121 in July 2006, and the crew had installed it in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory. Since the new system’s installation, the crew had added several pieces of hardware and software to the ISS to support its operation. The crew had installed the last required part, a hydrogen-vent valve, during a spacewalk on Space Shuttle Atlantis’s Mission STS-117 in June 2007. Software updates to U.S. computers earlier in July had completed preparations for the system’s activation and operation. The new system, which would augment the Russian Elektron oxygen generator, would allow the increase of the ISS crew in 2009. NASA had designed the system to generate approximately 12 pounds (5.4 kilograms) of oxygen per day, enough for six people, but it was capable of providing as much as 20 pounds (9 kilograms), enough for 11 people. During the test, the system had generated approximately 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) of oxygen.(NASA, “New NASA System Will Help Space Station Crews Breathe Easier,” news release 07-159, 17 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07157_station_oxygen.html (accessed 11 June 2010).)
Two U.S. astronauts, Mission Specialists John D. Olivas and James F. Reilly II, conducted the first extravehicular activity (EVA) of STS-117. During the 6-hour-and-15-minute spacewalk at the ISS, the astronauts made power, data, and cooling connections on a new 16-tonne (17.6-ton or 16,000-kilogram) truss segment containing solar arrays. One of STS-117’s objectives was to deliver the new US$367 million solar-power module to the ISS. The ISS partners intended for the arrays to increase the ISS’s power generation substantially and to serve future European and Japanese science modules. Mission managers decided to extend STS-117 two days, in case the crew needed to repair the fabric heat shield on the orbiter’s left tail section. Managers feared that Atlantis’s tail section had sustained damaged shortly after launch.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “US Atlantis Astronauts Step Out on Space Walk,” 12 June 2007; Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array Being Unfurled on Space Station,” 13 June 2007.)
to connect, forming a space station. According to Bigelow Aerospace’s spokesperson Chris Reed, data indicated that Genesis 2 had adequate air pressure and its power system had good voltage; however, data did not officially confirm the deployment of its solar panels or the expansion of its outer shell. Genesis 2 was a near duplicate of Genesis 1, which had launched in July 2006 and remained operational. Genesis 2 carried a new suite of sensors and avionics to monitor and control the craft while in orbit, as well as 22 cameras, compared to the 13 aboard Genesis 1. Genesis 2 also carried a multi-tank system to inflate the module with compressed air, an improvement over Genesis 1 that added vital redundancy in the inflation process and allowed better control of the craft’s gas supplies.
NASA announced that it had signed Commercial Space Transportation Capabilities Agreements with PlanetSpace, of Chicago and Transformational Space Corporation in Reston, Virginia, to facilitate the commercialization of low Earth orbit. According to these nonreimbursable Space Act agreements, NASA would provide no funding to either company. Instead, the agreements established milestones and objective criteria that the companies would use to measure progress. The agreements stipulated that NASA share information with the two companies, to help them understand NASA’s projected requirements for space station crew, transportation launch vehicles, and spacecraft, as well as NASA’s human-rating criteria, which indicates how safe a spacecraft, launch vehicle, or airplane is for transporting people. Each company would develop and demonstrate vehicles, systems, and operations required to transport crews and cargo to and from low Earth orbit. Scott J. Horowitz, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems, explained that stimulating the growth of commercial space enterprise would enable NASA to focus on long-range exploration of the Moon and Mars.(NASA, “Commercial Space Transportation Capabilities Agreements Signed,” news release 07-20, 1 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0720_COTS_agreements.html (accessed 13 January 2010); PlanetSpace, “NASA Signs Agreement with PlanetSpace for Development of Commercial Space Transportation Capabilities,” news release, 1 February 2007, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/PressRelease020107.pdf (accessed 13 January 2010).)
of the ISS in preparation for the expansion of the space station.(Patrick Peterson, “Docking Port Relocated, Attached to Harmony,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010). 167 Xinhua News Agency, “Russia, India To Develop Advanced Military Aircraft, 13 November 2007; Agence France-Presse, “Russia, India To Join in Moon Mission,” 12 November 2007.)
left side of the truss.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-231, 23 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07231_STS-120_launch.html (accessed 8 September 2010). 156 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648; Audra Ang for Associated Press, “China Successfully Launches Lunar Probe,” 24 October 2007.)
Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Oleg V. Kotov restored two of the three data channels on each of the two computers that had failed on 12 June during the deployment of the solar arrays on the ISS’s new power module. Russian engineers had determined that backup- power supplies for the computers had also failed. While Yurchikhin and Kotov worked on restoring the computers, U.S. astronauts James F. Reilly II and John D. Olivas conducted the third scheduled EVA of the Atlantis Mission STS-117. During a spacewalk lasting 7 hours and 58 minutes, Reilly installed a hydrogen vent on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory, and Olivas repaired a 4-by-6-inch (10.2-by-15.2-centimeter) piece of thermal blanket on Atlantis’s left orbital- maneuvering-system pod. The thermal blanket had loosened during launch. Together, Olivas and Reilly also finished retracting the old solar panels.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Cosmonauts Reboot Space Station Computers,” Los Angeles Times, 16 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete To-Do List on Shuttle, Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 16 June 2007.)
Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski and Douglas H. Wheelock embarked on the first EVA of STS-120. The astronauts installed the Harmony module in a temporary location; prepared the P6 truss for relocation, a task that NASA had scheduled for the second EVA; retrieved a failed radio-communications antenna; and secured one of Harmony’s window covers, which had opened during launch. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 14 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120 (23rd Space Station Flight) Discovery,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/216375main_ STS-120.pdf (accessed 29 September 2010).)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Mikhail V. Tyurin undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS lasting 6 hours and 18 minutes. In undertaking his 10th spacewalk, Lopez-Alegria set another U.S. record, surpassing Jerry L. Ross’s nine spacewalks. Although Tyurin initially encountered problems with his spacesuit’s cooling system, causing his visor to fog up, he and Lopez-Alegria accomplished several tasks, including repairing an antenna. The antenna had failed to retract on 26 October 2006, when a Russian Progress vehicle docked at the ISS’s Zvezda service module. To ensure the antenna would not interfere with the undocking of the craft in April, Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin partially retracted the stuck antenna and secured
NASA submitted to the U.S. Congress a report that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005 (Pub. L. No. 109-155) had mandated, “NASA Report to Congress Regarding a Plan for the International Space Station National Laboratory.” The Act required NASA to designate the U.S. portion of the ISS as a “national laboratory” and to make it available to public and private entities for basic and applied research not applicable to NASA’s mission. In the report, NASA affirmed its support of the concept and summarized steps taken during 2006 to make the ISS national laboratory a reality. NASA reported that a number of organizations had expressed interest in using the ISS for research in the fields of education, human health, and defense sciences. The report highlighted the project’s scheduled milestones, identified its constraints, explained NASA’s strategy and tactical initiatives for achieving the goal, and offered NASA’s preliminary findings on the project’s feasibility. After outlining progress to date, NASA described the preliminary operations plan. According to this plan, NASA would first address workforce needs and the requisite ground-based assets and management structures. NASA’s report concluded that, based on the demonstrated interest of parties outside of NASA, the odds of successfully realizing the goal set forth by Congress appeared promising. However, the report also noted that, because of the challenge of completing the ISS by 2010 and the need to demonstrate the capabilities of next-generation, commercial space-transportation services by the end of 2010, the financial risk to non-NASA entities remained high.(NASA, “NASA Report to Congress Regarding a Plan for the International Space Station National Laboratory” (NASA technical report no. PB2008-1005533, Washington, DC, May 2007), http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/ casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20090010198_2008045339.pdf (accessed 24 May 2010); Jeff M. Bingham, “The Significance of NASA’s ISS National Laboratory Report,” NASASpaceflight.com, 4 June 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/ 2007/06/the-significance-of-nasas-iss-national-laboratory-report/ (accessed 20 June 2010).)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted their second spacewalk in four days, to finish connecting cooling lines to a permanent system of the ISS. Working for just over 7 hours, the astronauts rerouted a series of two electrical cables and four quick-disconnect fluid lines to the Destiny laboratory’s permanent cooling system; retracted the aft heat-rejecting radiator on the P6 Truss; and finished disconnecting and stowing the second of two fluid lines for the Early Ammonia Servicer. Lopez- Alegria photographed the starboard solar array and the blanket box into which it folds, so that engineers could analyze the photos and finalize plans for its retraction during the Shuttle Mission STS-117, scheduled for March 2007. He also removed a sunshade that the crew no longer needed from a data-relay box, folding the sunshade to bring it inside the ISS, so that the crew could dispose of it later. At the conclusion of the spacewalk, Williams and Lopez-Alegria again followed precautionary decontamination procedures in the ISS’s airlock, as they had on 31 January, because they had seen ammonia flakes early in the spacewalk. Williams set a record for spacewalking time accrued by a woman—22 hours and 37 minutes—surpassing the record that NASA astronaut Kathryn C. Thornton had set in 1993.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06”; Marc Carreau, “Spacewalkers Finish Job; Astronauts Sets Record,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2007.)
The ISS Expedition 15 crew completed their second spacewalk in eight days. During the 5-hour- and-37-minute spacewalk, Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov performed a number of tasks. They installed on the Pirs module sample containers for a Russian experiment on the effect of space on microorganisms and placed a section of Ethernet cable on the exterior of the Zarya module. The installation of the cable completed a remote computer network, enabling the crew to command the Russian segment of the ISS from the U.S. segment. Furthermore, Yurchikhin and Kotov successfully completed their primary task, installing 12 debris-shield panels on the conical section of the Zvezda module. During the previous week, the crew had installed five panels, and in 2002 the ISS crew had installed six others, to provide the module with better protection from micrometeoroid-debris strikes. During the spacewalk, Yurchikhin and Kotov found a dent or hole from a meteorite, measuring approximately 5−6 millimeters (approximately 0.2 inches), in an outer pumping component on the Zarya module. This damage was the first of its type ever found on a module of the ISS. In addition, with the completion of the spacewalk, both cosmonauts had logged 11 hours and 2 minutes of experience in Russia’s new Orlan spacesuits.(Agence France-Presse, “International Space Station Holed by Meteorite,” 7 June 2007; Spaceflight Now, “Cosmonauts Begin Another Station Spacewalk,” 7 June 2007.)
ISS Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and ISS Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov undertook a 5.5- hour spacewalk to install protective panels designed to shield the space station from dangerous space debris. The IISTF had issued a report in February 2007 finding that the impact from space debris was the top threat to the future of the ISS and to the safety of its inhabitants. Yurchikhin and Kotov installed 5of 17 panels on a Russian section of the ISS, a section that had been among the first components launched and was not as heavily protected as the later U.S. modules. Each panel measured approximately 2 feet by 3 feet (0.6 meters by 0.9 meters) and 5 inches thick (12.7 centimeters thick) and weighed approximately 20 pounds (9 kilograms). The cosmonauts also successfully rerouted a cable for a navigation antenna that the crew would use later in the year at the scheduled arrival of the first new European cargo vehicle.(Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Protective Shielding,” 31 May 2007; Mark Carreau, “Cosmonauts Install Protective Panels on Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2007; International Space Station Independent Safety Task Force, “Final Report” (NASA, Washington, DC, February 2007), 17, http://www. nasa.gov/pdf/170368main_IIST_%20Final%20Report.pdf (accessed 29 January 2010).)
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson undertook a 7-hour-and-16-minute spacewalk to assist with the retraction of a 115-foot-long (35-meter-long) solar panel that crew had installed on the ISS seven years before. The retraction was essential to the successful activation of the new solar power module because the old solar array was preventing the pair of arrays on the new module from rotating as they tracked the Sun. Shuttle Commander Frederick W. Sturckow and the ISS crew attempted to initiate the retraction using remote commands, but the panel failed to fold correctly. During the spacewalk, Forrester and Swanson rode on the tip of the ISS’s robotic arm to the top of the space station, carrying tools that enabled them to smooth the array folds and to straighten obstructing wire guides. Although, after 2 hours, the panel had only retracted partially, Forrester and Swanson returned to the new power module to work on the 2,500-pound (1,134-kilogram) solar alpha rotary joint (SARJ). The astronauts planned to resume their efforts to retract the panel the following day. Because another Shuttle crew had encountered difficulties retracting an array in December 2006, Forrester and Swanson had trained extensively before their mission, learning to address problems with the solar-array retraction.(John Johnson Jr., “Spacewalkers Face Workaday Glitches,” Los Angeles Times, 14 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Solar Panel Keeps Shuttle Spacewalkers Busy,” Houston Chronicle, 14 June 2007; Robyn Shelton, “Astronauts Tame Stubborn Solar Array,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 14 June 2007.)
NASA announced that Richard J. Gilbrech would be resigning his position as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems to accept a position in the private sector. During his 17 years of service with NASA, Gilbrech had held positions as Director of NASA’s SSC and as Deputy Center Director of NASA’s LaRC. Effective 24 November 2008, Douglas R. Cooke would replace Gilbrech. Cooke was serving as Deputy Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems. In his 35 years with NASA, Cooke had served as Manager for the Advanced Development Office at NASA’s JSC, Manager of the Exploration Programs Office, and Deputy Manager of the Space Station Program. He had served as a technical advisor to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, a member of the team that conducted the 90-day study on lunar and Mars exploration, and a member of the Synthesis Group, which had reported to the White House on America’s space exploration initiative.(NASA, “NASA Announces Exploration Systems Directorate Leadership Changes,” news release 08-286, 12 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-286_ESMD_leadership.html (accessed 12 November 2011).)
A team of scientists, led by Geraint H. Jones of the Millard Space Science Laboratory in London, announced in the journal Science that NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had gathered evidence of the presence of rings around Saturn’s moon Rhea. Cassini had flown close to Rhea in November 2005. Using a set of six instruments to take samples and measurements of Rhea’s atmosphere, Cassini had detected a decrease in the number of electrons on either side of the moon. The team believed that a ring of debris orbiting Rhea had absorbed the electrons—the first time scientists had detected the presence of a ring of debris around a moon. The researchers estimated that the particles comprising the ring ranged in size from pebbles to boulders. NASA’s JPL was managing the Cassini project, a joint mission of NASA, ESA, and the Italian space agency (Agenzia Spaziale Italiana—ASI).(NASA, “Saturn’s Moon Rhea Also May Have Rings,” news release 08-074, 6 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08074_Rings_Around_Rhea.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Associated Press, “Saturn Moon Rhea May Have Rings,” 7 March 2008; G. H. Jones et al., “The Dust Halo of Saturn’s Largest Icy Moon, Rhea,” Science 319, no. 5868 (7 March 2008): 1380−1384.)
NASA’s Cassini spacecraft flew by Saturn’s moon Enceladus, photographing the ice jets that spew from gorges at the Enceladus’s south pole and taking measurements of them. The craft passed within 30 miles (48.28 kilometers) of the moon’s surface, traveling at 64,000 miles per hour (102,998.02 kilometers per hour), while snapping the highest-resolution images ever taken of the ice jets. The photographs revealed the features of the gorges known as “tiger stripes,” which are approximately 980 feet (298.70 meters) deep. Tiger stripes have V-shaped sides that are strewn with large chunks of ice and dusted with a fine material, apparently composed of snow-like ice particles. Scientists were interested in studying Enceladus’s ice jets because of the possibility that they might indicate the presence of liquid water beneath the moon’s surface.(Space.com, “Cassini Spots Icy Jet Sources on Saturn Moon,” 15 August 2008, http://www.space.com/5738- cassini-spots-icy-jet-sources-saturn-moon.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Kenneth Chang, “NASA Has Its Closest Look at Geysers on Saturn Moon,” New York Times, 16 August 2008.)
A team of scientists led by Robert H. Brown of the University of Arizona, Tucson, announced in the journal Nature that NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had gathered evidence that Saturn’s moon Titan has at least one lake of liquid hydrocarbons. The discovery made Titan the only known celestial body, besides Earth, to have liquid on its surface. Data from previous fly-bys had shown that Titan has several features that appear to be lakes, but scientists had been unsure whether these bodies contained liquid or solid material. Then, in a December 2007 fly-by, Cassini had used its visual and infrared mapping spectrometer (VIMS) to gather data on a lake in the southern polar region named Ontario Lacus. The lake covers an area of 7,800 square miles (20,201.91 square kilometers) and is composed of a liquid ethane solution, along with methane, other hydrocarbons, and nitrogen. At the surface temperature of Titan, which is -300°F (- 184.44°C), these compounds exist both as liquid and as gas. Cassini’s data showed that the lake had experienced some evaporation at summer temperatures. Titan has a methane-based hydrological cycle; therefore, the scientists believed that a precipitation of liquid methane fills Ontario Lacus.(Jeanna Bryner, “Giant Lake Confirmed on Saturn’s Moon Titan,” Space.com, 31 July 2008, http://www.space. com/5673-giant-lake-confirmed-saturn-moon-titan.html (accessed 18 May 2011); NASA, “NASA Confirms Liquid Lake in Saturn Moon,” new release 08-193, 30 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08_193_ Titan_lake.html (accessed 18 May 2011); see also R. H. Brown et al., “The Identification of Liquid Ethane in Titan’s Ontario Lacus,” Nature 454, no. 7204 (31 July 2008): 607−610.)
NASA announced that it had extended the U.S. On-Orbit Segment Acceptance and Vehicle Sustaining Engineering contract awarded to the Boeing Company through 30 September 2010. Originally granted in January 1995, the contract provided engineering support for the ISS. The contractor would complete delivery and on-orbit acceptance of the American section of the ISS, provide end-to-end subsystem management for the majority of the ISS’s systems, support American hardware and software provided to international participants in the ISS program, and sustain engineering of the ISS’s hardware and software. The contractor would work at NASA’s JSC, KSC, and MSFC. The contract was valued at US$350 million.(NASA, “NASA Extend International Space Station Contract,” news release C08-059, 1 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-059_ISS_Contract.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
At the Royal Astronomical Society’s National Astronomy Meeting, a team of researchers led by Peter T. Gallagher of Trinity College, Dublin, announced that they had produced new, corrected estimates of the speed at which solar tsunamis move. Solar tsunamis, first photographed by NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft in the 1990’s, are huge pressure waves that roll through the Sun’s gaseous atmosphere. Although the scientific community had previously estimated the speed of solar tsunamis based upon the SOHO photographs, these estimates had not correlated with the waves’ estimated intensity—an intensity equivalent to the release, in a fraction of a second, of 2 billion times the world’s annual energy consumption. To correct the estimates, Gallagher’s team had analyzed photographs that NASA’s Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO) spacecraft had captured on 19 May 2007. Because STEREO had captured more images per day than SOHO had, the researchers had been able to calculate the speed of solar tsunamis at over 1 million kilometers per hour (over 621,371.19 miles per hour), much faster than scientists had previously thought. Additionally, the researchers had used STEREO’s Extreme Ultraviolet Imager instruments to show that the solar tsunamis had moved through dense layers of the atmosphere just as quickly as through less dense layers. Solar tsunamis are associated with the appearance of coronal mass ejections (CMEs), which are massive explosions of gas and magnetic fields near the Sun’s atmosphere. Astronomers believed that monitoring solar tsunamis could help to predict CMEs.(Andrea Thompson, “Solar Tsunamis Move at Astronomical Speeds,” Space.com, 1 April 2008, http://www.space. com/5198-solar-tsunamis-move-astronomical-speeds.html (accessed 3 March 2011).)
A team of researchers led by Ralph D. Lorenz of Johns Hopkins University’s APL announced in the journal Science that NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had discovered evidence of an underground ocean composed of water and ammonia on Saturn’s moon Titan. During 19 flybys made between October 2005 and May 2007, Cassini’s SAR had gathered images of the moon’s surface that showed that distinct features on Titan’s surface, such as lakes, canyons, and mountains, had shifted location over time by as much as 19 miles (31 kilometers). The scientists believed that this shifting had occurred because winds in Titan’s heavy atmosphere had moved the moon’s thin surface crust, which was separated from the moon’s core by an ocean, measuring 60−120 miles (97−193 kilometers) deep. Scientists had previously discovered evidence of underground oceans on other moons in Earth’s solar system. However, the researchers were particularly interested to discover the presence of liquid water on Titan, because that moon has many of the same organic compounds as Earth.(NASA, “Cassini Spacecraft Finds Ocean May Exist Beneath Titan’s Crust,” news release 08-085, 20 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08085_cassini_ocean.html (accessed 2 February 2011); Charles Q. Choi, “Evidence for Ocean Found at Saturn’s Moon Titan,” Space.com, 20 March 2008, http://www.space.com/ 5151-evidence-ocean-saturn-moon-titan.html (accessed 3 February 2011); Ralph D. Lorenz et al., “Titan’s Rotation Reveals an Internal Ocean and Changing Zonal Winds,” Science 319, no. 5870 (21 March 2008): 1649−1651.)
NASA scientists released data that the Cassini spacecraft had collected on 12 March 2008, when it swooped through a geyser of water vapor erupting from the surface of Saturn’s moon Enceladus. The data revealed that the water vapor contained acetylene, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, methane, and propane. The organic material composing Enceladus closely resembled that of a comet, a discovery that surprised scientists and raised questions regarding the formation and origin of Saturn’s moons. Cassini had also generated new heat maps, which showed significantly warmer temperatures on Enceladus than anticipated, particularly along the moon’s “tiger stripes”—the deep fissures at its south pole. Temperatures along the fissures had registered at -135°F (-93°C), which was 63°F (17°C) warmer than previously recorded temperatures in that area and 200°F (93°C) warmer than the temperatures of other areas of the moon. Temperatures this warm raised the possibility that Enceladus could have subterranean liquid water.(NASA, “Cassini Tastes Organic Material at Saturn’s Geyser Moon,” news release 08-089, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08089_Cassini_Enceladus_Flyby.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Dave Mosher, “Seeds of Life Found Near Saturn,” Space.com, 26 March 2008, http://www.space.com/5179- seeds-life-saturn.html (accessed 1 February 2011).)
In the final planned spacewalk for the Expedition 16 mission aboard the ISS, Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani successfully replaced the Bearing Motor Roll Ring Module, a motor on the starboard side of the ISS that had been malfunctioning since early December. The defect had caused the station’s solar panels to fail to pivot toward the Sun, reducing the ISS’s supply of electricity and threatening to compromise the ISS’s ability to support future Shuttle missions. The 7-hour spacewalk suffered a minor setback when a communication failure left the astronauts briefly without direct contact with Mission Control in Houston. Because of the risk of electrical shock while in contact with the panels, Whitson and Tani had to perform the repair work carefully. They were only able to work during the 33-minute intervals when the Earth eclipsed the Sun during the ISS’s rotation around the Earth. The astronauts completed the motor replacement in time to inspect an additional problem with the starboard solar panels—damage to gears from metal debris. Whitson and Tani collected samples of the debris to use in determining future repair plans.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Bring Space Station a Step Closer to Full Power,” Space.com, 30 January 2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/080130-expedition16-eva5-wrap.html (accessed 9 December 2008).)
ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Yuri V. Lonchakov spent 6 hours on a spacewalk outside the ISS. They installed a device, known as a Langmuir probe, to monitor the electrical field around the ISS. Russian engineers believed that electrical interference might have damaged the explosive bolts on two Soyuz spacecraft, causing the craft to experience rough flight reentries in October 2007 and April 2008. Fincke and Lonchakov also installed a Russian experiment called Impuls, retrieved the Russian microbe experiment Biorisk, and took photographs of the Russian segment of the ISS. The spacewalkers attempted to install the European biological experiment EXPOSE-R, but the experiment would not activate to relay telemetry. Russian flight controllers eventually ordered Fincke and Lonchakov to remove the experiment and to return it to the ISS. The spacewalk was the first for Lonchakov and the fifth for Fincke.(Mark Carreau, “Space Station Astronauts Finish 6-Hour Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 23 December 2008; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Add New Experiments to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 December 2008, http://www. space.com/6254-spacewalkers-add-experiments-space-station.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Alliant Techsystems of Edina, Minnesota, announced that Lockheed Martin Space Systems had awarded Alliant a contract to build electricity-generating solar arrays for NASA’s Orion spacecraft. Because solar arrays are expendable, the contract, valued at over US$50 million, could extend at least through 2020. NASA had designed Orion for use in human space exploration and for transporting crews and cargo to the International Space Station (ISS). NASA had chosen Lockheed as the lead contractor for the Orion program in summer 2007.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), “Alliant To Build Solar Panels for NASA,” 11 January 2008; Erik Borg, “Alliance Gets $50 M NASA Solar-Array Contract,” Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal (MN), 11 January 2008.)
NASA announced that William W. Parsons would be resigning as Director of NASA’s KSC to pursue opportunities in the private sector. Parsons had begun his career with NASA in 1990. He had served in numerous positions, including Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC), Launch Site Support Manager, Manager of the Space Station Hardware Integration Office, Chief of Operations of the Propulsion Test Directorate, SSP Manager, and Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC. NASA had selected former astronaut Robert D. Cabana as the new Director of NASA’S KSC. Cabana, who had completed his astronaut training in 1986, had flown on four Space Shuttle missions: STS-41 in October 1990, STS-53 in December 1992, STS-65 in July 1994, and STS-88 in December 1988. Additionally, he had served as Director of NASA’s SSC, Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, Chief of NASA’s Astronaut Office, Manager of International Operations of the ISS Program, Director of NASA’s Human Spaceflight Program in Russia, Deputy Director of the ISS Program, and Director of Flight Crew Operations.(NASA, “Cabana To Succeed Parsons as Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 08-249, 30 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-249_Parsons_leaves.html (accessed 25 July 2011). 123 Brian Berger, “Bush Signs NASA Budget, Soyuz Waiver into Law,” Space.com, 5 October 2008, http://www. space.com/5929-bush-signs-nasa-budget-soyuz-waiver-law.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASA announced that Edward J. Weiler would continue in the position of Associate Administrator for the SMD. He had held the position of Interim Associate Administrator for the SMD since 26 March 2008. Joining NASA in 1978, Weiler had served as Chief of the Ultraviolet/Visible and Gravitational Astrophysics Division, Chief Scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins Program, Associate Administrator for the Space Science Enterprise, and Director of NASA’s GSFC. As Associate Administrator for NASA’s SMD, Weiler would be responsible for managing research and exploration programs on a number of topics, including Earth studies, space weather, the solar system, and the universe. Additionally, he would oversee the SMD’s grant-based research programs and spacecraft projects.(NASA, “Weiler Assumes Official Role as NASA Science Chief,” news release 08-114, 7 May 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08114_Weiler_Science_AA.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
An uncrewed Russian cargo ship, known as Progress-M 64 or Progress 29, launched at 20:23 (UT) aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. It carried 3.1 tonnes (3,100 kilograms or 6,834.33 pounds) of supplies to the crew of the ISS, including 568 pounds (257.64 kilograms) of food; 282 pounds (127.91 kilograms) of hygiene products; 277 pounds (125.65 kilograms) of medicine; 770 pounds (349.27 kilograms) of propellant; over 100 pounds (45.36 kilograms) of oxygen and air; and 925 pounds (419.57 kilograms) of water. Also traveling to the ISS aboard the cargo craft were 90 snails that would be part of a scientific experiment studying the effects of weightlessness on live organisms. The ISS crew expected Progress to dock automatically with the ISS on 17 May 2008.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 655, 1 June 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx655.html (accessed 16 March 2011); Tariq Malik, “Russian Cargo Ship Launches Toward Space Station,” Space.com, 15 May 2008, http://www. space.com/5344-russian-cargo-ship-launches-space-station.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
SpaceX announced the successful demonstration of a laser-imaging detection and ranging (LIDAR) sensor called DragonEye, a proximity sensor that had launched aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle Endeavor on 15 July 2009 in Mission STS-127. With the help of NASA’s Commercial Crew and Cargo Program Office, SpaceX had tested DragonEye in proximity with the ISS, in preparation for future visits of SpaceX’s Dragon spacecraft to the ISS. DragonEye would guide the Dragon craft as it approached the space station, providing three-dimensional images based on the amount of time needed for a single laser pulse from the sensor to reach a target and to bounce back. DragonEye had used flight data gathered on board Endeavour to detect the ISS successfully and to track it through various approach and departure maneuvers. Following Endeavour’s return to Earth, DragonEye had returned to SpaceX for evaluation. SpaceX’s Falcon-9 launch vehicle and Dragon were both under contract to NASA to provide cargo resupply to the ISS, following the Space Shuttle’s retirement. The contract included 12 flights between 2010 and 2015, with SpaceX representing the only COTS contender with the ability to return cargo to Earth.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX’s DragonEye Navigation Sensor Successfully Demonstrated on Space Shuttle,” SpaceX news release 25, September 2009, http://www.spacex.com/press.php?page=20090925 (accessed 19 September 2011); Laser Focus World, “SpaceX Successfully Tests DragonEye LIDAR on Space Shuttle,” 30 September 2009.)
NASA’s GSFC announced that NASA’s STEREO mission had confirmed the existence of the so-called solar tsunami, a controversial phenomenon that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission had first observed in 1997. In May of that year, the SOHO craft had recorded a tsunami-type wave rippling away from a CME blast site on an active region of the solar surface. At that time, scientists wondered whether the phenomenon had been an actual wave or a shadow of the CME. SOHO’s single point of view was insufficient to provide an answer to that question. However, in February 2009, the twin craft of the STEREO mission had recorded a wave from two positions, separated by 90 degrees, when sunspot 11012 suddenly erupted, giving researchers an unprecedented view of the event. The technical name for a solar-tsunami wave is “fast-mode magnetohydrodynamical (MHD) wave.” STEREO had captured a solar-tsunami wave climbing 100,000 kilometers high (62,137 miles high), racing outward at 250 kilometers per second (155.34 miles per second)—560,000 miles per hour (901,233 kilometers per hour) — and generating energy equivalent to 2.4 million megatons of TNT. Joseph B. Gurman of the Solar Physics Laboratory at NASA’s GSFC explained that, although solar tsunamis pose no direct threat to Earth, they help scientists diagnose conditions on the Sun and forecast of space weather more accurately.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Mystery of the Solar Tsunami—Solved,” GSFC news release, 19 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/stereo/news/solar_tsunami.html (accessed 21 December 2011); Space.com, “Solar Tsunamis Are Real, NASA Says,” 25 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7602-solar- tsunamis-real-nasa.html (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
Pursuant to a 2008 congressional mandate, NASA was required to provide a research management plan for the ISS National Laboratory. The GAO report, “International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research,” evaluated how NASA was currently using the ISS for research and how NASA expected to use the ISS once it was completed. The report also identified challenges to maximizing ISS research, as well as examining common management practices at other national laboratories and large science programs, practices that could apply to the management of the ISS.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research” (report no. GAO-10-9, Washington, DC, November 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d109.pdf (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA astronaut Michael R. Barratt, Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka, and U.S. software engineer Charles Simonyi launched aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:49 a.m. (CDT), on a flight to the ISS. Barratt and Padalka would join JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata to form the Expedition 19 crew at the space station. The first space tourist to make a second flight to the ISS, Simonyi had previously visited the station in April 2007. He was flying under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Simonyi would return to Earth with Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, who had been aboard the station since October 2008. The Expedition 19 crew would continue conducting scientific investigations and preparing for the arrival of the station’s first six-person crew.
NASA astronauts David A. Wolf and Timothy L. Kopra successfully completed the first of the five spacewalks scheduled at the ISS for STS-127. Over the course of 5 hours and 32 minutes, the duo installed the 1.9-tonne (4,189-pound or 2.09-ton) Japanese Exposed Facility (JEF), with the assistance of four crew members, who operated the Canadarm2 from inside the ISS. Koichi Wakata and Douglas G. Hurley used the robotic arm to help remove the structure from the Shuttle’s cargo bay, and Julie Payette and Mark L. Polansky maneuvered it over to Kibo, the Japanese research module. NASA described the JEF as a “type of porch for experiments that require direct exposure to space.” After completing their work with JEF, Wolf and Kopra moved to the ISS truss, to work on attaching two spare-parts platforms. ISS crew had already set up one of the platforms, the Cargo Attachment System. However, during STS-119 the crew had experienced difficulty deploying a platform, when a jammed pin failed to release. Wolf and Kopra had used a new tool, built especially for the task, to unfold the platform successfully. The spacewalk was Kopra’s first and Wolf’s fifth.(Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Endeavour Astronauts Complete First Space Walk,” 19 July 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Astronauts Add Porch to Space Station,” Space.com, 18 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7007- astronauts-add-porch-space-station.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
Progress 32 successfully carried out an automated docking at the ISS Pirs docking compartment, with Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov monitoring the process from a terminal inside the space station. The two spacecraft linked up flawlessly and the docking required no intervention from Lonchakov.(Tariq Malik, “New Russian Cargo Ship Docks at Space Station,” Space.com, 13 February 2009, http://www. space.com/4777-russian-cargo-ship-docks-space-station.html (accessed 10 March 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC at 2:28 p.m. (EST) on STS-129, carrying nearly 30,000 pounds of replacement parts for use at the ISS. NASA had packed the spare parts inside two Express Logistics Carriers (ELCs). Astronauts would install the ELCs outside the space station on the central truss during one of the three scheduled spacewalks. Most of the spare parts, which included two steering gyroscopes, a group of tanks, pumps for the ISS cooling system, and a hand for a robotic arm, would remain packed indefinitely until a need for them arose. The STS-129 crew was composed of Commander Charles O. Hobaugh; Pilot Barry E. Wilmore; and Mission Specialists Leland D. Melvin, Michael J. Foreman, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Randolph J. Bresnik.(NASA Space Shuttle Mission Archives, “Mission STS-129: Delivering the Goods,” 4 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts129/launch/129_overview.html (accessed 21 November 2011); James Dean, “A ‘Picture-Perfect’ Start: Atlantis Hauls Spare Parts to International Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 November 2009.)
Astronauts aboard the ISS operated the Japanese robotic arm for the first time, moving two experiments. One of the two experiments would study the effect of the station’s space environment on electronics and devices; the other was an x-ray observatory that would scan the night sky, using an inter-orbit communications system to send images, data, and voice communications to Japan’s Kibo mission control center at Tsukuba Space Center. The ISS’s robotic arm moved the three payloads from JEL to JEF, the porch attached to Japan’s Kibo laboratory. After some initial problems with its grappling device, the 33-foot (10-meter) robotic arm continued its day-long operation as planned. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata helped to drive the robotic arm. Wakata, Japan’s first long-duration ISS resident, had lived aboard the station since March 2009.(Tariq Malik, “Japanese Experiments Moved to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7043-japanese-experiments-moved-space-station.html (accessed 29 August 2011).)
JAXA’s HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISS’s robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASA’s Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASA’s Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit,” 18 September 2009; “ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
JAXA successfully launched its 16.5-ton (14.97-tonne, or 14,969-kilogram) H-2 Transfer Vehicle (HTV 1), loaded with 4.5 tonnes (4.96 tons) of cargo and supplies for delivery to the ISS. Liftoff occurred at 1:01 a.m. (EDT) from the Tanegashima Space Center, and JAXA confirmed separation from the rocket’s upper stage approximately 15 minutes later. HTV 1, which carried both pressurized and unpressurized cargo to the ISS, was the first craft capable of transporting both types of cargo. The pressurized cargo included food, computer equipment, and other supplies. Also aboard was cargo that NASA and JAXA intended to use on JAXA’s Kibo module: NASA’s Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) and Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) Experiment Payload (HREP), for studies of the ocean and atmosphere, and JAXA’s Superconducting Submillimeter-Wave Limb-Emission Sounder (SMILES) instrument, designed to study the ozone layer. Masazumi Miyake, Deputy Director of JAXA’s Houston office, said that the launch signaled a new era for JAXA, opening new horizons for Japan in its efforts to achieve human spaceflight. Miyake added that the HTV-1 mission was a demonstration flight to verify functionality and performance. However, after completing the mission, JAXA intended to launch an average of one operational HTV per year. HTV 1 represented Japan’s first attempt at a major orbital rendezvous and its first launch to a staffed space station. The HTV program, which Japan had been developing since 1997, had cost the United States US$700 million. The cost of the HTV spacecraft unit was US$200 million, not including the launch vehicle.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671, 1 October 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx671.html (accessed 16 September 2011); Robert Block, “Japan Enters New Era of Space Exploration,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis arrived at the ISS on mission STS-129. With the assistance of a robotic arm, NASA astronauts immediately unloaded one of two ELCs: a 16-foot-by-14-foot (5-meter- by-4-meter) platform, containing pumps, storage tanks, and other equipment weighing hundreds of pounds apiece. All of the equipment was too large to launch aboard any vehicle other than the Shuttle. With only five launches to go before the scheduled 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle program, NASA planned for the Shuttles to carry to the ISS as many spare parts as possible in the time remaining. In addition to spare parts sent to the ISS for storage, Atlantis had also carried thousands of microscopic specimens. NASA intended to use the specimens in experiments studying the effect of gravity on human muscle development and physiology. Upon the docking of Atlantis with the ISS, NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had been on board the ISS for approximately three months, became a member of the Shuttle crew. Stott would return home on board Atlantis at the conclusion of STS-129.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station, Unloads Parts,” 19 November 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Shuttle Atlantis Docks with Space Station,” 19 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
Progress 31, a new digitally controlled Russian Progress M-01M-series cargo spacecraft, completed its mission when its remaining fragments fell into the Pacific Ocean after reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. The craft had launched from Baikonur, Kazakhstan, on 26 November 2008, to deliver 2.5 tons (2,267 kilograms, or 2.27 tonnes) of cargo to the ISS, including scientific equipment and supplies of food, fuel, and water. The craft had undocked from the ISS on 6 17 February, undergoing tests at a safe distance from the space station before decommissioning.
NASA announced that its Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), on board ISRO’s Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft, had detected water molecules in the polar regions of the Moon. Data from the Visual and Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (VIMS), on NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had helped to corroborate the findings, as had data from the High-Resolution Infrared Imaging Spectrometer on NASA’s spacecraft EPOXI—Extrasolar Planet Observations and Characterization (EPOCh) and Deep Impact Extended Investigation (DIXI). M3’s spectrometer had measured light reflecting off the Moon’s surface at infrared wavelengths, splitting the spectral colors small enough to reveal a new level of detail in surface composition. The M3 science team found that the pattern of absorption of the wavelengths at the lunar surface was consistent with the absorption pattern for water molecules and hydroxyl, which is a molecule consisting of one oxygen atom and one hydrogen atom. In 1999 Cassini’s VIMS instrument had also collected data showing water molecules and hydroxyl, but that data had never been published. Roger N. Clark, a U.S. Geological Survey scientist in Denver who had been a member of both the VIMS and the M3 teams, remarked that the data from the two instruments closely agreed, showing as much as 1,000 water molecule parts per million in the lunar soil. To confirm the VIMS and M3 data further, scientists examined EPOXI mission data from June 2009. EPOXI data not only confirmed the findings but expanded on them. Jessica Sunshine, a member of the University of Maryland’s EPOXI team, as well as Deputy Principal Investigator and member of the M3 team, remarked that the extended spectral range and the views over the Moon’s north pole had enabled scientists to explore the distribution of both water and hydroxyl as a function of temperature, latitude, composition, and time of day. She added that the analysis unequivocally confirmed the presence of water molecules and hydroxyl on the lunar surface, revealing that the entire surface of the Moon’s north pole appeared to be hydrated during some portion of the lunar day.(NASA, “NASA Instruments Reveal Water Molecules on Lunar Surface,” news release 09-222, 24 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-222_Moon_Water_Molecules.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “It’s Not Lunacy, Probes Find Water in Moon Dirt,” 24 September 2009; Kenneth Chang, “In Surprise, Moon Shows Signs of Water,” New York Times, 24 September 2009.)
In the third spacewalk at HST, John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel carried out a set of unprecedented tasks—no astronaut had ever tried to take apart any of HST’s scientific instruments in space. The work proceeded smoothly, unlike the two previous spacewalks, and the astronauts completed all tasks within the allotted 6.5 hours. Grunsfeld and Feustel successfully connected the US$88 million Cosmic Origins spectrograph, a task that required them to remove the corrective lenses that had restored HST’s vision in 1993. The newer scientific instruments had built-in corrective lenses, rendering the 1993 lenses unnecessary. Grunsfeld then fixed the ACS using a set of specially designed tools. Working from a dark work site at an odd angle and wearing stiff, heavily padded space gloves, Grunsfeld cut off a grate and removed 36 tiny fasteners and four circuit boards. The new cards and the power supply pack slid smoothly into place.(Marcia Dunn, “Spacewalkers Pull Off Toughest Hubble Repairs Yet,” Agence France-Presse, 17 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Spacewalkers Easily Pull Off Tricky Hubble Fix,” USA Today, 17 May 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASA’s commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceX’s remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners’ vehicles—three Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities” (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, “Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASA’s Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads,” 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, “GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
A new Russian MRM 2 named Poisk, or Explore, docked with the ISS at 10:41 a.m. (EST). A cargo ship carrying Poisk had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 10 November. The 4-ton (3.63-tonne, or 3,628-kilogram) module, measuring 13 feet long (4 meters long) and 8 feet (2.4 meters) in diameter, attached to the space-facing port of the Zvezda service module. Poisk would provide a fourth Russian docking port, an airlock for Russian spacewalkers, and an experiment platform. In addition to Poisk, the Russian delivery included water-supply equipment, hygiene supplies for the crew, medical equipment, personal items, and spare parts.(Associated Press, “Space Station Gets New Research Module,” 13 November 2009; James Dean, “Watch Live: Russian Module Docking at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2009; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Gets New Russian Module,” Space.com, 12 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7518-space-station-russian- module.html (accessed 28 November 2011).)
NASA announced the one-year extension of the Space Station Cargo Integration Contract that Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems had held since January 2004. The extension’s start date was 1 October 2009. As the second of two such options provided for in the original contract, the extension brought the total value of the contract to US$381 million. Under the terms of the contract, Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems provided sustained engineering for NASA carriers and cargo packing for delivery to and from the ISS. The company also determined the most efficient way to pack cargo; verified the adequacy of the integrated carriers; packed the pressurized cargo into subcarriers; and returned the cargo to providers, once it had returned to Earth.(NASA, “NASA Extends Space Station Cargo Integration Contract,” news release C09-038, 26 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/C09-038_ISS_cargo.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
Soyuz TMA-16 docked with the ISS Zvezda service module at 4:35 a.m. (EST), safely delivering to the ISS NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams, Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev, and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté. Williams and Suraev were joining ISS Expedition 21 as flight engineers. The docking marked the first time that three Soyuz craft had docked at the space station at one time. The automated docking system worked flawlessly.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: Crew Docks Safely at Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 October 2009. 147 NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Impacts Lunar Crater in Search for Water Ice,” news release 09-236, 9 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-236_LCROSS.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Moon Crash: Public Yawns, Scientists Celebrate,” 10 October 2009.)
University of California at Irvine announced the publication of a NASA-funded study about bone strength among astronauts. Although previous studies had examined bone-mineral density, this study was the first to evaluate bone strength. Joyce Keyak, a professor of orthopedic surgery and biomedical engineering at University of California at Irvine, led the study. She and her research team used a novel computer program that Keyak had developed to identify hipbone fracture risk in people with osteoporosis. They analyzed hipbone CT (computed tomography) scans of one female and 12 male astronauts who had spent four to six months aboard the International Space Station (ISS). The researchers found that, on average, the astronauts’ hipbone strength decreased 14 percent. However, three astronauts experienced losses of 20 to 30 percent—comparable to those seen in older women with osteoporosis. The research team published its findings in the online version of Bone, the journal of the International Bone and Mineral Society.(University of California at Irvine, “Astronauts on International Space Station Lose Alarming Amounts of Hipbone Strength,” news release, 26 January 2009, http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/article/ 19371 (accessed 2 February 2011); Kristen Schott, “UCI Study Finds Astronauts at Risk for Bone Loss,” OC Metro (Newport Beach, CA), 27 January 2009.)
Commander Gennady I. Padalka and Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt, of ISS Expedition 20, landed safely on the steppes of Kazakhstan in the Soyuz TMA-14 spacecraft, following a six- month residency at the space station. During their mission, Padalka and Barratt had presided over the inauguration of the station’s six-person crew, as well as two Space Shuttle assembly and resupply missions. The two missions had included the delivery of new science facilities for expanded research and the arrival of the first Japanese HTV. Also aboard Soyuz TMA-14 was Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté, who had launched on 30 September with the Expedition 21 crew to spend nine days aboard the ISS. Laliberté had hosted a global Web cast from aboard the space station, to promote his One Drop Foundation. The mission of the One Drop Foundation was to preserve the world’s water resources and to provide global access to clean water. With Padalka’s departure, ISS Expedition 21 Commander Frank DeWinne became the first European to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz Landing Caps Historic Space Station Increment,” news release 09-237, 11 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09_237_Soyuz_Lands.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Douglas Birch for Associated Press, “Russian Spacecraft with Circus Tycoon Lands Safely,” 13 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, “European Takes Command of Space Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 October 2009.)
With the assistance of K. Megan McArthur, who operated the robotic arm, astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook a spacewalk to upgrade HST for the first time in seven years. The mission was Grunsfeld’s third visit to HST and Feustel’s first space mission. The team’s primary task was to replace the 16-year-old Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 with the new Wide Field Camera 3. Feustel and Grunsfeld struggled with a pair of bolts on the old camera, setting them 30 minutes behind schedule. However, Feustel managed to work the bolts loose without breaking them, which would have blocked installation of the new US$132 million camera.(Mark Carreau, “Spacewalkers Equip Hubble with New Computer,” Agence France-Presse, 15 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Hubble Repair Passes ‘Speed Bump’,” USA Today, 15 May 2009.)
ISS Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov successfully completed all scheduled tasks in a spacewalk lasting almost 5 hours. Fincke and Lonchakov installed EXPOSE-R (studies of exobiological processes in outer space), a joint European-Russian scientific experiment involving biological materials. They placed the experiment outside the Zvezda service module, which astronauts had been unable to activate during a December spacewalk because of an internal cable problem. NASA astronaut Sandra H. Magnus assisted in the installation of EXPOSE-R from inside the ISS. Fincke and Lonchakov also rotated a container holding a scientific experiment involving Russian materials and trimmed a set of six straps positioned near the Pirs docking compartment, to prevent their interference with incoming Russian vehicles needing to dock. In addition, they photographed the Zvezda module, as part of a survey to assess its condition after nine years in orbit. The spacewalk was Lonchakov’s second, Fincke’s sixth, and their second spacewalk as a team. Fincke had undertaken all of his six spacewalks wearing a Russian spacesuit.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: ISS Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Upgrade Space Station,” Space.com, 10 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6396- spacewalkers-upgrade-space-station.html (accessed 12 May 2011).)
ISS Expedition 20 and 21 crew members ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, cosmonaut Roman Y. Romanenko, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz TMA- 15 capsule. Soyuz TMA-15 landed in Kazakhstan at 2:15 a.m. (EST) in icy weather, ending a 188-day mission to the ISS. Although poor weather conditions had grounded the eight Mi-8 helicopters normally used in the recovery process, recovery crews in all-terrain vehicles were able to reach the spacecraft within 15 minutes of touchdown. Astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev remained on board the ISS, representing the smallest space station crew since July 2006.(William Harwood, “Space Station Crew Lands in Frigid Kazakhstan,” Spaceflight Now, 1 December 2009; James Dean, “Soyuz Makes Safe Return to Cold Earth,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2009.)
Commander Scott D. Altman eased Atlantis up to within 30 feet (9.1 meters) of HST. Operating the Shuttle’s robotic arm, K. Megan McArthur captured the telescope at 1:14 p.m. (EDT), on her first attempt. An hour later, still using the robotic arm, McArthur successfully secured the telescope in its berth at the back of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. A communication glitch slowed the procedure—the astronauts had sent commands to the telescope to ease the capture, directing it, for example, to shut off the gyroscopes. However, the astronauts were unable to discern whether HST had obeyed their commands. Instead, the crew had to relay the information through the telescopes control room at NASA’s GSFC.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Grab Hubble for Repairs,” New York Times, 14 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “What a Catch! Hubble Grabbed for Spacewalking Repairs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 2009.)
NASA announced its selection of Einstein, Hubble, and Sagan Fellowships in three areas of astronomy and astrophysics. Each postdoctoral fellowship would provide support to the awardees for three years at any host university or research center in the United States. Jon Morse, Director of the Astrophysics Division in NASA’s Science Mission Directorate (SMD), described the recipients as among the best and brightest young astronomers in the world, who had already contributed significantly to studies of how the universe works, the origin of the cosmos, and whether life exists beyond Earth. Morse described the fellowships as a springboard for scientific leadership, as well as an inspiration for the next generation of students and researchers. NASA awarded 10 fellowships in the Einstein program, to conduct research related to NASA’s Physics of the Cosmos Program; 17 fellowships in the Hubble program, to pursue research associated with NASA’s Cosmic Origins Program; and five fellowships in the Sagan program, which 26 NASA had created in September 2008, in alignment with its Exoplanet Exploration Program.
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino and Michael T. Good undertook the fourth spacewalk at HST, attempting to fix the spectrograph and to replace worn insulation on the telescope. To fix the spectrograph, Massimino first needed to remove a handrail, but a stripped bolt hampered his work. Even using various specially designed tools, he was unable to remove the bolt for 2 hours. As a last resort, after engineers at GFSC conducted two tests on a mock-up, Mission Control in Houston instructed Massimino to “use his muscles.” After successfully pulling the bolt off, Massimino tried to install a special plate to remove 111 tiny screws that held the spectrograph’s cover in place, but the battery of one of the tools became depleted. Massimino returned to the Shuttle, swapped out the batteries, and recharged his oxygen supply, but this task set the spacewalk another half hour behind schedule. After Massimino had successfully replaced the spectrograph’s internal electronics power-supply card, the astronauts still faced more than 90 minutes of cleanup and closeout work. Therefore, spacewalk coordinators decided to delay the insulation task until the fifth and final spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted more than 8 hours, the sixth longest in NASA history.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Stuck Bolt, Dead Battery Bedevil Hubble Repairs,” 18 May 2009.)
Russia’s Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamer’s first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, “Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station,” news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission,” 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station,” Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA astronauts Michael R. Barratt and Kevin A. Ford used a robotic arm to remove the 13.5- ton (12.3-tonne, or 12,247-kilogram) Leonardo cargo module from Space Shuttle Discovery’s cargo bay. An hour later, the astronauts had successfully attached the module to the Harmony module’s Earth-facing port and had begun the process of checking for leaks and pressurizing a vestibule between Harmony and the cargo module.(William Harwood, “Cargo Module Mounted to Space Station for Unloading,” Spaceflight Now, 1 September 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISS’s American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japan’s new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some “get-ahead” tasks—attaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call,” Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Three new ISS residents arrived at the space station aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, bringing the outpost’s full staff to six for the first time in its 10-year history. Also, for the first time, each of the major space station partners had a representative on board: Roman Y. Romanenko and Gennady I. Padalka of Russia, Michael R. Barratt of the United States, Koichi Wakata of JAXA, Belgian astronaut Frank De Winne of ESA, and Robert B. Thirsk of CSA. The first ISS crew had arrived in the year 2000, two years after the launch of the first part of the station. Since that time, the ISS had expanded to nine rooms, including three full-scale laboratories, five sleeping compartments, two toilets, two kitchens, and two mini-gyms, making the station 81 percent complete. The increased crew size also ushered in a new era of station operations that would allow astronauts and cosmonauts to focus on scientific research rather than on the assembly and maintenance of the ISS.(Marcia Dunn, “Space Station Crew Finally at Full Staff of 6,” Agence France-Presse, 30 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “At Space Station, the House Is Packed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 June 2009.)
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the second STS-119 spacewalk at the ISS, primarily to lighten the workload for future crews. As their first task, the pair loosened bolts holding down batteries at the end of the ISS’s power-grid framework, in preparation for the batteries’ replacement during the next Shuttle visit, scheduled for June 2009. As Swanson and Acaba finished that task, the gyroscopes maintaining the position of the ISS- Shuttle complex became overloaded, setting off an alarm in the ISS. Discovery quickly assumed control with its thrusters, and Mission Control ordered Swanson and Acaba to continue with their tasks. The two astronauts had trouble with their next task, deploying an equipment-storage platform, because Acaba accidentally inserted a pin upside down. Mission Control instructed them to move on to other tasks—installing a global positioning system (GPS) antenna and using an infrared camera to photograph a pair of radiators, one of which had a peeling cover. Before reentering the ISS, Swanson tied down the equipment-storage platform to prevent it from moving around. NASA assembled a team to determine a means of prying or hammering the pin loose during the spacewalk scheduled for 23 March.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go on 2nd Spacewalk at Space Station,” 22 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “To-Do List Keeps Astronauts Busy on 2nd Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 22 March 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space station’s final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the station’s truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
