Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Lockheed was leading a six-member industry team in an effort to develop an unsolicited National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) proposal for the Air Force. The team was to recommend scrapping the NASP in favor of a much lighter hypersonic research vehicle called NORA, for National Orbital Research Aircraft. NORA's $5 billion price tag was far less than the $10-15 billion slated for the NASP. (AvWk, Mar 8/93)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)
NASA announced that it was adapting an existing, cutting-edge x-ray system to improve inspections of aging aircraft while saving American industries money. The x-ray system, which combines TV-like scanning by x-ray beams with digital data acquisition, was originally intended for medical, dental, and other industrial purposes.  NASA was to adapt the system to inspect aircraft wings, turbines, and propeller blades for corrosion, cracks, and disbonding.  The system was developed by the Digiray Corporation. (NASA Release 93-137)
Using the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), NASA scientists measured thermal radiation differences across the universe and come up with more conclusive evidence than ever to support the "Big Bang" theory that the universe was created by a single blast 15 billion years ago. Measurements made by COBE revealed that 99.97 percent of the early radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year after the Big Bang itself. "This is the ultimate in tracing one's cosmic roots," said NASA scientist John C. Mather, who announced the findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society. (NASA Release 93-5; USA Today, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 8/93; AP, Jan 8/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
The Freedom Forum, a group that funds journalism programs, presented a $100,000 grant to the Mercury Seven Foundation to establish a lecture series about space. The series, which was intended to help improve public understanding of space issues, was to be held annually in Florida's Brevard County, the location of the Kennedy Space Center. (AP, Mar 22/93)
Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Allan H. Meltzer, professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that if the Clinton Administration were serious about reducing spending it would eliminate the $30 billion Space Station, reduce entitlements, and cut wasteful projects. (WSJ, Feb 22/93)
A modified troop and cargo plane described as a "flying laboratory" crashed and burned after taking off from Dobbins Air Force Base in suburban Atlanta. The seven people aboard, all Lockheed employees, were killed. The plane, a modified troop and cargo plane, was used by Lockheed for testing new technologies.
A Russian would-be cosmonaut, now in the United States pursuing a doctorate in space policy at American University in Washington, was in Houston for three months on a U.S. government subcontract, helping two Russian cosmonauts prepare for flights in U.S. spaceships in 1993 and 1995. (LA Times, June 7/93)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation of Germantown, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract. The seven-year, $91 million contract would provide instrument support services to the Engineering Directorate at Goddard. (NASA Release C93-h; W Post, June 15/93)
A fighter plane shaped like an arrowhead flew into NASA's Langley Research Center this week. The plane, a heavily modified version of the Air Force F-16 fighter, has a wing that is narrow near the front of the plane and flares out near the tail. The plane was part of a program to build an efficient supersonic jetliner. (Daily Press, Apr 16/93)
NASA announced that scientists from the University of Hawaii and NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had determined that the planet Pluto is covered with surface ices that are 98 percent nitrogen.  The scientists concluded that with such abundant nitrogen surface ice, Pluto's thin atmosphere must be primarily gaseous nitrogen. (NASA Release 93-142)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, hosted six three-day sessions of Aerospace for Kids, designed to teach children about aerospace technology and Goodard this summer.  The program was to host 150 children over a six-week period this summer. (Prince George's Sentinel, Jul 29/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
NASA announced that under a recently signed agreement NASA engineers and Learjet Inc. engineers, based in  Wichita, Kansas, would work on the development of a new high performance business jet. The engineers were to study aircraft size and aerodynamics to create the plane; they would use state-of-the-art supercomputers and wind tunnels at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-46; AP, Mar 15/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom Utilization Conference, planned for June 21-24 in San Francisco, California. NASA managers decided to postpone the conference because of recent instructions to redesign the Space Station. (NASA Media Advisory)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it had selected NSI Technology Services Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for integration and test support services. The contract, which covered seven years, had an estimated value of $200 million and would provide services to all of Goddard and portions of NASA's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release C93-e)
NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
NASA contracted with Stanford University to do additional work on the Gravity Probe-B experiment. The experiment tests predictions of the general theory of relativity. Gravity Probe-B determines how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth and its rotation by measuring small changes in the spin of four gyroscopes in a satellite at 400 miles altitude in a Earth polar orbit. The first Shuttle test flight was scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release C93-b)
NASA announced that it had awarded Government Technology services Inc. of Chantilly a contract to provide Unix work station products to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland (W Times, Mar 4/93)
NASA and the seven Central America nations began a program to study, preserve, and protect the  region's rain forest by expanding the use of satellite data by Central American scientists. Under an agreement with the Central American Commission for Environment and Development, NASA would train and provide equipment to scientists from all the Central American countries. By using data from the Advanced Very High-Resolution Radiometers flying aboard several U.S. weather satellites, the scientists would be able to estimate the amount and type of vegetation cover and forest cover in the region and to conduct costal studies. (NASA Release 93-47)
NASA announced that the agency would design and install an acoustic lining in the wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The improved wind tunnel ultimately would help U.S. industry design quiet engines for a future high-speed civil transport and for new helicopters. (NASA Release 93-81; San Francisco Examiner, May 9/93)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
A White House panel recently called for the American space program to cut back its program significantly. The panel's report, issued on December 17, said that duplication among agencies had to be eliminated and cold-war secrecy reduced. The panel added that the United States should seek to make international cooperation an essential component of its space exploration strategy. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center Director Robert Crippen and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had signed an agreement that would transfer benefits derived from the U.S. space program to the private sector and industries in Florida.  The two parties agreed to set aside $1 million each for the next two years to implement projects under this agreement. (NASA Release 93-155)
NASA, the Alaskan Volcano Observatory (AVO) and Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, have agreed to a second robotic volcano exploration involving Dante, an eight-legged robot that attempted to explore Mt. Erebus in Antarctica earlier this year. (NASA Release 93-195; AP, Oct 26/93; W Times, Oct 31/93)
A satellite was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying a military satellite designed to improve the accuracy of radars that track planes, missiles, space junk, shuttles, and other spacecraft. (AP, June 26/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) contract award protests were settled. EG & G Florida, Inc; BAMSI, Inc.; and Westinghouse KSC Company, Inc. protested the awarding of the contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, charging that there were deficiencies in the agency's activities during the original proposal submission. As part of the settlement, NASA agreed to rescind its original selection and said that each of the four competitors would be able to submit a revised proposal. (NASA Release 93-18; WSJ, Feb 2/93; AP, February 2/93; O Sen Star, Jan 19/93; Fla Today, Jan 29/93)
Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, selected Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Corporation, Houston, for the Engineering, Test and Analysis contract worth $12.5 billion over 10 years, beginning January 1, 1994.  (NASA Release C93-y)
Bad weather delayed the landing of Space Shuttle Endeavour at Kennedy Space Center. The landing was rescheduled for June 30, weather permitting. (UPI, June 29/93, June 30/93; W Post, June 30/93; USA Today, June 30/93; NY Times, June 30/93; B Sun, June 30/93; AP, June 30/93; RTw, June 30/93)
Air traffic controllers reported that their new  $839 million radar system has some serious flaws: planes vanish from screens, phantom images appear, and even a squirrel can chew up the network.  NASA said that it has received many complaints at its Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California, home of NASA's aviation safety reporting system. (AP, September 21/93
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
The Department of Justice filed a complaint accusing Paul Buchanan, director of NASA's Biomedical Operations and Research Office at Kennedy Space Center, of submitting false vouchers claiming lodging expenses for time spent in Washington, DC, while on temporary duty for NASA. (Fla Today, Dec 4/93; C Trib, Dec 5/93)
The government-backed computer chip consortium Sematech announced Thursday that it had produced chips with electrical devices just 0.35 microns wide using American production equipment. The announcement indicated that the American chip industry was coming back on track technically. The state-of-the-art in chip production was 0.6 microns; however, Japanese companies recently began demonstrating their ability to produce 0.35 chips. Achieving 0.35 micron capabilities by the end of 1992 was one of Sematech's goals at its founding in l987. (LA Times, Jan 22/93)
NASA scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica in 1992 was as severe as in any previous year. Ozone is destroyed by chorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which are used as solvents, propellants, and coolants.  On September 23, 1992, the surface area of the ozone hole reached 8.9 million square miles. Measurements were taken by the Nimbus-7 and Meteor-3 Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) instruments. (NASA Release 93-14; UPI, Jan 19/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
Western Europe's Ariane 42P rocket deployed an American communications satellite into space on June 24. The rocket, which was launched from French Guiana after a long series of delays, was owned by the Los Angeles based Hughes Space and Communications Company. (RTw, June 24/93)
Two NASA scientists told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that a cosmic collision as powerful as the one that many scientists think killed all the dinosaurs on Earth 65 million years ago may take place on the planet Jupiter in 1994. The scientists speculated that the impact might come from the comet Shoemaker-Levy, which last year came so close to Jupiter that the planet's powerful gravitational field shattered the comet into about a dozen large chunks. Recent calculations show that most of the comet's remaining chunks may hit Jupiter in July 1994. Because of uncertainties about the comet's orbit, however, it was possible that the collision might not occur at all. (C Trib, June 13/93; P Inq, June 20/93; W Post, June 28/93)
Robert McClure of Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in Victoria, British Columbia, said that Canadian and U.S. astronomers had used a telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, to obtain the first clear pictures showing galaxies colliding and merging on "a really grand scale." The pictures supported a theory that postulates that elliptical galaxies were formed by galactic mergers such as those observed. (W Times, June 20/93)
NASA announced the solicitation of proposals for the Technology Reinvestment Project, a $471 million federal interagency effort to develop and deploy dual-use technologies and at the same time give a competitive advantage to American companies. (NASA Release 93-85)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)
NASA announced that it would soon begin tests using a modified Convair 990 commercial jet airliner to expand the operational landing capabilities of the Space Shuttle system. The Convair has been undergoing modifications for two years in preparation for tests that would help Johnson Space Center researchers better understand the operational capabilities of the Shuttle system. (Desert Wings, Jan 8/93)
The military's plans to test a Russian Topaz 2 nuclear reactor in orbit were criticized by the governing council of the American Astronomical Society and some other scientists. Council members were concerned because experience with previous Russian reactors had shown that they emit radiations that "can significantly disrupt x-ray and gamma-ray astronomical observations." Society officials noted that they were not opposing the mission or the use of nuclear reactors in space; rather they were asking that the test be conducted at higher levels, which would presumably be safer.
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) recommended eliminating the JPL Edwards Test Facility, staffed by 28 JPL employees and 18 contractors, at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert. If NASA managers accepted the recommendation, the facility could shut down by 1996. (UPI, Feb 8/93; Feb 9/Antelope Valley Press, Feb 9/93)
Arthur L. H. Rudolph, a German-born scientist who played a crucial role in developing the Saturn 5 rocket used in the American moon landings, lost his attempt to regain his American citizenship. He gave up his citizenship in 1984 when he faced deportation for Nazi war crimes.
NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)
Donald K. Slayton, one of the original seven American astronauts, died June 13 at his home in League City, Texas, of brain cancer. He was 69.
NASA announced that it had selected SYSCON Services, Inc., Washington, D.C., for negotiations leading to the award of a contract to provide technical and support services at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California.  (NASA Release C93-j)
NASA released four new images gathered by the Cosmic Background Explorer. The images, which were released at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, showed infrared sources such as dust within the Solar System, stars in the Milky Way Galaxy, and dust and stars in other galaxies. The images were created from Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE) data. (NASA Release 92-256)
NASA announced that beginning in February, NASA would test "technology incubation," a new laboratory-to-market approach designed to help space technology contribute to U.S. industrial competitiveness. NASA was funding two centers, the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The three-year experiment, which was being operated by the University of Texas, Austin, was receiving funding of $800,000 this year. (NASA Release 93-037)
An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)
A Titan 4 rocket carrying an expensive military spy satellite system exploded minutes after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base.  This, the first failure of the four-year-old Titan 4 program, was a $2-billion accident, said John Pike, director of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, a liberal group that researches classified aerospace projects. Pike consistently has criticized U.S. spy satellites. The accident wiped out most of the savings Congress took from the intelligence budget during the year. (RTw, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 3/93; USA Today, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; LA Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93)
The Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of five landed January 19 at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Endeavour circled Earth 96 times and traveled 2,501,277 miles during its six-day flight. The Shuttle and its five crew members were said to be in good shape. (LA Times, Jan 20/93; W Times, Jan 20/93; NY Times, Jan 20/93; B Sun, Jan 20/93)
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had created the first geographically precise image of the Earth "breathing"--removing and releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. The dynamic computer model shows monthly changes for carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere as microbes decompose plant debris in the Earth's soil. (NASA Release 93-223; UPI, Dec 20/93)
NASA announced that during the third week in July  it had delivered the first data sets from the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to the National Space Science Data Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. As a result, researchers from around the world now have access to the COBE data that provided the scientific community with an unprecedented look at how the universe began. (NASA Release 93-145)
The New York Times reported that a radio telescope spread across 5,000 miles had been finished.  The new telescope, called the Very long Baseline Array (V.L.B.A.), has 10 antennas scattered across United States territory from the central Pacific Ocean to the Caribbean. All 10 antennas are very well synchronized as a single telescope of gigantic size, an arrangement that gives the V.I.B.A. far sharper vision than that of any other telescope. The telescope's revolving power is such that an observer in New York City would be able to read a newspaper in San Francisco. The V.I.B.A. was to be used to probe the depths of time and space. (NY Times, Aug 17/93)
Germany's space agency was scheduled to be in charge of the scientific aspect of Shuttle Columbia's next research mission. NASA would oversee Shuttle operations during the flight. Ninety-three experiments were planned, two-thirds sponsored by German institutions and the rest by other European countries, the United States, and Japan. This would only be the second time in 32 years of American manned spaceflight that a mission had been managed from outside the United States. (AP, Jan 20/97)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were measuring how the human body reacted to exercise done on Earth and comparing those measurements to the exercise measurements of astronauts working in the microgravity environment of space. The goal was to try to improve the productivity of astronauts involved in space walks. (NASA Release 93-93)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
A team of astronomers from the University of Arizona told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that they had found convincing new evidence that a black hole the size of a million suns is at the center of the Milky Way galaxy. The astronomers reported that they had detected faint infrared emissions from an area at the galactic core that is the source of a powerful radio signal possibly produced by forces surrounding a black hole. The team detected the emissions by using a new adaptive optics system known as FASTTRAC, developed by graduate student Laird Close and Donald W. McCarthy Jr., of the University of Arizona. (W Post, Jan 6/93; NY Times, Jan 6/93; USA Today, Jan 6/93)
NASA announced that researchers had recorded unexpected, huge flashes of light in the upper atmosphere that might affect atmospheric ozone and present potential problems for high-altitude research planes. The flashes occurred above a severe thunderstorm in the Midwest in the summer and were recorded aboard NASA's DC-8 Airborne Laboratory, based at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-167; W Post, Sep 24/93; AP, Sep 23/93)
NASA announced that an American satellite had detected the most intense flash of gamma radiation observed in the two years of its operation. The burst, known as "the super bowl" event because it occurred on the day of this year's National championship game, appeared to produce 10 times more energy than any previously observed gamma-ray burst. The burst also led scientists to say that the bursts were not the product of merely hot "cooking objects, but of particles being accelerated to near the speed of light and being emitted in focused beams, or jets. The new findings suggested that the bursts originated far beyond the Milky Way galaxy. (NASA Release 93-72; Reuters, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; APn, Apr 4/23)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
Space scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, think they have identified what matter in deep space is absorbing certain wavelengths of light from distant stars. Researchers Farid Salama and Louis Allamandola demonstrated that the light is absorbed by unexpectedly large organic molecules spread throughout the vacuum of space. These molecules, shaped like chicken wire, are called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
America's technological leaders were scheduled to meet  in Anaheim, California, from December 7-9 1993, to explore innovative ideas that could be used to solve engineering problems, create new products and industry opportunities, and facilitate the transfer of government-sponsored technologies to American industry. TECHNOLOGY 2003, the fourth annual national technology transfer conference and exposition, was sponsored by NASA, "NASA Tech Briefs" magazine, and the Technology Utilization Foundation. (NASA Release 93-212)
Bernard A. Harris, MD, an African American, was set to make his first Shuttle flight aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in late February. He was scheduled to conduct experiments exploring the behavior of humans, living organisms, and materials.
The W Times reported that a joint U.S.-German experimental fighter jet had completed a revolutionary rapid turn in flight. The aircraft slowed from a speed of about 300 miles an hour and reversed direction in only nine seconds using a tight, looping turn. According to the Pentagon, the turn was far beyond the aerodynamic capability of any conventional fixed-wing aircraft. The test flight took place at Edwards Air Force Base, California.
Robert M. Rados, 73, a retired NASA meteorologist, died of cardiac arrest February 3 at Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, D.C.
NASA announced that the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and California wine growers would use aerial and satellite images to battle an insect problem encountered by California's wine industry. Sensitive electronic scanners on aircraft and satellites would help a group from government, industry, and several universities map and analyze root louse damage in northern California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA Release 93-55; UPI, Mar 31/93; SF Chron, Mar 31/93; P Inq, May 2/93)
Twenty-six Prince George's Country students with physical, mental, or learning disabilities spent six weeks in a jobs program at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, during the summer.  The program, which was under the auspices of the President's Commission on Employment for Persons With Disabilities, aimed to steer more young people into fields like science, engineering, and computer programming. (W Post, Aug 12/93)
NASA engineers believed that they had identified the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine section. A Kennedy Space Center spokesman said that probably a
NASA announced that it had joined with American Bio-Technologies Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, in an attempt to arrive at a better understanding of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The goal was to use advanced x-ray technology and expertise developed by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, to advance knowledge of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and AIDS, to develop new therapeutic approaches for HIV and AIDS, and to develop superior biological materials for vaccine development and HIV detection. (NASA Release 93-88)
NASA announced that a study at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, might lead to a reduction in the lightheadness astronauts feel after returning to earth from space. A reduced level of plasma was believed to contribute to the tendency to feel faint. (NASA Release 93-030)
NASA announced that the IC2 Institute, Austin, Texas, had appointed John S. Gee as the Director of the Ames Technology Commercialization Center (ATCC) located in Sunnyvale, California. IC2 Institute, a unit of the University of Texas, was contracted by NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts Technology, Washington, D.C, to assist NASA centers in the transfer of technology to the private sector.  (NASA Release 93-185)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
NASA announced that recent discoveries from the agency's Extreme Ultravioilet Explorer (EUVE) would be presented at the National Meeting of the American Astronomical Society, University of California at Berkeley on June 7 and 8.
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Jackson and Tull Chartered Engineers of Washington, D.C. for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for multidisciplinary research and development. (NASA Release C93-p)
NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)
NASA announced that NASA and industry engineers had designed and built a new measuring device that would save American taxpayers more than $1 million on a NASA project. The device, an improved "inlet rake,"  measures the air flowing into one of the engines on the F/AS-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle (HARV), based at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Engineers would be able to use the air flow data to help give fighter-type aircraft more power and better handling qualities. (NASA Release 93-035; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 19/93)
Miles "Mike" Ross, former deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center, died of cancer Wednesday at his home.  He was 74.  Mr. Ross joined NASA in 1967 as deputy director of the center's engineering and technical operations.  He became deputy center director in 1970. (Fl Today, Oct 15/93)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (M.I.T.) reported that a powerful new x-ray camera had been shot into orbit just in time to focus on the newly discovered supernova. The scientists reported that the camera was providing very detailed information about the cosmic explosion. The M.I.T. camera was one of several Japanese and American instruments put into orbit aboard a Japanese spacecraft launched on February 20. (NY Times, Apr 13/93)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)
The New York Times reported that at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, Dr. Douglas N.C. Lin of the University of California at Santa Cruz had described the Milky Way as practicing "galactic cannibalism." Lin explained that the gravitational force of matter in the vast halo encompassing the Milky Way galaxy was causing the Milky Way to consume the stars and gases of its nearest galactic neighbor, the Large Magellanic Cloud 160,000 light-years away. (NY Times, June 8/93; LA Times, June 8/1993; USA Today, June 8/93; B Sun, June 8/93; P Inq, June 8/93)
Guy Bluford, the nation's first African American astronaut in space, was scheduled to retire later in the month.  Bluford, 50, who went on four Shuttle missions, planned to work for a Maryland aerospace company. (AP, Jul 13/93)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA announced that it had selected the Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, Maryland, to negotiate a cost-plus-fee contract for the Visiting Scientists Program at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The five-year contract was expected to take effect September 1, 1993; the proposed cost for the five-year period was $31 million. (NASA Release C93-g)
The media reported that the Space Shuttle Columbia landed May 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California, after low clouds at Cape Canaveral, Florida, forced it to divert to California.
During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on April 26, daughters of Johnson Space Center employees got to see where astronauts prepare for space flights and were even able to test the pressurized spacesuit gloves worn by astronauts. Daughters were also welcomed at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, where they toured the control room, investigated an SE-71 cockpit, and crawled around inside a modified Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr 29/93)
The Washington Times reported that a conference of scientists and policy makers had discussed the question of what to do with the "junk science" that makes its way into public policy. The conference, which was held in the Washington, DC area, was sponsored by the International Institute of George Mason University and the Science and Environmental Policy Project. (W Times, May 25/93)
NASA announced that 40 college students had started a six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The summer residence training program was for college students interested in life sciences, bioengineering, ecology, or related fields. (NASA Release 93-117)
The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
NASA announced that scientist Dr. Robert Watson would receive the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) on February 15.
Rockwell International Corporation Chairman and CEO Donald R. Beall presented the Chairman's Team Award to National Aero-Space Plane engineers in recognition of the Engine Flowpath Team's significant contributions to hypersonic propulsion development in the United States. The team was composed of 11 engineers from General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Pratt & Whitney, Rockwell's Rocketdyne and North American Aircraft businesses, and NASA's Langely Research Center. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 26/93)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California announced that nearly two dozen engineers from the center would visit 22 schools in the Antelope Valley next week to celebrate National Engineer's Week. (LA Times, Feb 13/93)
The Navy announced that it was turning over the Moffett Naval Air Station, located 40 miles south of San Francisco, California, to NASA's Ames Research Center, which is located on the base. The Center was to continue developing and testing space and aircraft-related technologies. The center's wind tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test generations of spacecraft and commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. (AP, Jan 4/93)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Joint Astronomy Centre, Hilo, Hawaii, discovered an unexpected type of molecule in the ices of a star-forming cloud.  The scientists have detected large amounts of molecular hydrogen frozen into the ice grains in a dense molecular cloud in Rho Ophiuchus. Rho Ophiuchus is known as a stellar nursery, a region in the Milky Way galaxy where new stars are being formed. (NASA Release 93-187)
Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)
NASA's exhibit at the Experimental Aircraft Association Fly-in Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin on July  29-August 6, was scheduled to focus on general aviation technology. The exhibit was to explain how NASA was addressing the challenges of aircraft in every speed regime. It also planned to stress how NASA's "customers," that is, the government, industry, universities, and, ultimately, the American taxpayer, benefitted from the agency's advances in aeronautics.  (NASA Release 93-128)
NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)
NASA announced that findings by scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, challenge the theories of how galaxies evolve. The  U.S. team included a scientist from the Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany.
Charles H. Vermillion, chief of the international data systems office at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was charged in a six-count indictment with violating federal conflict-of-interest laws and converting government property to his own use. Vermillion, who said he was innocent, was charged with taking NASA-developed plans for a programmable frame synchronizer, assembling the synchronizers at his own plant, and selling them privately. (W Post, Jul 23/93)
The media reported that NASA and the astronomical community had differing views on an orbiting billboard that would beam a moon-sized message back to Earth. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond said that the "space billboard" was in line with the space agency's aims, that is, to encourage commercial development of space. A quite different view was expressed by Carl Sagan, a well-known U.S. astronomer and university professor, who called the project an "abomination" and said that it was "the thin edge of a wedge which may  destroy optical ground-based astronomy...."  An American Astronomical Society spokesman said the billboard would hamper Earth-based astronomy, add to the growing pollution of the night sky by light, and even infringe on everyone's enjoyment of nature's sunsets." (RTw, May 17/93)
NASA scientists reported in the British journal Nature that a supernova may have caused a huge void known as the "Local Bubble" that envelopes the solar system and many nearby stars. Researchers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that evidence suggests that the bubble, an area about 300 light-years across, was formed by the supernova or explosion of a star about 340,000 years ago. The blast was strong enough that its radiation could have disrupted earth's protective ozone layer and caused extra sunburns on the ancestors of modern humans. (NASA Release 93-036; USA Today, Feb 25/93; NY Times, Feb 25; P Inq, Mar 5/93)
The San Francisco Chronicle reported that NASA was renewing its interest in aeronautics.  In 1992, aeronautics accounted for about 8 percent of NASA's $14.3 billion budget; if the agency got the funding it had requested, NASA planned to spend $8.6 billion on aeronautics from 1994 though 1998--an increase of 50 percent. (San Francisco Chronicle, Aug 11, 1993; LA Times, Aug 25/93)
Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle, legendary Army aviator and World War II hero, died at the age of 96.  He was best known for leading "Doolittle's Raiders" in a daring bombing run on Tokyo and other Japanese cities in April 1942.  The raid brought the war home to Japan for the first time and lifted American morale when the country was still reeling from a string of Axis victories.  After the war, General Doolittle served as president of the Institute of Aeronautical Science and chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, the forerunner of NASA.  (B Sun, Oct 1/93; AP, Oct 1/93; W Post, Oct 2/93)
A 240-pound Array of Low-Energy X-ray Imaging sensors (ALEXIS) satellite was launched into orbit April 25 aboard an Air Force Pegasus rocket for the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Mew Mexico. Officials at the New Mexico laboratory had hoped to demonstrate that they could handle space missions faster, better, and cheaper than NASA. However, one of the satellite's four solar panels was damaged during the launch, and the satellite was deemed a loss.
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, announced that he had accepted an appointment as the Zachry Professor of Engineering at Texas A&M University and would retire from NASA on August 20. Cohen joined NASA in 1962.  He became Director of the Johnson Space Center in 1986. (NASA Release 93-131; AP, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 16/93; UPn, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
The Houston Chronicle reported on a new nationwide poll of registered voters conducted by Yankelovitch Partners and sponsored by NASA contractor Rockwell International Corporation. The poll revealed that 70 percent of American voters supported the construction of a permanently staffed Space Station and 63 percent believed that the United States should spend "whatever is necessary" to preserve its lead in space activities. Some of the poll results, however, reflected wide swings of support for the space program. (H Chron, May 25/93)
The Washington Times reported that the launch of a rocket with a "star wars" payload had been scrubbed on May 22, just a minute before its scheduled launch. The Air Force blamed the failed launch on a power outage in a computer. The launch was rescheduled for May 23. (W Times, May 23/93)
Speaking to a meeting of the American Astronautical Society, Representative Alan Mollohan warned that unless NASA could prove it contributed to U.S. economic competitiveness, politicians would view it as a "Cold War anachronism." According to an article in Space News, Mollohan's comments reflected the view of both the White House and members of Congress. The message: change or become irrelevant. (Space News, March 15-21)
Researchers writing in the current issue of the journal Nature announced that they had detected a guitar-shaped nebula attached to the fastest known star in the galaxy; the star is at the tip of the neck of the "guitar." The speed of the star, a pulsar, which scientists calculated travelled at least 500 miles per second through the Milky Way galaxy, created a "bow-shock" wave in the rarified gas of outerspace. The shock wave heated the gas it encountered and made it give off energy, now appearing as the outline of the star's wake. The wake was detectable only with the world's most powerful telescope, according to Cornell University astronomer James M. Cordes. (W Post, Mar 15/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that Space Station Freedom needed to be everything from a scientific laboratory to "an inspiration to children."  Disagreeing with Goldin, Robert L. Park, representing the American Physical Society, argued that the "Space Station is unlikely to make any significant scientific contribution." (AP, Jul 1/93, Jul 2/93)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly at Edwards Air Force Base after 14 days in orbit, ending the Shuttle program's longest flight with a wealth of new data on weightless in humans. Columbia's mission was only the second in U.S. history totally devoted to medical research.  The Shuttle logged 5.8 million miles and circled Earth 225 times during its journey, which began October 18.  Columbia performed well but sustained damage to thermal barriers around engine heat shields and to its protective tiles.  Both problems have occurred before and will continue to be investigated, a NASA spokesperson said.
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
In an address to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, said that the redesign effort for Space Station Freedom was making "great progress." (AvWk, May 10/93)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
According to  Luke Dones, a visiting Assistant Research Astronomer at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, the Earth's rotation rate may be caused by early collisions with rocks as large as Mars. Without the large impacts, the Earth would rotate only every 200 hours instead of the 24 hours it rotates today, said Dones. (NASA Release 93-012; AP, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Jan 19/93)
NASA unreeled 1,640 feet of cooper wire above Earth and conducted electricity through the line in a space tether test. When refined, such tethers could be used to dispel electrical charges from spacecraft and change spacecraft orbits. The tether spool was carried into space by a Delta 2 rocket launched by the Air Force. (AP, June 26/93; RTw, June 26/93; NY Times, June 27/93; W Post, June 27/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, had awarded the Space Shuttle Orbiter Avionics Software contract to IBM Corporation, Houston.  The contract was for the development and maintenance of the primary avionics support software, tool development and maintenance, and certification of primary flight software. (NASA Release C93-s)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)
A conference committee of the Senate and House eliminated $12.3 million earmarked for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project. Angry astronomers began seeking private funds to continue their work, which had been underway for barely a year. (SF Chron, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 7/93; San Francisco Examiner, Oct 4/93)
Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)
The first flight of NASA's Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS) was scheduled to be launched aboard a U.S. Air Force Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, no earlier than March 18. The SEDS tether system would be a secondary payload on the Delta 2 launch vehicle. (NASA Advisory, Mar 11/93)
After conferring with Space Station contractor McDonnell Douglas, space officials confirmed that a cost overrun of at least $500 million was expected if costs were not brought under control. They told a congressional panel that the Station was now a $31.3 billion project. The increases appeared to be mainly in the Johnson Space Center portion of the program. NASA's Marty Kress, the Space Station project's new deputy director, said managers were determined to lower costs and were considering various means for doing so. Key congressional aides expressed anger at the news of the overrun, noting that for years NASA had ignored their advice on a design strategy to lower costs. (W Post, Jan 31/93; Space News, Feb 1-7/93; O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
NASA announced that the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, would lead a multi-year research program effort to develop technology for a future high-speed civil transport. According to Louis Williams, Director of the High-Speed Research Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., "The program is laying a technical foundation for an environmentally compatible, economically practical commercial transport that could contribute up to 140,000 jobs and $200 billion to the national economy in the next century." (NASA Release 93-52; Daily Press, May 24/93)
The U.S. Postal Service unveiled a new $2.90 stamp featuring the image of a futuristic spaceship. Deputy Postmaster General Michael Coughlin and ex-astronaut Robert Crippen, director of the Kennedy Space Center, dedicated the stamp at a brief ceremony that was to have occurred the same day as the launch of Shuttle Endeavour. That launch was delayed for two weeks because of engine problems. (AP, June 3/93)
NASA selected Hughes STX Corporation, Lanham, Maryland, to negotiate a five-year contract, proposed at $121,7 million, to provide support of computer systems management for Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C93-m)
Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)
According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
A team of astronomers from the University of Massachusetts in Amherst and Arizona's Kitt Peak Observatory announced at a gathering of the American Astronomical Society in Phoenix that they had gotten a glimpse of hundreds of sun-like stars shortly after the stars emerged from the clouds of dust that would have obscured their birth. The team found that many stars begin life in small, tight-knit families and at that stage are surrounded by orbiting disks of dust grains and gas. Scientists believe that this is the material from which planets like Earth are derived. (W Post, Jan 11/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
Harris B. Hull, 83, a retired Air Force brigadier general and former special assistant to the administrator of NASA, died January 29 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington after a heart attack. General Hull was assigned to NASA in 1963. After retiring from the Air Force in 1964, he remained with NASA until retiring in 1986. (W Post, Feb, 1/93; NY Times, Feb 2/93)
