At the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston, astrophysicists Alexander G. Kosovichev of Stanford University and Valentina V. Zharkova of the University of Glasgow in Scotland presented evidence confirming their “solar-bomb theory.” Using sequential images that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft had captured, the two scientists explained that, 20 minutes following the rupture of a solar flare from the surface of the Sun, “a seismic wave front surges across the [S]un’s face like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond.” The SOHO images proved that solar flares not only release energy into the Sun’s atmosphere, but also “trigger huge waves of seismic energy that ripple through the [S]un like earthquakes.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Solar Flares Trigger Sunquakes,” 27 May 1998; A. G. Kosovichev and V. V. Zharkova, “X-ray Flare Sparks Quake Inside Sun,” Nature 383, no. 6683 (28 May 1998): 317.)
The Boeing Company announced the creation of a new subsidiary called Boeing Space Operations, based in Houston, Texas, at the Johnson Space Center, which would provide various services for government and commercial space operations. Rick Stephens, the president of the new subsidiary, stated that the goal of Boeing Space Operations was to make Boeing “the global provider of low-cost, reliable, commercially based space operations services.”(James Wallace, “Boeing Forms a New Unit To Boost Its Space Business,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 3 June 1998.)
Shuttle operator United Space Alliance (USA) cut 363 jobs at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), one of the largest cutbacks in decades. Combining the layoffs with 194 voluntary resignations, USA eliminated 557 jobs at KSC. In implementing the cutbacks, the company hoped to “trim $100 million from the current [S]huttle budget,” thereby reducing costs, improving efficiency, and attracting new payload customers without compromising safety.(Richard Burnett and Seth Borenstein, “363 Lose Jobs at Space Center,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1998.)
NASA announced that an intense wave of gamma rays, emanating from a magnetar 20,000 light- years away from Earth, had struck Earth’s atmosphere on 27 August. Stanford University professor Umran Inan remarked that the occurrence, which had a measurable effect on Earth, was extremely rare, since the event occurred outside the solar system. The radiation wave was “so powerful that it blasted sensitive detectors to maximum or off scale on at least seven scientific spacecraft in Earth-orbit and around the solar system.”(NASA, “Tremendous Gamma-Ray Flare Blasts Earth,” news release 98-172, 29 September 1998.)
Russia’s first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russia’s largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a “revolution,” because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, “Delta Lifts Russian Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia,” 23 November 1998.)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
Shuttle Endeavour docked with Mir at an altitude of 214 nautical miles (2,467 miles or 3,970 kilometers), bringing the seventh American astronaut to work on board Mir since the program began in 1995. Andrew S. W. Thomas, a mechanical engineer, replaced David A. Wolf, a physician, who had been on board Mir since September. The hatches opened at 5:25 p.m. (EST), and Thomas's transfer occurred at 6:35 p.m. (EST).(New York Times, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station with Astronaut and Supplies,” 25 January 1998; NASA, “STS- 89.”)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would “play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States.” With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could “detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone.” The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, “Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, “U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket,” 9 May 1998.)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, “Orbital’s Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecraft’s First Signals Indicate Early Success,” 2 April 1998.)
Two scientific teams, independently studying HR 4796, a star in the southern constellation Centaurus, announced they had captured “the strongest evidence yet” of a new group of planets forming around the star. The teams used the 10-meter (33-foot) W. M. Keck II Telescope on top of the extinct Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii, and the National Science Foundation’s 4-meter (13-foot) Blanco Telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile. Using both of these sensitive new instruments, the research teams believed they could see clearly, through the glare of the star, a planet-forming disc of gas and dust. A third international team of British and American astronomers released the first images of the huge discs, which appeared to be forming around two other stars, Fomalhaut and Vega, the star made famous in the novel and movie Contact. The third team used the 15-meter (49-foot) James Clerk Maxwell Telescope, also atop Mauna Kea. Scientists considered the discoveries of the discs around the stars a missing link in the study of planetary system formation, offering them clues about the formation of rocky planets like Earth.(Kathy Sawyer, “Oh, Baby! Telescopes Show the Birth of a Solar System; New Imaging Sharpens Delivery Room View,” Washington Post, 22 April 1998.)
James K. Yungel, a NASA scientist studying Earth remote sensing, discussed a joint project underway at Monterey Peninsula Airport, involving NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The researchers had parked at the airport a Twin Otter airplane, with a scanning laser system and a global-positioning-satellite receiver, to make precise measurements of the West Coast, mapping the changes El Niño had caused along the coastline. The goal of the survey was to create “the most highly detailed map yet of the West Coast,” increasing scientists’ ability to predict erosion over the next decade.(Michael McCabe, “NASA Mapping West Coast in Wake of El Niño: Most Rigorous Survey Ever Should Help Predict Erosion,” San Francisco Chronicle, 17 April 1998.)
NASA dedicated as a U.S. Air Force conference center the newly renovated, historic control center, Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, the site of the Mercury program launches. The domed blockhouse with 10-foot-thick (3-meter-thick), reinforced concrete walls had protected launch controllers from possible explosions of Atlas rockets launched only 1,000 feet (305 meters) away. The renovation preserved the periscopes that controllers had used to safely view launches. The control center was at the launch site of the first piloted orbital flight of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.(USA Today, “Cape Canaveral Restores Piece of Space Age History,” 11 May 1998.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planet’s polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyor’s data; the Arizona researchers believed that a “concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes.” The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water “was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.”(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, “Mars Discovery,” 28 May 1998; Washington Times, “Minerals Suggest Life in Mars’ Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers,” 28 May 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
American astronaut David A. Wolf made his first spacewalk, accompanied by veteran spacewalker Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Commander of the Mir space station. Solovyev, making his 18th spacewalk, set the world’s record for the highest number of spacewalks by one individual.382 The spacewalk began 20 minutes later than scheduled, because of problems opening locks on the malfunctioning outer hatch. The scheduled task had been to assess wear and tear on the exterior of the station using a photoreflectometer designed in the United States. David A. Wolf worked for 2 hours trying to verify whether the device was working properly, but only succeeded in taking readings on the shell of the nine-year-old Kvant-2 module, one of the station’s oldest compartments. Engineers planned to use the data to help make selections for materials and protective coatings for the new ISS. Flight Director Vladimir A. Solovyov explained in a news conference at Mission Control outside Moscow, “the device proved to be far from mature, so it was decided to skip the examination of the core module.” Instead, the two men studied the holes in the Spektr module, which had suffered punctures during a collision with a cargo craft on 25 June 1997.(USA Today, “American Looks at Mir from Outside,” 15 January 1998; Oleg Shchedrov for Reuters, “Hitches Marred Mir Crew Space Walk, Says Official,” 15 January 1998; Houston Chronicle, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Take Short Spacewalk: Excursion Marked by a Few Small Difficulties,” 15 January 1998.)
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the craft’s fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Solar Probe Back Under Control,” 17 September 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being “one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon.” A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepard’s spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, “Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard,” news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, “Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74,” news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard,” government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shepard’s Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age,” USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, “Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: ‘Pioneer’s Pioneer’ also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon,” Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced the hiring of Space Gateway Support of Herndon, Virginia, to run base operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Patrick Air Force Base, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Johnson Controls and EG&G Florida at KSC had previously held base-operations contracts at the military bases. The new joint base-operations- support contract was worth US$1 billion for five years, with the option to renew for another five years. In consolidating the contracts, the agencies intended to cut costs. According to officials, continuing separate base-operations contracts would have cost 30 percent more. Other primary customers under the contract included government contractors for NASA and U.S. Air Force spaceflight operations, payload ground operations, life sciences, expendable vehicles, and launch operations and support.(NASA, “SGS Awarded NASA and Air Force Joint Base Contract,” contract announcement C98-m, 21 August 1998; Joni James, “Base Operations Under 1 Contract,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 August 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
SPACEHAB Inc., a Virginia-based, commercial space company with a staff of 85, purchased the Johnson Engineering Corporation, a 400-person firm contracted to support NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. SPACEHAB’s chairperson said the company would “expand the use of Johnson Engineering’s larger technical staff to support its plans for expansion into the commercial space arena.” Investors had incorporated SPACEHAB in 1984, to “develop a commercial research module that could accommodate small, private, as well as government- financed science experiments and engineering tests during [S]pace [S]huttle mission[s].” However, when the anticipated commercial market had failed to develop, SPACEHAB “changed its strategy,” winning NASA contracts. NASA used SPACEHAB modules, stored in the Shuttle’s payload bays, as cargo containers for storing “tons of food, clothing, and other gear that was ferried to Russia’s Mir space station aboard a series of recently concluded U.S. [S]huttle flights.”(Mark Carreau, “Spacehab of Virginia Acquires NASA Contractor,” Houston Chronicle, 5 July 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
NASA announced the arrest of “the suspected leader of a group of computer hackers who broke into the network of a NASA laboratory.” Law enforcement agents accused twenty-year-old Calldan Levi Coffman of Carson, Washington, suspected leader of a group called ViRii, of infiltrating the networks of various corporations, universities, and other government agencies, in addition to breaching the security of computer systems at NASA’s JPL last June. NASA’s Computer Crimes Division had worked with other government agencies, including the U.S. Naval Intelligence Service, the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations, and the FBI, to uncover a link between Coffman’s group and Israeli hacker Ehud Tenenbaum, known as The Analyzer. Law enforcement officials suspected Tenenbaum of organizing a confederation of hacker groups, including his own group and Coffman’s group.(Associated Press, “NASA Hacker,” 18 March 1998; Billington for United Press International, “Hacker ‘Confederacy’,” 20 March 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
NASA awarded its combined space operations contract to Lockheed Martin, covering operations at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida; Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama; and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The contract, worth US$1.9 billion for the first five years, with a five-year renewal worth an additional US$1.5 billion, covered the cost of directing, monitoring, and downloading data from spacecraft. NASA estimated that the contract, consolidating work previously done under 17 separate contracts, would save US$1.4 billion over 10 years.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Space Operations Co. Awarded Contract To Manage NASA’s Space Operations,” contract announcement c98-p, 25 September 1998; Peter Behr, “Lockheed Team Wins NASA Contract; $3.4 Billion Big Beats Out Boeing,” Washington Post, 26 September 1998; Anna Wilde Mathews, “Lockheed Group Wins NASA Pact for $3.44 Billion,” Wall Street Journal, 28 September 1998.)
A fire that started in a shed containing an air compressor spread to another building of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), causing extensive damage. No one was injured, and firefighters were able to stop the blaze before it reached laboratories containing hazardous and flammable materials. Fire investigators had not determined the cause of the fire. NASA did not permit the investigators to survey the damage immediately, because of sensitive material housed in the affected building.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire,” 20 August 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
A US$35,000 study commissioned by the Florida Space Business Roundtable revealed that commercial satellite companies did not favor Cape Canaveral as a launch site. The Florida Space Business Roundtable presented its findings at the Florida Space Launch Symposium in Melbourne, Florida. In the survey, executives from satellite manufacturing companies rated spaceports, evaluating them in 11 categories, such as their launch base facilities, flight scheduling, governmental red tape, and on-site technical services. The executives’ favorite launch site was Vandenberg Air Force Base in central California, and they selected Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China as the worst place to launch. Florida’s spaceports did well in two categories, but business executives considered red tape at those facilities a problem.(Todd Halvorson, “Survey: Brevard Launch Sites Fail To Measure Up—Space Coast Falls Short for Commercial Liftoffs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 February 1998.)
NASA announced the arrival of international astronaut candidates at Johnson Space Center, where they began training as members of the 1998 astronaut class. The international candidates, from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, and Italy, were Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, Hans W. Schlegel, and Roberto Vittori of the European Space Agency; Bjarni V. Tryggvason of the Canadian Space Agency; and Marco C. Pontes of the Brazilian Space Agency.
NASA announced that it had restructured and renamed its Office of Aeronautics and Space Transportation Technology, known as Code R, appointing retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Spence M. Armstrong to head the newly reorganized Office of Aero-Space Technology. NASA’s spokesperson said that NASA’s management had created three new divisions within the Office⎯Goals, Programs, and Institutions⎯to help NASA achieve its goals. Major goals included accessing space more cheaply, with reusable launch vehicle programs; creating greater synergy between aeronautics and space transportation technology; decreasing aircraft accident rates, while tripling the nation’s aviation-system capacity; diminishing aircraft noise and emissions; and reducing the cost of air travel and the cost of placing payloads in orbit. The role of the Goals Division would be to implement the challenging development of new technologies; that of the Programs Division would be to manage the various programs within the Office, and the Institutions Division would oversee “institutional problems at the field centers.”(NASA, “Aeronautics Enterprise Reorganizes and Changes Name,” news release 98-187, 14 October; Aerospace Daily, “NASA Renames, Reorganizes Code R under Armstrong,” 15 October 1998.)
NASA announced that JSC had modified its contract with United Space Alliance, awarding the contractor more Shuttle work. Three other NASA contractors had previously performed the more than US$900 million of work on the Space Shuttle’s solid rocket booster and other elements. USBI Company at Kennedy Space Center had worked on the boosters; Lockheed Martin Corporation in Houston, Texas, had designed and produced the primary Shuttle avionics software; and Boeing Aerospace Operations in Houston had processed flight equipment.(NASA, “NASA Awards More Shuttle Work to USA,” news release c98-h, 7 July 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States’ first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States’ 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life,” 31 January 1998.)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs,” 22 January 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martin–built Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASA’s Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Rocket Explosion,” 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, “Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite,” Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
Controllers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), “activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun.” Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHO’s mission was to track “major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space.” The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Sun’s atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted,” news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears It’s Lost,” USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had “apparently outshone all the rest of the universe” for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and “pinpointed the position of the rays’ source.” The United States’ Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, “Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories,” news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
Minnie, the last living astro-chimp, died of old age at forty-one-years-old. Minnie had lived out her retirement at Holloman Air Force Base under the care of the Coulston Foundation. Minnie, an understudy for chimps Ham and Enos, was the only female chimpanzee to train for the Mercury Project in the early 1960s, but she had never flown in space. Ham had become the first chimpanzee in space when he had made a 15-minute suborbital flight in 1961, before Alan B. Shepard Jr.’s flight that May. Enos’s orbital flight had been a precursor to John H. Glenn Jr.’s flight in February 1962.(Los Angeles Times, “Minnie, Last of the Early U.S. Space Program ‘Astro-Chimps’, Dies at 41,” 28 March 1998. 439 Mike Billington for United Press International, “Hacker ‘Confederacy’ Hits Pentagon,” 20 March 1998; Michael J. Sniffen for Associated Press, “US-Israel-Analyzer,” 20 March 1998; Washington Post, “Five Teens Suspected of Hacking into Pentagon Computers,” 20 March 1998.)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billion–light-year–long “corridor,” the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a “core sample” of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a “small patch of space near the Big Dipper.”(NASA, “The Universe ‘Down Under’ Is the Target of Hubble’s Latest Deep-View,” news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, “Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew,” news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Just hours before Endeavour touched down in Florida, a new crew from Russia docked at Mir to begin a three-week transition from Mir 24 to Mir 25. Mir 25 Commander Talgat A. Musabayev replaced Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Flight Engineer Nikolai M. Budarin replaced Pavel V. Vinogradov, and Researcher Léopold Eyharts, a 40-year old French air force pilot on his first spaceflight, joined the crew.(NASA, “STS-89”; Washington Post, “2 Russians, Frenchman Blast Off for Mir,” 30 January 1998.)
At an American Geophysical Union meeting, a team of research scientists led by David E. Smith of GSFC discussed new research findings based on data collected in the spring and summer by the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA). The data indicated that the ice cap on Mars’s north pole, although definitely water ice, is much smaller than previously thought. The scientists concluded that the amount of water in the ice cap is not voluminous enough to have created the “deep gullies that scar the surface of the planet,” nor could it have filled an ancient ocean. MOLA images showed the ice cap resting in a deep basin, possibly created by an asteroid impact. Scientists described this formation as unique in the solar system. The team of researchers remarked that their findings raised more questions about Mars’s formation and conditions than they answered.(NASA, “Laser Provides First 3-D View of Mars’ North Pole,” news release 98-219, 7 December 1998; Joseph B. Verrenga for Associated Press, “Icecap Seen on Mars’ North Pole,” 6 December 1998; Maria T. Zuber et al., “Observations of the North Polar Region of Mars from the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter,” Science 282, no. 5396 (11 December 1998): 2053.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was “a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula,” the site of a gas cloud generating enough water “to fill the Earth’s oceans 60 times a day.” The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting “large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula.” The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time “the vital role that water plays in star formation,” may “provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Michael Werner of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, “that water is prevalent in space” and “plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth,” 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, “Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, “Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
The Iridium World Communications system global, digital wireless communications network completed a series of deployment missions, with the launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California of five Iridium satellites aboard a Boeing Delta II launch vehicle. The successful launch had completed the entire Iridium constellation “in just twelve months.” The world’s first global, wireless telephone company scheduled its commercial service to begin four months following this last launch, once it had completed integrating and testing the Iridium system.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Delta II Rocket Places Iridium Satellites into Orbit,” 17 May 1998.)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagon’s National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 11⁄2 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was “the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center.” NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a “whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac,” the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, “so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids” to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, “X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test,” news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, “Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight,” Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena II’s first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, “Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, “Late Flagstaff Astronomer’s Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute,” Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, “NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers,” 7 January 1998.)
Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been “personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts.” He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nation’s first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, “William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts,” New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) launched into orbit, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, a new weather satellite, the NOAA-K, aboard a 34- year old converted Titan II nuclear missile. The satellite was an Advanced Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS-N) weather satellite, able to see inside clouds, a feature that scientists expected would greatly increase our knowledge of how hurricanes develop and move. The TIROS-N was the latest model of TIROS satellite in four generations. Lockheed Martin had last built a TIROS satellite for NASA and NOAA in 1960. After the launch of the TIROS-N, the satellite would undergo a series of tests by NASA, followed by a round of tests by NOAA, before becoming fully available in time for next year’s hurricane season.(Justin Ray, “New NOAA Weather Satellite Will Keep a Better Eye on Hurricanes,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 1998; Business Wire, “Nation’s Newest Advanced Weather Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully,” 14 May 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASA’s early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study “how space travel affects an aging astronaut’s body.”(Bill Sammon, “Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit,” Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle,” New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenn’s Flight; SPACEHAB,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would “compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches,” while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, “Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur.” Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, “Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project,” Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
Scientists studying images taken by NASA’s Galileo spacecraft announced, in a joint teleconference with Cornell University and NASA’s JPL, that Jupiter’s rings appeared to consist of dust, created in the course of millions of years, as asteroids and comets crashed into the four small moons nearest the planet’s surface⎯Metis, Adrastea, Amalthea, and Thebe. The images, captured during several hours in November 1996, when Galileo was able to observe the rings lit up by the Sun, had provided “unprecedented details of the tiny dust particles.” Furthermore, scientists observed that, in the images, “the three rings stopped abruptly at different moons.” Images from a second flyby in September 1997 had confirmed that “the depths of the three rings matched the depths of the moons’ orbits,” and that material in the rings “matched the dark red dust on the moons’ surface.” The scientists said that more moons than rings exist, because some of the moons supply dust to more than one ring.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Jupiter’s Rings Formed by Dust Blasted Off Small Moons,” news release 98-167, 15 September 1998; New York Times, “New Images Clear Up a Jupiter Mystery: Its Rings Are Just Dust,” 16 September 1998; Dennis Cauchon, “Scientists Solve Mystery of Jupiter’s Rings: Pictures Suggest Asteroid Impacts Stirred Moon Dust,” USA Today, 16 September 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
Eighteen members of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton, urging him to “abandon plans to reach an agreement in China on expanding space cooperation because of Beijing’s weapons transfers and human rights abuses.” The letter was the House’s response to a 29 April report in the Washington Times, disclosing a plan to conclude a space cooperation agreement at the Beijing summit. The article discussed a draft agreement calling for the free and unrestricted exchange of scientific data between NASA and the State Science and Technology Commission of China, a key developer of weapons-related technology. The lawmakers, warning that the pact would increase the likelihood of China’s sharing technology with rogue states, referred to a CIA report stating that China had aimed 13 of its 18 long-range strategic missiles at the United States. These comments emphasized the concern of members of Congress that China constituted a direct threat to the United States. Many opponents of the agreement insisted that the United States should not share with China technologies or applications that enemies of the United States might use against the American people or U.S. interests.(Bill Gertz, “House Science Panelists Oppose Space Pact with China,” Washington Times, 24 June 1998.)
The Organization of American Historians presented the 1998 Richard W. Leopold Prize to Andrew J. Butrica for his book, To See the Unseen: A History of Planetary Radar Astronomy. The organization awarded the biennial Richard W. Leopold Prize “for the best book written by an historian connected with federal, state, or municipal government in the areas of foreign policy, military affairs, the historical activities of the federal government, or biography in one of these areas.” Butrica’s book, a comprehensive history of planetary radar astronomy, was a publication of the NASA History Series produced by the NASA Headquarters History Division’s Office of Policy and Plans.(NASA, “NASA History Wins Prestigious Prize,” news release 98-53, 3 April 1998.)
The crew closed the hatches used to transfer equipment between Endeavour and Mir at 5:34 p.m. (EST) in preparation for Endeavour’s return flight to Earth. The closure of the hatches concluded five days of Endeavour’s continuous link-up with Mir, during which time the astronauts and cosmonauts had transferred 9,600 pounds (4,350 kilograms) of materials. In addition to equipment exchanges, the crew exchanged American astronaut David A. Wolf for Andrew S. W. Thomas, a U.S. astronaut born in Australia, who was to remain aboard Mir for a planned four- and-one-half-month mission.
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
Pursuant to H. Res. 572, the U.S. House of Representatives agreed to an amended version of H.R. 1702, the Commercial Space Act of 1998.595 The legislation gave the Federal Aviation Administration the authority to issue licenses to private companies for the launch of reusable space vehicles like NASA’s Shuttle. Supporters of the measure stressed that enactment of the law would “better enable American companies to compete in an increasingly competitive international marketplace,” warning that, without this law, the United States would risk losing the space industry to overseas markets. The legislation also required NASA to submit a report and an independently conducted market study to Congress, identifying commercial opportunities and evaluating commercial interest in the development of the ISS.(Jim Abrams for Associated Press, “House Bills Help Federal Workers,” 5 October 1998; Associated Press, “House Sends Senate Bill To Allow Private Space Launches,” 5 October 1998.)
