Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASA’s JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Center’s goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSC’s Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director,” news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
NASA launched the Genesis solar research spacecraft from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Genesis would collect samples of solar wind to assist scientists in studies of the formation of Earth’s solar system. Scientists believed that the plasma in solar wind might contain material similar to or identical with the material that formed the solar system. The 633-kilogram (1,400-pound) spacecraft was equipped with four instruments: a wide-angle ion collector, a concentrated ion collector, an ion spectrometer, and an electron spectrometer. Donald S. Burnett of California Institute of Technology was Principal Investigator and Project Scientist for Genesis.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574, 1 September 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx574.html (accessed 7 November 2008); NASA JPL, “Genesis, Search for Origins: Why Study the Sun?” http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/gm2/science/solarwind.htm (accessed 7 November 2008).)
Wallace D. Hayes, an aeronautical engineer and longtime Princeton University professor, died at age 82 after a long battle with Parkinson’s disease. His colleagues referred to Hayes as “a giant in his field,” Hayes had helped design the first planes that could safely break the sound barrier. Hayes’s 1959 book Hypersonic Flow Theory had outlined the scientific principles behind hypersonic flight, as well as the necessary technology to accomplish it. Although decades passed before his theories produced functional aircraft, many consider Hayes the father of high-speed flight. According to Robert Probstein, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, “Every supersonic aircraft, in my opinion, owes to him their design.” Hayes had worked with NASA and a handful of elite American universities during his stellar career. In his association with NASA, he had worked to limit sonic booms from supersonic jets, an achievement that enabled supersonic jets to travel freely over populated areas.(Mark Mueller, “Aerospace Pioneer Wallace Hayes DiesObituary,” Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ), 11 March 2001. 29 Vladimir Isachenkov, “Russia to Insure Mir Descent Negotiating $200 Million Spacecraft Policy,” Chicago Sun- Times, 7 March 2001.)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, NASA scientists Patricia T. Boyd and Alan P. Smale, both working at NASA’s GSFC, announced that they had uncovered a predictable mathematical pattern governing the release of x-ray light from binary star systems. Boyd and Smale had tracked the emission of x-rays from three binary star systems over a period of several years, determining that the number of days between the low points of emission in each binary system was always based on multiples of a single constant number. The discovery countered the common perception among scientists that flares and bursts happen completely at random, suggesting that a repeatable process occurs when swirling matter pours into a black hole, thereby creating an emission. According to Smale, the ongoing challenge would be to combine this knowledge of a pattern, while still considering the many random factors. “The interplay between periodic and random components in these systems is a puzzle,” Smale concluded.(NASA, “Method Uncovered in Madness of Black Hole and Neutron Star Eruptions,” news release 01-111, 5 June 2001.)
Presiding over the launch of a Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite, Major Nina M. Armagno became the first female launch director at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Armagno assumed responsibility for a 400-person crew and for making the final decision about whether to proceed with launch plans.(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
Arthur F. Davidsen, an astrophysicist who had helped found the Space Telescope Science Institute at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, died at age 57. Davidsen had served for many years as a professor of physics and astronomy at Johns Hopkins, focusing much of his research on the missing mass or dark matter of the universe. His findings had led to the development of the theory that, because of the reflecting light of other bodies, we are able to observe only about 1 percent of the universe’s matter. Davidsen’s work indicated that, although the remaining matter exists, it remains hidden from us. Not only had Davidsen led his colleagues in establishing the Space Telescope Science Institute, but he had also encouraged the Institute to participate in operating the HST. In his later years, Davidsen had even begun planning for the instrument that would eventually supplant the HST as the world’s foremost astronomical tool. Davidsen had trained at Princeton University and at the University of California at Berkeley. In 1979 he had won the American Astronomical Society’s Helen B. Warner Prize for his work using a rocket to obtain the first ultraviolet spectrum of a quasar.(Martin Weil, “Hopkins Astrophysicist Arthur Davidsen Dies,” Washington Post, 22 July 2001; Los Angeles Times, “Obituaries: Arthur Davidsen; Astrophysicist Led Work To Build Knowledge of Universe,” 23 July 2001. 88 NASA, “NASA Celebrates 25th Anniversary of Mars Landing,” news release 01-143, 17 July 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, to honor the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks, NASA would carry American flags into space and give the flags to survivors of the attacks and families of the victims. NASA called the memorial to the people who had lost their lives in the events of 11 September “Flags for Heroes and Families.” Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to launch on 29 November 2001, would carry nearly 6,000 flags. NASA would later have the flags mounted on specially designed memorial certificates and would distribute them to survivors and to victims’ families.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Launches ‘Flags for Heroes and Families’ Campaign,” news release 01-195, 11 October 2001.)
A rocket carrying a NASA satellite and other payloads failed to reach orbit. The 91-foot (27.7- meter) Taurus rocket launched at 11:49 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, and within minutes, NASA observed indications of problems with the rocket, including a skewed trajectory near the time of the first-stage separation. The rocket’s manufacturer Orbital Sciences Corporation was uncertain about the exact details of the launch problem but presumed that the rocket had not reached orbit. The rocket was carrying NASA’s ozone-analyzing Quick Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (QuikTOMS) satellite, a private imaging satellite called OrbView-4, and a private payload with the cremated remains of individuals who had paid to have their remains launched into orbit.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch with NASA, Orbital Sciences Payload Goes Awry, Satellites Probably Lost,” 21 September 2001.)
Terrorists hijacked four U.S. planes, subsequently crashing them in New York City, Pennsylvania, and Washington, DC. The incidents led to the deaths of nearly 3,000 people. The federal government immediately responded by grounding all commercial air traffic, and NASA closed its major facilities throughout the country.(Mark Carreau, “Cautious NASA Shuts Down Johnson Space Center, Other Major Facilities,” Houston Chronicle, 12 September 2001; U.S. Department of Transportation, “Statement of Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta,” news release 93-01, 11 September 2001.)
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics to former NASA scientist Wolfgang Ketterle and two other scientists, Eric A. Cornell and Carl E. Wieman. Ketterle was a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Principal Investigator for NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) in Washington, DC. The three scientists received the Nobel Prize for their work in discovering a new state of matter called Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC), named after the two physicists who had made the initial theoretical calculations of such matter. BEC consists of atomic particles that all have the same energy and that researchers can oscillate in a controlled manner. Cornell and Wieman had created a pure condensate of rubidium atoms, and Ketterle had independently produced BEC with sodium atoms. However, Ketterle’s condensates had also enabled further investigation of the new type of matter, because his condensates contained more atoms than those of Cornell and Wieman. In addition, Ketterle had produced other research that further advanced understanding of the phenomenon.(Nobel Foundation, “The Nobel Prize in Physics 2001,” http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/ laureates/2001/press.html (accessed 23 November 2008).)
U.S. Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta allowed privately owned and operated aircraft to use the nation’s airspace as part of a phased restoration of the national airspace system. However, the Department of Transportation would allow this category of aircraft―often referred to as general aviation―to resume flights only if they complied with certain restrictions. For example, general aviation flights would have to operate according to the Instrument Flight Rules, which required certified pilots to operate under direction from air traffic controllers subsequent to filing specific flight plans with the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In addition, the Department of Transportation would not permit general aviation flights to fly within 25 nautical miles of New York City or Washington, DC.(FAA, “Secretary Mineta Re-opens Skies to General Aviation,” news release DOT 97-01, 14 September 2001, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsid=5432 (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Lockheed Martin confirmed that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) had decided not to fund the company’s development of the X-33 space plane, a possible replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Since 1996, Lockheed Martin had been developing a pilotless prototype of the X- 33, a reusable spacecraft that would be able to launch without shedding fuel tanks or boosters and to land like an airplane. However, the development of lightweight fuel tanks had taken the project off schedule and over budget, and NASA had decided in March 2001 to forego continued funding for the X-33, although it was, reportedly, 75 percent complete. When Lockheed Martin had subsequently attempted to secure another government sponsor for the project, the U.S. Air Force had expressed interest in the project and submitted to the Pentagon a proposal to fund the space plane. However, the DOD had since determined that the project was too costly to undertake.(Michael Cabbage, “Air Force Decides Not To Revive Lockheed’s X-33 Space Plane,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
For the first time, NASA and the Canadian Space Agency made available the data gathered by the Terra spacecraft, carrying the technologically advanced Measurements of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT) experiment. The data, released at the American Geophysical Union meeting, revealed more clearly than any previous readings the presence of immense clouds of carbon monoxide over Africa and South America. The readings also charted dense air-pollution plumes over Southeast Asia. The MOPITT data pointed to natural factors such as forest fires, as well as human contributors such as industrial pollution, as causes of the increased carbon- monoxide readings. The scientific community greeted the release of the new data, and the promise of more to come, with excitement, because the MOPITT data would be vital in the quest to understand Earth’s changing climate. According to one researcher who was already mining the MOPITT data for an extensive study, the new data had the potential “to improve our understanding of the linkages between air pollution and global environment change.”(NASA, “NCAR NASA/CSA Monitor Provides Global Air Pollution View from Space,” news release 01-102, 30 May 2001.)
A team of European and American astronomers announced that they had obtained the first observations of energy leaving a black hole. The scientists, who had used ESA’s XMM-Newton satellite to observe a supermassive black hole in the center of galaxy MCG-6–30–15, had detected an x-ray glow emanating from iron gas that was moving at half the speed of the light that was close to the black hole. The scientists believed that the x-ray glow resulted from friction produced by matter rotating around a black hole before falling into it. Because the black hole’s gravity is sufficiently intense to wrap magnetic field lines around it, the entwined magnetic fields tighten around the black hole, slowing its rotation, and, as a result, increasing the temperature of the region surrounding the black hole. Observed gravity-stretching particles of light in the iron gas, the scientists had discovered unexpectedly that the total energy output of the gas was too high for only gravity and the descent of matter into the black hole to be providing the power source. The scientists had concluded that an additional power source must be increasing the energy output of the gas to the observed intensity.(NASA, “New Energy Source ‘Wrings’ Power from Black Hole Spin,” news release 01-200, 22 October 2001; Jörn Wilms et al., “XMM-EPIC Observation of MCG-6-30-15: Direct Evidence for the Extraction of Energy from a Spinning Black Hole,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 328, no. 3 (11 December 2001): L27–L31.)
A group of scientists from Stanford University and NASA’s GSFC published research providing the first clear evidence of the causes of sunspots. Sunspots are large dark areas on the surface of the Sun that can last for weeks or longer. The scientists had used the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO)―a project of NASA and ESA―to conduct an acoustic tomography of a large sunspot on 18 June 1998. This technique, much like medical ultrasound diagnostics, had enabled the scientists to conduct subsurface observations of the sunspot, whereas previous research had relied only on surface observations. Researchers had already known that material flows out of sunspots and that the magnetic field below sunspots obstructs the upward flow of energy from the solar interior, thus making the sunspot cooler than its surroundings. However, the SOHO data revealed that material also flows into sunspots, because the cooler material at the sunspot’s top condenses and flows downward, pulling the surrounding plasma and magnetic field inward with it. This concentration of material leads to further cooling of plasma, which, in turn, flows downward and draws in more plasma in a self-perpetuating cycle. These findings also clarified the previously unexplained attraction of magnetic fields with like polarities in sunspots. This characteristic had puzzled scientists because such magnetic fields generally repel rather than draw towards each other.(Junwei Zhao, Alexander G. Kosovichev, and Thomas L. Duvall Jr., “Investigation of Mass Inflows Beneath a Sunspot by Time-Distance Helioseismology,” Astrophysical Journal 557, no. 1 (10 August 2001): 384–388; NASA, “The Sun’s Dark Secret: How Sunspots Pull Themselves Together,” news release 01-216, 6 November 2001.)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASA’s global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASA’s JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deere’s NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm,” news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the “newest power couple” in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, “Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XM’s ‘Roll’ Satellite,” 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, “Sea Launch Sends ‘Roll’ Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio,” Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Lander’s safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, “Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration,” at the National Geographic Society’s Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Mars’s Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Mars’s surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Mars’s hostile but fascinating landscape.
At the American Astronomical Society convention, astronomers Victoria M. Kaspi and Mallory S. E. Roberts of McGill University presented evidence dating a known pulsar to 386 AD. Because scientists consider it quite difficult to determine the age of particular pulsars or of any astronomical body, the scientific community regarded the find as especially significant. The researchers had used NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to locate the pulsar exactly at the center of a supernova remnant known as G11.2-0.3, which astronomers had already definitively dated. Scientists believed that both the pulsar and the supernova had formed during an explosion in 386 ADan event that early Chinese astronomers had recorded. Astronomers have experienced difficulty tracking and interpreting the patterns of pulsars, because the formations spin and move rapidly. In light of the successful dating, many scientists hoped that the discovery might help them understand how pulsars develop.(NASA, “Chandra Links Pulsar to Historic Supernova,” news release 01-02, 10 January 2001.)
The New York Times revealed that, in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 11 September, the U.S. government had changed the rules of engagement regarding the circumstances in which the U.S. military could shoot down civilian aircraft. The newspaper had interviewed U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart, who had provided some cursory details of the military’s rules of engagement for civilian aircraft. Before 11 September, the DOD had no formal rules concerning military engagement of a hijacked airplane when the flight had originated within the United States. However, on an unnamed date after 11 September, White House officials and the Joint Chiefs of Staff had approved new rules, stipulating that the U.S. military could down an aircraft that presented a security threat, but that the President of the United States or one of four specified U.S. Air Force generals must authorize such an action. The new rules also detailed measures taken by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) and the FAA for better joint surveillance of the nation’s airspace. Those measures included NORAD’s positioning of mobile ground radars around the country and a direct telephone line between the two agencies.(Eric Schmitt, “Generals Given Power To Order Downing of Jets,” New York Times, 27 September 2001.)
1993and to overcome its major management challenges, which GAO and NASA’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) had previously identified. The GPRA required each government agency to develop an annual plan, which must include its performance goals, the resources required to achieve them, and the measures it would use to assess its performance. In its examination of NASA’s FY 2002 performance plan, GAO had determined that NASA had successfully met its stated goals. NASA’s goals for the fiscal year had included expanding commercial development of space and deploying and operating the ISS safely and cost-effectively. However, GAO’s report also stated that NASA’s performance plan had not explained the reasons that NASA had changed its previous performance goals to those stated in the FY 2002 performance plan. In addition, GAO questioned NASA’s measurements of its performance in meeting the stated goals and gave mixed assessments of NASA’s performance in the areas of human-capital management and information security. In its response to the report, NASA concurred with GAO’s findings but it also defended the explanations and measurements of its performance goals, as outlined in its FY 2002 performance plan.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA: Status of Plans for Achieving Key Outcomes and Addressing Major Management Challenges” (report no. GAO-02-184, Washington, DC, November 2001), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d02184.pdf (accessed 8 December 2008).)
NASA commemorated the 75th anniversary of the first successful launch of a liquid-fueled rocket. On 26 March 1926, Robert H. Goddard had launched a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long) rocket fueled by gasoline and liquid oxygen. The rocket flew just over 40 feet (12 meters) high using the same technology that would one day launch massive rockets carrying Space Shuttles and other research craft into space. NASA had named Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) after Robert H. Goddard. At the anniversary celebration, NASA’s Chief Historian Roger D. Launius called Goddard the forefather of American space exploration: “Dr. Goddard was a true visionary, having already visualized flight in outer space by the time he was 21.” Goddard had turned 21 in 1903, some 50 years before space exploration began in earnest. Even 75 years after Goddard’s successful test, NASA continued to use liquid-propulsion systems to launch most of its spacecraft and satellites.(NASA, “March 16 Marks 75th Anniversary of First Liquid-Fueled Rocket Launch,” news release 01-35, 12 March 2001.)
NASA launched the Jason-1 oceanography satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite launched on the same rocket as the TIMED spacecraft, but the two spacecraft were part of separate missions. Jason-1 belonged to a joint U.S.-French mission to monitor global climate interactions between Earth’s atmosphere and seas, continuing the mission that the TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft had begun in 1992. The 500-kilogram (1,100-pound) Jason- 1 weighed about 1/5th of the TOPEX/Poseidon and carried its predecessor’s main instrument―the Poseidon 2 altimeter―as well as other, more advanced instruments that would provide Jason-1 with improved operational utility.(NASA, “NASA/French Ocean-Observing Satellite Set To Soar,” news release 01-225, 19 November 2001; NASA JPL, “Ocean Surface Topography from Space: Missions―Jason-1 Launch,”29 July 2008, http://topex- www.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/jason-1-launch.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA launched the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) spacecraft on a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The purpose of the mission was to study a region called the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere/Ionosphere (MLTI), located 40 to 110 miles (60 to 180 kilometers) above Earth. The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory had designed the spacecraft to produce the first set of comprehensive, global measurements of the MLTI, a region that scientists had not yet thoroughly analyzed, in which electrical currents surge and auroras create a glow over the northern and southern hemispheres of Earth. TIMED, which launched on the same rocket as the Jason-1 oceanography satellite, was the first in a series of six spacecraft that NASA intended to send to observe the MLTI from a 388-mile (625-kilometer) orbit of Earth. NASA’s GSFC would manage the TIMED spacecraft for the Office of Space Science in Washington, DC; the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory would operate the spacecraft for NASA during the mission.
NASA announced that its X-40A aircraft, built by the Boeing Company and on loan from the U.S. Air Force, had successfully passed a test flight, giving the X-37 program a major boost. NASA had designed the X-37, a reusable craft that could launch into space and return safely, for use in testing NASA technologies. To test the flight-control system planned for the X-37, an Army Chinook helicopter lifted the X-40A aircraft to 15,000 feet (4,570 meters) and then released it to a safe landing. NASA’s director of the X-37 program called the successful test, “a cause for celebration,” saying that incremental tests on prototype airplanes would ultimately make the X-37 program both cost-efficient and successful. Scientists hailed the safe landing of the X-40A as a triumph of cooperation among the U.S. military, NASA, and the Boeing Company, with each of the three playing a vital role in the development of the successful craft.(NASA, “Successful X-40A Test Flight Gives Major Boost to NASA’s X-37 Program,” news release 01-51, 21 March 2001; M2 Presswire, “X-40A Flight Test Successful; Major Milestone in X037 Space Plane Project,” 15 March 2001.)
The ISS Partnership agreed to allow space tourist Dennis A. Tito to travel to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TM-32, scheduled to launch at the end of April. The agreement among the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States followed months of disagreement regarding the safety and propriety of allowing the wealthy American businessman to purchase passage into space for US$20 million. Without conferring with NASA or with other members of the ISS Partnership, the Russian Space Agency had made an agreement with Tito permitting him to take a place on Russia’s Soyuz spacecraft. NASA had protested against including an individual who was not a trained astronaut on the spaceflight at such an early point in the ISS’s development. After Russia had reached the agreement with Tito, he had undergone months of training. The ISS Partnership required Tito to sign a waiver absolving NASA of any liability for his safety and required him to promise that he would pay for anything he damaged. The ISS Partnership also announced plans to formalize the criteria for future visits to the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Deal Reported in Long-Running Dispute on Putting Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 April 2000; NASA, “International Space Station Partnership Grants Flight Exemption for Dennis Tito,” news release 01-83, 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Continues To Resist Visit by First Tourist,” 15 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Financier’s Spaceflight Gets Final Clearance,” Washington Post, 25 April 2001.)
Crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS held a brief ceremony to mark the three-month anniversary of the 11 September terrorist attacks. The tribute included playing both the Russian and U.S. national anthems in the Space Shuttle and at ISS Mission Control Centers at NASA’s JSC in Houston. Moreover, Endeavour carried U.S. flags and Marine Corps flags that had flown at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the Pennsylvania State Capitol; shields and patches worn by New York City police officers; a New York Fire Department flag; and a poster with pictures of the firefighters who had died in the attacks. Also aboard the Shuttle were 6,000 American flags, which Endeavour would return to Earth, and NASA would distribute to the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks and their families.(NASA, “Shuttle, Station Crewmembers To Honor September 11 Victims,” news release N01-74, 10 December 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98/ISS-5A lifted off from NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the most expensive and crucial component of the ISSthe United States–built Destiny science laboratory. Mark Stephenson of the Boeing Company, which had built the US$1.4 billion research module, called the vessel “the crown jewel” of the ISS. NASA had set high stakes on the Destiny laboratory, which was so expensive and complicated to build, that NASA could not afford to assemble a backup module. Therefore, any problem in the transport and connection of the Destiny module would set back the ISS several years. NASA had delayed Atlantis’s mission for three weeks when engineers discovered evidence that faulty wiring might compromise the Shuttle’s safety. The vital mission brought the ISS closer to becoming the permanent and highly functional research station that NASA and the international space community had long awaited. The Destiny laboratory measured 28 feet (9 meters) long, weighed more than 30,000 pounds (13,600 kilograms), and held 13 computers. NASA expected to control the ISS using the computers and communications equipment built into Destiny. Because of the Space Shuttle’s cargo, some officials speculated that Atlantis’s mission was the most important for NASA’s research agenda ever undertaken. One NASA spokesperson called the Destiny module “the cornerstone for space-based research aboard the orbiting platform.” The STS-98 crew consisted of Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell; Pilot Mark L. Polansky; and Mission Specialists Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Thomas D. Jones, and Marsha S. Ivins.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-98,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-98.html (accessed 2 February 2009); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Shuttle Flight No. 102 Will Transport $1.4 Billion Lab Module,” Washington Post, 8 February 2001; Kelly Young, “Atlantis To Deliver Destiny,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 2001; Associated Press, “Shuttle Totes Space Station’s ‘Crown Jewel’,” 8 February 2001; Associated Press, “Countdown Begins for Launch of NASA Lab,” 5 February 2001; NASA, “Atlantis Set To Deliver International Space Station’s Destiny,” news release 01-16, 5 February 2001.)
At the American Physical Society Spring Meeting, a team of cosmologists announced that they had discovered the “music of creation,” using an extremely sensitive microwave telescope. The researchers presented their discovery of the sound waves that had rippled through the universe some 14 billion years ago. The team of the Balloon Observation of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics (BOOMERANG) project had gathered the data from a telescope aboard a balloon, which circumnavigated Antarctica at an altitude of 23 miles (37 kilometers). According to Team Leader Paolo deBernardis, the beginning of the universe left behind a residue of light and sound, providing scientists with hints about the details of the Big Bang: “The early universe is full of sound waves compressing and rarefying matter and light, much like sound waves compress and rarefy air inside a flute or trumpet.” The BOOMERANG team’s findings provided a new means of examining the early universe and new evidence to use in calculating how it changed. Scientists praised the discoveries as “stunning and humbling” evidence that cosmologists were using the correct model to describe the early universe.(NASA, “New Boomerang Findings Reveal ‘Music’ of the Early Universe,” news release 01-87, 29 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Astronomy Peers into Face of Infant Universe,” Washington Post, 30 April 2001.)
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: “The term Joint Airlock means that it’s applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.”(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities,” Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, “NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space,” news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS, the first time ISS crew had walked in space without a Shuttle present. Two tethers attached each cosmonaut to the ISS as the pair departed and reentered the station through the 16- foot (4.9-meter) Russian module Pirs, added to the ISS in September 2001. During the 5-hour spacewalk, the two cosmonauts hooked up a 40-foot (12.2-meter) crane, a ladder, handrails, and other equipment to the exterior of the ISS. American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. monitored the two cosmonauts’ work from inside the station, and Mission Control Center in Moscow supervised the spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts Work Outside on Station; Spacewalk from New Module Is First Without Shuttle Present,” Washington Post, 9 October 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California after three days of bad weather had prevented its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew received a congratulatory call from President George W. Bush, praising their successful 13- day mission. By the time that Atlantis and its crew departed the ISS, the Shuttle had significantly boosted the space station’s orbit, leaving the ISS orbiting at about 237 miles (381 kilometers) above Earth. While attached to the space station, Atlantis had used a series of engine bursts to push the ISS approximately 16 miles (26 kilometers) higher than its previous position. Shuttle crew had also unloaded food and supplies, including an enormous Russian carbon-dioxide removal unit, for the use of the three-person ISS crew during their visit.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back on Earth After Dismal Three Days,” 21 February 2001; Associated Press, “Atlantis Leaves Space Station in a Higher Orbit,” 16 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, when wind and rain caused the diversion of the Shuttle and its seven-person crew from its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. The completed mission had been unique, with NASA deliberately paring down its research goals because of the anticipated arrival during Endeavour’s stay at the ISS of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft carrying space tourist Dennis A. Tito. Shuttle Commander Kent V. Rominger greeted the press upon landing, commenting on the crew’s installation of the ISS’s robotic arm and the computer problems that had plagued the space station during the visit. Rominger explained that he and the other astronauts had worked with 500 computer experts on the ground to achieve partial restoration of the ISS’s hard drives and software applications.(Warren E. Leary, “As Shuttle Returns to Earth, Tourist Adjusts to Space Station,” New York Times, 2 May 2001; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Diverted to California Due to Bad Weather,” 1 May 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lands in Clear California/Cloud Hangs Over Russia Relations,” Houston Chronicle, 2 May 2001.)
Two members of the ISS crew performed a spacewalk to complete installation of the Russian Pirs docking compartment. During the 5-hour spacewalk, American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir N. Dezhurov connected communications cables between the Pirs module and the adjoining crew-habitation and command module. The pair also tested an external construction crane and photographed an askew solar array attached to the crew-habitation module, so that ground-based experts in Russia could determine whether the array would require repair in the future.
Russian cosmonauts training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASA’s rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russia’s agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Tito’s crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, “Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff,” Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains,” 20 March 2001.)
