Reported by Drew Pearson that CIA had warned that Russia “is preparing to launch a man around the moon in 60 days.”
Beginning of the fifth year of the “space age,” being the anniversary of the launching of Sputnik I (1957).
Sputnik IV launched into orbit by U.S.S.R., a 7.1-ton payload, but mission of flight was not announced.
Kaman H—43-B Huskie helicopter flown to claimed altitude record of 25,814 feet by Capt. W. C. McMeen (USAF), bettering Russian record of 24,491 feet established on March 26, 1960.
Sputnik IV, launched on February 4, reentered the Earth’s atmosphere.
Sputnik VIII launched into Earth orbit by U.S.S.R., from which it placed 1,419-pound Venus probe on its course.
In San Bernardino news conference, Gen. Bernard Schriever, U.S. Air Force, said: “I have never felt we were behind Russia in missile development.”
The Soviet Communist Party organ, Pravda, explained why Russian space techniques and the names of spaceship designers were kept secret as follows: “A corrupt capitalist society, by its very nature, is extremely capable of turning the greatest peaceful achievements of mankind into the total means of destruction of mankind. This is why it is risky to open even the smallest loopholes in the world of Soviet rocket technique for the gentlemen who are lagging considerably behind as far as their technique is concerned, but who become militarily agitated and distracted from an honest program of general and complete disarmament and who mumble something about the right of inspection of neighbors’ orchards and storerooms. That is why the wonderful group of heroes who insured the mastering of the cosmos remain nameless until now.”
Russian scientist, K. Florensky, reported in Komsomol Pravda that a comet’s head, not a meteorite or an interplanetary atomic weapon, caused the big explosion that jarred Siberia on June 30, 1908. The blast near the Hunguska River killed 1,500 reindeer, felled trees over an area of 700 square miles, and was recorded on seismographs around the world.
At NASA press conference following President Kennedy’s call to Congress for an accelerated space program, NASA Administrator Webb pointed out that the long-range and difficult task of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth before the end of the decade offered a chance to beat Russia.
U.S.S.R. launched 5-ton Sputnik IV into orbit and recovered dog passenger, the second time this feat was performed.
President Kennedy, in his regular press conference, stated that “no one is more tired than I am” in seeing the United States second to Russia in the space field. “They secured large boosters which have led to their being first in Sputnik, and led to their first putting their men in space. We are, I hope, going to be able to carry out our efforts, with due regard to the problem of the life of the men involved, this year. But we are behind * * * the news will be worse before it is better, and it will be some time before we catch up * *
Dr. Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, told the IAF that Russian radar returns from Venus indicated a value of 149,599,500 kilometers for the astronomical unit. This was a major revision of the value of 149,469,500 kilometers first released by the Russians in March. The Russian value compared with 149,598,820 kilometers obtained by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the figure of 149,597,850 kilometers obtained by Lincoln Laboratory. Disagreement remains on whether Venus day is a 9-to-l 1-earth-day period or 225-earth-day period.
