U.S.S.R. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet declared April 12, anniversary of the first Soviet space flight, to be a national annual holiday in Russia. In announcing ceremonies for Cosmonautics Day m the Soviet Union, Leonid Korneyev reviewed the U.S.S.R.’s space program from its beginning in April 1932, with the formation of a group to study jet propulsion. Between 1932 and 1941, Korneyev pointed out, the U.S.S.R. had developed 118 different liquid-fuel rocket engines.
Dr. Andrei S. Severny, Soviet astronomer who heads the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory whose 102-in. telescope is the largest outside of California, reported a partial theory on cause of solar flares—solar flare convulsion is brought about by a release of the accumulation of magnetic energy. Based on observations of changes in the strong magnetic fields, Dr. Severny’s interpretation of flares is based on technique developed by Dr. Horace D. Babcock and his son at Mount Wilson in California. Skeptical of Severny’s thesis, a colleague of the Babcocks, Dr. Robert Howard, was reported in Russia to challenge the Soviet data.
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
In nbc TV interview, Dr. F. J. Krieger, specialist of the rand Corporation on Soviet space affairs, pointed out that the 50th anniversary of the Communist Revolution in Russia was in 1967, and that that year may be the political target date for the accomplishment of a Soviet lunar landing mission.
New York Times reported f'that more than 20 fragments from sputnik iv had been recovered in Wisconsin. Launched May 15, 1960, the Soviet satellite had re-entered earth’s atmosphere Sept. 5, 1962, and disintegrated over Wisconsin.
TV pictures of Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich orbiting the earth in spacecraft vostok iii and iv were viewed by the public in Russia, Western Europe, England, and the U.S. The pictures were put on videotape or kinescope film during London broadcast for TV viewing in America.
Bell Aerosystems engineers, John N. Cord and Leonard M. Seale, recommended in paper to the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences meeting in Los Angeles that a U.S. astronaut be landed upon the moon with the means of survival, perhaps for as long as three years, until an Apollo vehicle could be sent to return him to earth. The astronaut could do valuable scientific work and would be on “a very hazardous mission but it would be cheaper, faster, and perhaps the only way to beat Russia.”
Representative John E. Moss (D-Calif.), Chairman of special House Subcommittee on Government Information, criticized “Government news management which is unique in peacetime.” He objected strongly to handling of news about military space launches: “All launches by military agencies, whether they are for a military purpose or to gather information of a scientific nature, are covered by a blanket of secrecy. . . . All information about the billions of dollars spent by the military in space research is channeled through the Pentagon’s single public information voice.” Moss recalled last September when nasa said that six Russian attempts to send space probes to Venus and Mars had failed. Since then, Moss said, “there has been a complete blackout of information about Russian satellite efforts. This is the kind of news management that causes grave concern. ... If we cover up Russian successes ... we can certainly cover up our failures. This . . . leads to a dangerous delusion of the American people.”
Capt. Richard H. Coan (usaf) established a new world’s record for a helicopter distance flight over a closed course, flying an H-43B Huskie 656.258 miles on a 25-mile course near Mono Lake, Calif. Previous record of 625.464 miles had been held by a Russian military helicopter Mi-1 (June 1960).
In testimony before Senate subcommittee, Federal Communications Commissioner T.A.M. Craven reported that talks with Russian and other representatives had been encouraging on establishment of a global communications satellite system, fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow said that fcc “could live with” the proposed U.S. corporation with stock to be owned by the public and by communications companies. The fcc was, Minow stated, ill equipped to handle a Government-owned system.
Fifth anniversary of the Space Age, inaugurated with the orbiting of first manmade satellite, sputnik i, by the U.S.S.R. According to the Goddard Satellite Situation Report of October 10, 1962, the first half decade of the Space Age saw the orbiting of 134 satellites, lunar probes, and space probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 26 (6 still in orbit), the U.S. 108 (48 still in orbit). Of U.S. total, nasa orbited 36 (24 still in orbit), dod 72 (24 still in orbit). Two of the nasa launches must also be credited to the nations contributing the experiments or the payload—U.K. for ariel and Canada for alouette. Of the U.S. total, three were manned orbital spacecraft, as were four of the U.S.S.R.’s. Totals for manned space flight—U.S.: 12 orbits, with 19 hrs., 3 min. flight time; U.S.S.R.: 130 orbits, with 192 hrs., 41 min. flight time. October 4: Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (usaf) flew X-15 No. 3 to altitude of 106,000 ft. and speed of 3,375 mph (mach 4.91), in 10-min. flight to check out the craft’s adaptive control system. A secondary objective was to further evaluate X-15 performance with ventral fin removed. All flight objectives were achieved.
Senator Margaret Chase Smith, in a radio interview with Senator Kenneth B. Keating, expressed doubt on the value of space cooperation with the U.S.S.R. A member of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, Sen. Smith said the U.S. had “decided superiority over Russia on really important space development. Russia has the edge over us on thrust power but when it comes to finer scientific space developments and information, we have great superiority over Russia. Perhaps one of our greatest areas of superiority is in the development of miniaturization. I think we could learn something from Russia but there is a question as to just how far we can trust her and what we get in return.”
Dr. Mia G. Masevich, Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Astronomical Council, published first serious mention of echo i in a leading non-technical Russian magazine (Ogonyok). Virtually nothing has been said about echo i in the Soviet press since its launch in August 1960, although it has remained in orbit longer than any Soviet satellite and was visible to Soviet citizens.
Senator Henry M. Jackson in a radio interview said there was evidence that “lives were lost” in the Russian manned space flight program. He urged the Kennedy Administration to challenge the U.S.S.R. to “lay bare” its trials and errors in achieving manned space flight.
In opinion poll taken in Ohio Congressional District (23) by Congressman William E. Minshall on whether the U.S. should enter into a cooperative space program with Russia, 47% replied affirmative, 39.6% replied negative, and 13.3% made “no opinion” replies.
Massive celebration in the Kremlin on Soviet Air Force Day as the new Russian space heroes, Cosmonauts Major Andrian Nikolayev and Lt. Colonel Pavel Popovich, were feted. In round of speech making, Premier Nikita Khrushchev welcomed the cosmonauts and their famllies, awarded them “Hero of the Soviet Union” medals, and said: “We are gathering new strength to surprise the world with our discoveries and victories.” He also demanded that the Western Allies get out of Berlin.
In television interviews in New York, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov denied reports that any Russian cosmonauts had been killed prior to the orbital flight of Gagarin as reported in the American Sress. Titov said he also saw the tiny “fireflies” reported by ohn Glenn.
Testimony by nasa Administrator Webb before House Appropriations subcommittee was released in which he declared that the U.S. has given far more than it has received in exchanges of space flight findings with the Soviet Union. By publicly releasing information gained from space flights, the U.S. is “ . . . cooperating with them, but not getting very much in the way of return cooperation,” he said. Webb defended U.S. policy of making space research results generally available: “We are, in this open way, exposing the problems just ahead of us to the largest number of able minds all around the world. This is really the way mankind has made its forward advance. No one can tell from which mind comes the solution to a problem. “I think the progress which can come from this can never be matched by Russia and the nations which do these things in secret.”
Results of a usia poll in Britain showed that 82% of people questioned had identified telstar communications satellite by name, compared to 78% able to identify sputnik i in 1957. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science gnd Astronautics, Robert Mayer Evans, special assistant to usia Director Edward R. Murrow, reported the survey’s results and said they showed “an extraordinary level of awareness” of the communication satellite in its first weeks of existence.
In speech to the American Astronautical Society, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, submitted that Russia could match the U.S. in space “only if we place short-run convenience ahead of our nation’s future. . . . There are those who seem to take for granted that a country like Soviet Russia, with less than half the per capita income of the United States, can afford a major successful space program, while we can not. That is, at best, ridiculous, and, at worst, deliberate sabotage.”
nasa press conference at nasa Hq. on the tandem Russian orbital flights of vostok iii and iv. Participants: nasa Administrator James E. Webb; Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden; Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director, Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes. Mr. Webb paid tribute to the Russian accomplishment as “demonstrations of a very real technological capacity, an ability to plan and engineer and build and fly vehicles that can carry man for extended periods of time. . . . They do have significance.” Dr. Dryden felt that the flights essentially conformed to the stated Russian objective, “to subject two men to identical space exposures, and weightlessness . . . plus . . . longer duration, which is needed to do this.” Dr. Seamans noted that “as far as guidance accuracy is concerned, what they achieved is roughly comparable to what we achieve in our Mercury flights. To me the significant element here is that on the second flight they were able to take off within a limited period of time . . . countdowns can be protracted for one reason or another.” Mr. Holmes said he was not surprised at the Russian flights: “I think we would be selling the Russians pretty short if we didn’t feel that a year after they launched a Vostok on a booster that could lift that kind of a weight, something of the order of 10,000 pounds, that they couldn’t indeed perform in this fashion.” Asked whether the nasa manned space flight program could be accelerated, Mr. Webb answered that the booster program could be accelerated with a crash program spending another $1 to $2 billion a year. “You can get more done. It wlli be done inefficiently. We believe we have a program [now] that marries all of the considerations in an effective way . . .” To the question of who wollid first land on the moon, Mr. Webb replied, “I think we will make the manned lunar landing and return before they do.” As to future Russian capability, Dr. Dryden said: “there is a possibility that the Soviets can do circumlunar flight before we can. I once said there is a fifty-fifty chance, certailliy no better than that, that we collid do that as early as they can. It is for this reason, in fact, that our national goal was set at the lunar flight because this does require another booster on the part of the Russians as well as ourselves. “Ever since the Space Agency has been formed we have been waiting for this other shoe to be dropped. People have told us every month, the Russians are going to produce this big booster in the next few months. Now four years have gone by and they have not yet shown us this big booster. To the best of our knowledge they have developed lighter-weight nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles rather than bigger space boosters. This is not to say that they may not be doing this. All I am saying is that they will require a bigger booster to land men on the moon.”
Addressing sam’s Aerospace Medicine symposium, Major General C.	H. Mitchell, Vice Commander of afcs, said that the “Russian threat in space is becoming obvious . . . Clearly it is our responsibility as a nation to insure that space is used to benefit all mankind. We can insure this only through development of the ability to conduct military operations in space with maximum effectiveness . . .”
Re-entry and disintegration of sputnik iv reported by Edward A. Hallbach, director of Milwaukee Astronomical Society. Hall-bach and others observed the satellite as it broke into about 24 pieces, most of which fell from orbit toward Green Bay, Wise., area and Lake Michigan. Law officers in a wide area of northern Wisconsin reported seeing flaming objects at about the same time. sputnik iv was launched by U.S.S.R. on May 15, 1960.
Drew Pearson referred to Cosmonaut Titov’s recent denial of Pearson’s report of February 23, 1962, that five Russian cosmonauts had been lost in previous manned space flight attempts. He pointed out that the unsuccessful attempts were not orbital shot, rather were suborbital “rocket rides” such as that of Cdr. Alan Shepard.
In an article in Ekonomicheskya Gazeta, the economic newspaper of the Soviet Communist Party, Dr. Peter Kapitza, one of Russia’s outstanding physicists, said that Soviet science had been hampered by attempts to judge the validity of scientific theories on the basis of Marxist dialectics. If Soviet scientists had listened to Marxist philosophers in the 1950’s, he said, the Russian achievements in space would have been impossible.
Chunk of metal, too hot to touch, was discovered in Manitowoc, Wise., street by two policemen. Considered as possibly part of sputnik iv, the 20-lb. object was sent by local members of nationwide Moonwatch tracking network to Moonwatch hq. at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Mass., where fragment would be analysed.
National Science Foundation released comprehensive report on “Education and Professional Employment in the USSR” by Nicholas DeWitt of the Harvard Russian Research Center.
Premier Khrushchev claimed that the U.S.S.R. had a new “invulnerable global rocket,” announced the orbiting of cosmos i (the 16th Russian satellite), and stated that the U.S.S.R. would carry out new atmospheric nuclear tests if the U.S. resumes its atmospheric tests. Tass released a news story on the new satellite, giving its orbital data as apogee, 609 mi.; perigee, 135 mi.; period, 96 min.; and inclination, 49° to the equator. A scientific payload included measurements of meteoric impacts, low-energy solar radiation, earth’s radiation belts, cosmic rays, earth’s magnetic field, short-wave radiation from sun and other celestial sources, and atmospheric cloud patterns.
Japanese Meteorological Observatory reported abnormal atmospheric pressures from a Soviet nuclear blast, apparently one of two recorded also by Uppsala University in Sweden. Japanese agency estimated the strength of the blast at 20 megatons. It said the abnormal pressure lasted from 40 to 100 minutes. Two blasts registered at the seismological institute in Sweden were listed at 19 megatons and 8 megatons. The geodetic institution of the Technological High School at Stockholm, Sweden, registered another gravitational disturbance which may have been a third Russian nuclear test, one which had a force of about 10 megatons. During the past 10 days, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission had announced that the Russians have conducted at least four nuclear tests.
Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov denied in interview with Trud that U.S.S.R. had launched other men into orbit besides Majs. Gagarin and Titov. U.S. press had speculated that as many as five Russian cosmonauts had been killed in unsuccessful flights.
In meeting of U.N. Committee for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. offered to U.S.S.R. a 14-lb. metal chunk, believed to be part of sputnik iv, that had landed in Wisconsin September 5. Soviet delegate to the U.N. Platon D. Morozov rejected the offer, saying “We do not know to whom it belongs.” He said it was not necessary to make dramatic gestures to show that falling satellite fragments could do harm, and charged the U.S. with “dramatic staging” to divert the Committee from Soviet proposals on legal principles for use of outer space. Displaying the chunk following the meeting, U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said the object weighed 20 lbs. when it fell from the sky, but U.S. scientists of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had retained a six-lb. piece for further examination.
Analysis of the metal chunk believed to have been part of Soviet satellite sputnik iv showed the object had greater radiation level than any other object previously recovered from space, aec scientists at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (N. Mex.) said one reason for high radiation was that the chunk was analyzed soon after being found, whereas previous objects had not been analyzed until at least three weeks after being found. Radiation expert Dr. Ernest C. Anderson of Los Alamos reported that the object had same sort of radioactivity shown by natural iron meteorites, evidence that the object was part of a spacecraft that had been orbiting for long time above the atmosphere, sputnik iv went into orbit May 15, 1960, and disintegrated September 5, 1962, over the U.S. Los Alamos forwarded 14-lb. chunk to U.S. delegation to U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had kept a 6-lb. slice of the original object for further examination.
nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly 4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality. During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight produced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr. Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight, compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More newspapers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not only the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared to let our own people and the rest of the world see the entire operation from beginning to end.”
Reported that Russian Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov were assured membership in the Supreme Soviet. Neither was opposed in election slates and both will represent their home towns. It was also reported that the U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry’s press department had denied the rumor that Russia was preparing to let Western newsmen cover the next Soviet space shot.
