Exchanging Scientists and Engineers: Oppose__________________________________ 54% Not sure_________________________________12% Selling equipment with potential military application to Russia was adamantly opposed. (L. Harris, Wash. Post, 12/16/63, 1)
Soviet embassy in Rio de Janeiro reported that Cosmonauts Pavel Popovich and Andrian Nikolayev were to arrive in Rio to represent Russia at the Brazilian air and space show on March 15. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63,1)
usn launched Polaris A-3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S. Observation Island using completely new eject launch system. (dod Release 1301-63) September 26-0ct6ber 1: xivth International Astronautical Congress held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and technical subjects were presented. (Program) Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, and Chairman of iaf Bioastronautics Committee, presented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci discussed U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and compared U.S. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up Project Mercury MA-9 flight, he said: “Hie performance of Gordon Cooper proved in detail man’s integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This accomplishment of the Mercury program is of major significance as it does indicate that much more dependence can be placed on man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft combination .... Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in a new environment. His senses and capabilities are little changed in space. At least for the duration of Cooper’s mission (a total of 34+ hours) weightlessness affecting the normality of his judgment, orientation and other human functions in space was no problem . . . .” (Text) Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology. He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts, since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run, human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text) Four papers by Soviet scientists presented at iaf Congress indicated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most complex and most urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue, and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev, and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts) At iaf Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of hit told Missiles and Rochets that joint lunar landing was possible within five years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance were used with a Soviet rocket. {M&R, 9/30/63,26) Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin acknowledged that rendezvous technique was “extremely complex” and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communications, optics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock several individual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the moon. Le Journal du Dimanche reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s prediction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the U.S. {Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 30; Le Journal dv Dima/nrhs,. 9/29/63. 22) . Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at iaf luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, said in iaf address: “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space exploration has been the development of automated spacecraft. Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful applications of space flight thus far have been made possible by automated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, attitude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of light weight, high efficiency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed reliability and quality . . . .” He then reviewed automated spacecraft already flown or currently under development by nasa. (Text)
In press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “By when do you think we will be first in space, and in view of Russia’s current lunar probe [lunik iv], do you think we will beat the Russians with a man to the moon ?” He replied: “I don’t know. We started well behind. Quite obviously they had a tremendous advantage in big boosters and we are still behind, because obviously we haven’t gotten our new boosters yet, which we won’t get until 1964, ’65 and ’66. We will have to wait and see but I can assure you it is an uphill race at best, because we started behind, and I am sure the Russians are making a major effort. Today’s indication of what they are doing makes me feel that their program is a major one, and it is not spongy, and I think that we would have to make the same ourselves. “So I would say we are behind now, and we will continue to be behind, but if we make a major effort we have a chance, I believe, to be ahead at the end of this decade, and that is where I think we ought to be.” Questioned about his reaction to General Eisenhower’s charge that the national budget could be reduced by billions of dollars and that enormous sums were being wTasted in the space program (letter to Congressman Charles A. Halleck made public March 291, President Kennedy said: “. . . The United States Congress almost unanimously made a decision that the United States would not continue to be second in space. We are second in space today because we started late. It requires a large sum of money. I don’t think we should look with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all through the sixties and possibly the seventies. We have the potential not to be. I think having made the decision last year, that we should make a major effort to be first in space. I think we should continue to do so. “President Eisenhower—this is not a new position for him. He has disagreed with this at least a year or year and a half ago when the Congress took a different position. It is the position I think he took from the time of Sputnik on. But it is a matter on which we disagree. It may be that there is waste in the space budget. If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut by the Congress, and I am sure it will be. But if we are going to get into the question of whether we should reconcile ourselves to a slow pace in space, I don’t think so. “This Administration has concentrated its attention since it came into office on strengthening our military. That is one of the reasons why you could not possibly put in the cut which has been recommended, nine or ten billion dollars, without cutting the heart out of the military budget. The fact of the matter is when we came into office, we had 11 combat-ready divisions and we now have 16. We increased the scheduling on Polaris, nearly double per year. We increased the number of planes on the 15-minute alert from 33 per cent of our strategic air force to 50 per cent. In a whole variety of ways—in the Navy we have added about 46 vessels, and strengthened ourselves in defense and space . . . .” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 4/4/63)
Sixth anniversary of launching of sputnik i, the opening of the Space Age.
U.S.S.R. celebrated the 46th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution with a Moscow parade that featured the first public display of its antimissile missile. Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, Chief of the Soviet General Staff, hailed the weapon on a radio broadcast as capable of destroying “the enemy in the air.” At a reception Premier Khrushchev said: “Before the Revolution Russia was a beggar. Now she has become the Soviet Union and is a king in the land. From the lowest she has become the second country in the world, and in a maximum of seven years we will be first.” (Tanner, NYT, 11/8/63,1)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted the Goddard Historical Prize Essay for 1962—“Early U.S. Satellite Proposals,” by R. Cargill Hall—into the Congressional Record. Chairman Miller pointed out that “in space affairs we cannot afford to be shortsighted or wrong” and asked that proposals of 1946-49 be considered in the light of the current discussion on the U.S. space program: “What if the United States had launched a satellite in 1952 or even 1954? Would history have been different? . . . Would not the image of the U.S. in the eyes of the rest of the world have been spared the historical blemish of Sputnik, the appearance that we were not the scientific and technological leader in the world ? ... If we would remain free and maintain peace on a small and troubled planet, America had better make sure that superior space science and technology are on our side.” Prize historical essay reviewed proposals by the U.S. Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics and the U.S. Air Force’s rand Corp. for for the launching of earth satellites, proposals turned down by Department of Defense officials as not having “scientific or military utility.” Goddard Historical Essay Competition is sponsored annually by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. {CR, 10/7/63, A6277-6284)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he doubted that Russia has developed any new booster capability despite rumors that the Soviets are about ready to launch another “space spectacular.” (Dallas Morning News, 4/24/63)
Administration reactions to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia would not attempt to land a man on the moon indicated strong reservations on Russian motivations. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Russian withdrawal announcement was “a very wise pronouncement. "Whether they planned to go to the moon or not, they have sensed some slackening of support for the moon program here and have made a strategic move to capitalize on this situation.” Another official said: “All during the moratorium on nuclear testing the Soviets secretly prepared for an intensive series of tests. How can we be certain that they won’t do the same thing in space?” (Wash. Post, 10/27/63)
First official Soviet comment on President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar cooperation came from Russian news agency Tass. While not identifying the proposal with the President, Tass said: “Maybe it is too early to discuss now the question what is better—to combine a Soviet rocket with an American spaceship or to include an American in the Soviet space crew, but first steps in cooperation cannot but give satisfaction.” A few hours later, Cosmonaut Pavel Popovich made an unscheduled talk on Moscow Radio, calling for a “common effort by the peoples of all states of our planet” to solve the earthly difficulties that hinder man’s flight to the stars. ( Wash. Post, 10/4/63)
nasa announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Anaheim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059 contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at msfc. The additional work would include design, manufacture, and installation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test position and an acoustical-model test position at msfc. (nasa Release 63-222) World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva with delegates from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary General U Thant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate radio frequencies to provide growth room for future satellite communications needs. (NYT, 10/8/63, 16) Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, received Harry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution to the field of transportation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Lecturer at Syracuse Univ. (Ltr. of Invitation, 4/18/63) Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during the week whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio), according to George Clifford of the Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey, adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News, 10/7/63) nana reported Lufthansa sources in Germany claim that U.S.S.R. is farther along on supersonic transport development than either Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the famous Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, the Russian entry is reported to be in the same speed class as the British-French Concorde— mach 2.2 (1,500 mph)—and carry about the same passenger load of 100, and to land at quite low speeds, probably through the use of variable-sweep wings. First version of the supersonic transport would be a freight carrier, not only because it can be introduced with a lower safety factor than a passenger version but because the increased friction between Soviet Russia and Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to eastern Russia, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63) Atlas D icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., but exploded shortly after launch, (upi, NYT, 10/8/63, 28) Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynamics/Astronautics and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using “flox”—a mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen—as the oxidizer in the Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in payloads for 100-mile high orbits, (lrc Release 63-78, Lewis Chronology, 9) Early October: faa Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that nasa’s studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (scat) were not in accord with faa thinking—that they derived too much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they recommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while faa leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically feasible for airline operation. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,38)
Various Russian sources had listed a variety of possible uses for the Polet type of maneuverable satellite, according to Space Business Daily. Space expert Vladimir Dobronravov had said that the spacecraft would be used for rendezvous and docking experiments. Tass mentioned the potential for reconnaissance, weather, or communications satellite. M. Litvin-Sedoi said it was a test of a system for construction of an orbiting space platform. {Space Bus. Daily, 11/5/63,201)
Two Soviet Ilyushin-18 transport aircraft completed 15,000-mile flight from Moscow to the Russian Antarctic base of Mirny. Director of the Leningrad Polar Institute, A. Treshnokov, said in New Zealand that such flights might well inaugurate regular supply flights between Moscow and the Antarctic. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A29)
Sen. Ernest Gruening (D.-Alaska) criticized nasa on the Senate floor for its indifference to training and use of women astronauts in the manned space program. Also he inserted in the Congressional Record a recent article in Life by Clare Boothe Luce, in which she said: “The astronaut of today is the world’s most prestigious idol. Once launched into space he holds in his hands something far more costly and precious than the millions of dollars’ worth of equipment in his capsule; he holds the prestige and the honor of his country .... But the astronaut is also something else: he is the symbol of the way of life of his nation. “In entrusting a 26-year-old girl with a cosmonaut mission, the Soviet Union has given its women unmistakable proof that it believes them to possess these same virtues. The flight of Valentina Tereshkova is, consequently, symbolic of the emancipation of the Communist woman. It symbolizes to Russian women that they actively share (not passively bask, like American women) in the glory of conquering space.” (CR, 6/27/63,11228-30) Jwne 27: usaf launched Minuteman icbm from amr in 4,000-mi. flight down Atlantic Missile Range in successful test, (dod Release 929-63)
Thomas J. Watson, Jr., chairman of the board of International Business Machines Corp., speaking at the 46th annual meeting of the American Council on Education in Washington, D.C., expressed concern about the current course of education. “That concern has its origin just 6 years ago tomorrow. It was the day that the Soviet Union put Sputnik I in orbit. Do you remember the thoughts which flooded in on us that day? Thoughts of embarrassmefit—dismay—concern. ... We could even try to say that satellites were just stunts, that Sputnik was a silly hunk of iron. But try as we would to whistle m the dark, Americans finally had to reach the conclusion that the Russians had outdistanced us at least temporarily in the exploration of space, a pursuit which in our century might well become as important as the exploration of the oceans had been in the time of Columbus and Magellan.” Mr. Watson pointed out that the impact of sputnik on education “has thrown the sciences and the humanities badly out of balance. ... In the fiscal year of 1961, of all Federal funds for basic research, the physical and biological sciences got 97 percent. “There are many traditional reasons for reemphasizing the humanities—which today are more important than ever. “In the first place, a thorough grounding in the humanities is vital training for many leaders who can wisely manage people as well as sufficiently manage machines. This need exists in universities, in public service, and in business. “Secondly, as our planet continues to shrink, we will more and more have to become citizens of the world. We must acquire a better understanding of the language, history, and culture of people of other lands. With present day mass-destruction weapons, this understanding is not just desirable—it’s vital. “Finally, the greater our skills in the humanities—in literature and the arts—the greater our capacity for a constructive use of leisure time, which is bound to increase as machines lift old burdens from men’s shoulders and minds. “On this sixth anniversary of the flight of sputnik, we can be sure of one thing; no second sputnik will come along to jolt us into action, and do for American education in the humanities what the first Sputnik did for American education in the sciences.” {CR, 11/12/63, A7010-A7012)
Moscow Radio said U.S. astronauts “become bourgeois exploiters [of the people] in their own right,” but the Russian people had “profound respect” for U.S. spacemen, who needed “no little bravery” to let themselves be launched in rockets “whose reliability is highly dubious.” (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 1/8/63)
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, interviewed on nbc-tv, said he was surprised in May 1960 when the U.S.S.R. publicized the downing of the U.S. U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Russia. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles also “believed just as I did that it was necessary to use it but he also believed that it would cause no real publicity if one of them should fall.” Both of them felt that the Soviets would not be willing to concede publicly that for “three or four years we’ve been doi'ig this . . . .” On the question of admitting U.S. responsibility ror the flights, Mr. Eisenhower said: “ . . . I just thought as L.ig as the thing had come out, the best thing to do—and I don’t believe I asked anyone’s advice on this—I just said ‘l am responsible and that’s that.’” (TFasA Post, 11/4/631
Reported that Russian trawlers and other Soviet vessels regularly appeared off of nasa’s Wallops Station to observe rocket launchings. (Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 5/26/63)
County Judge Thaddeus Pruss ruled in Wisconsin that metal particles allegedly from sputnik iv satellite were to be returned to their finder, Thomas Williams, Brown Deer, Wis., said to be first known test case involving space law. ( upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/18/63)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations began in Rome on technical details of a three-year agreement signed at Geneva in June 1962, for exchange of data to be gained from separate satellite launchings. Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, headed U.S. scientific delegation, and Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences headed the Russian delegation. Joint space research program would include coordination on meteorology and communications studies, and charting of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A3)
Eric Sevareid, in Washington Evening Star column titled “If Columbus Had Never Sailed,” discussed the debate on landing men on the moon: “It was two years ago this week end that President Kennedy sent his special message to the Congress in which he said that he himself believed we ‘should go to the moon.’ It has taken two years to develop the beginnings of a national debate on the question, among Congressmen, scientists and editorialists. “I say the beginnings of a debate because, on its public plane at least, the argument has not yet come into its true focus. The true question is not whether we should try to land men on the moon—the nature of this political world as well as the nature of men’s curiosity and the unquenchable spirit of science make it inevitable that we try—but how we go about it ... . “This is only the beginning. Anyone has only to let out his imagination a short notch to see the ultimate possibilities—to see humanity’s push into space transforming this society, dominating its intellectual pursuits, absorbing its resources, altering the training of its youth and its moral and religious concepts, upsetting the priorities for the its social and humanitarian efforts on terra firm a. “Those who scold the worriers say that to cancel the moon voyage would be as if Ferdinand and Isabella had cancelled Columbus’ voyage which opened the New World. They are more often right than they know. What is at stake are not only the new marvels to be found, but also the profound transfiguration of the source of the search. 741-623 o—64--15 “After the voyage of Columbus the Old World was never the same, in political, economic, military, social, religious or intellectual terms. After the first men walk upon the moon, Old Earth will never be the same and the change will begin in the two societies, Russia and America, now competmg for the cataclysmic honor of commencing the alteration.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/28/63, A13) May US: Stanford Research Institute report, prepared under Aerospace Industries Association grant, criticized “industry-Government aerospace relationship” as inefficient, full of overregulation and ineffective administration by Government and “over-management” by industry. Report said its findings were of national significance because aerospace industry’s output represents three per cent of gross national product and even greater share of manufacturing volume and employment. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/29/63, A4)
A Russian Embassy official in Washington quietly collected from the U.S. State Department the Russian satellite fragment that fell in Manitowoc, Wis., on September 5, 1962. U.S.S.R. had previously ignored U.S. offer, made at U.N. last fall, to return the re-entered fragment. (TVos A Post, 1/8/63,1)
Dr. Glen Wilson, staff member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Missiles and Rochets interview: “Contrary to some published reports, President Johnson is not predisposed to a military emphasis on space. He will judge the requirements of dod and nasa strictly on merit, if his past performance is any measure.” Dr. Wilson recalled Johnson was Chairman of Senate Armed Services Committee’s Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, later was Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences from its inception until he became Vice President. Dr. Wilson stressed that “it must be noted that Johnson was one of the few men on the Hill to recognize the supreme importance of the sputnik i launch, and he instigated an extraordinary session of Senate hearings a few weeks later.” {M&R, 12/23/63, 16)
On test ban treaty, U.S. News and World Report said: “Nuclear test ban does not mean disarmament. Nuclear weapons still will be the weapons of future war. Weapon testing will not come to a full stop. “Tests will continue underground. France will go on testing in the air. Red China will test in the air, too, if and when she gets the bomb .... “Test agreement, now being entered into, favors Russia. Russia, behind in smaller nuclear weapons, can catch up by testing underground. United States, behind in bigger weapons and in an antimissile missile, will be hindered in her effort to catch up by the bar against testing in the atmosphere .... “Just as long as Russia is a closed country, ruled by a dictatorship, possessed of weapons capable of destroying United States, there can be no real disarmament, no real end to the arms race without great danger . . . .”	(U.S. News, 8/5/63, in OR,
Speaking at the dedication of the Douglas Space Center in Huntington Beach, Calif., Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson emphasized the peaceful purpose of the U.S. in space research and compared our policy of cooperation in space to the secretive Soviet program: “Those who say—as some are inclined to do—that our purposes and the purposes of communism in space exploration are the same misread and misunderstand the history and meaning of our times. In 1957 when the Soviets placed the first sputnik m orbit, the Communist rulers of Russia refused to consider sharing the fruits of space research with other nations—refused to consider committing themselves to developing space for peaceful purposes alone. In that same year, we of the United States clearly stated our own national policy and purpose. We committed and dedicated ourselves to sharing the fruits of space research with all mankind—and to the sole objective of developing the uses of space for peaceful purposes. “It is significant that while the Communist efforts are conducted behind a curtain of secrecy, we of the United States enjoy the cooperation, support and alliance of more than 60 nations for our space program. It is significant that while we of the United States can and do propose joint endeavors for peaceful purposes, the Soviet both rejects our proposals and devotes itself to attempts to dissuade us from continuing on the programs we have established. “America’s commitment to the exploration of space for peaceful purposes—and for the good of all mankind—is a firm commitment. We will not retreat from our national purpose. We will not be turned aside in our national effort by the transparent maneuvers of those who would attempt to divert us. “Our national purpose in space is peace—not prestige. “Our foremost objective is not to send a man to the moon but to bring a greater measure of sunlight into the lives of men on earth.” (C^, 11/19/63, A7163)
priorities in space as well as article from current issue of Reader’s Digest entitled “We’re Running the Wrong Race with Russia” which said: “The Russians have recently achieved an increase in the effectiveness of nuclear explosions so devastating that it dwarfs all previous records. Confirming this, our own atomic experts have warned that such stupendous forces, let loose above us from a satellite, could, in a few seconds, literally cremate a large part of the United States. There would be nothing left below, no man, beast, vegetation, buildings, nothing at all but the glare of white-hot cinders. “In the face of such a dire threat, it must come as a stunning shock to all thoughtful Americans to learn that the United States has no top-priority programs beamed at preventing, anticipating, or deterring such a terrifying prospect. Our top priorities are all tied up with steamrollering through the moon shot. Many billions of public money, together with the rich cream of scientific talent, are lavished on an effort that could well be aborted in midstride by Soviet enterprise and realism. “There is a crying need for a reappraisal of our space aims, for more specific public information, especially since statements from those highly placed in Washington are so contradictory that they blur rather than clarify our understanding . . . .” {Reader’s Digest, 8/63, CR, 7/31/63,13035-39)
Speaking on Cuban television from Havana, Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova said that she was a member of the team of Russian cosmonauts chosen to make the trip to the moon and that Yuri Gagarin headed the team. She said she would propose that a Cuban woman be included on the team. The Russian plan for a moon flight was described by Miss Tereshkova: the manned capsule would be launched into earth orbit, where it would rendezvous with an unmanned tanker spaceship; then another rocket would be launched from earth and tow the manned-vehicle-tanker combination to the moon. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/63)
Humorous columnist Arthur Hoppe commented on Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia was not competing to land a man on the moon, said this marked the beginning of a new weapon in Soviet diplomacy—“Competitive unresistance.” “Oh, it strikes at the one weakness in the American character. For while we are imbued with the will to win, we can’t stand licking somebody who isn’t trying. Competitive unresistance, let me warn you, will sap our will to resist. “. . . Of course we could do some things for other reasons. Like maybe feeding people because they’re hungry. Or reaching for the moon because we believe the future of our race lies in the stars. But would Congress buy that? Nonsense. It’s unrealistic-“So I say we must meet this new Soviet threat head-on. We # must abolish our moon program, knock off foreign aid and do our utmost, fellow Americans, to make our Nation a second-rate power. But cheer up. I’m certain we can count on Congress.” (Hoppe, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/63, 5)
In Saturday Evening Post, Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D.-Nev.) “A perilous notion grips Washington—that through some sort of gentleman’s agreement with Russia we can quarantine space, can keep it from becoming a theater of war. Wishfully the nation gears its space program to peaceful purposes, blind to the fact that the Russians have no such inhibitions. While we dream, the Russians bend every effort to develop military space systems. Quite openly they are striving for a decisive advantage in ilifli notrlu nonolrato^ romnn
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told the Senate that it was unwarranted to assume from Premier Khrushchev’s Oct. 26 remarks that the Soviets had pulled out of the space race. “The competition in space between the United States and the Soviet Union is still intense. It would be foolish indeed if this country were to attempt to reorient its vast space program each time the Soviet Union made some pronouncement about its goals. We should take cognizance of Russian statements but we should not let ourselves be diverted from sound objectives on the ground that competition no longer exists.” {CR, 11/6/63, 20140)
Editorial in The Houston Post: “Why Khrushchev’s word should be accepted on this [commenting that Russia does not have a definite program for putting a man on the moon] any more than on anything else is hard to understand .... It . . . must be kept in mind that Soviet policy in any area is a zig-zag affair and subject to quick change. Moreover, under the Soviet system, Khrushchev does not have to worry about congressional attitudes or reaction if he should decide upon a change .... “. . . why should Khrushchev be permitted to set the policy on this country’s space program? That is something for the Legislative and Executive branches of the United States government to do on the basis of careful study and evaluation. “The fact is that the United States government made its decision several years ago. It stands committed to a program of trying to put a man on the moon in this decade. What the Russians do or don’t do should be a matter of secondary importance at this point in the program. Much more is involved than merely a contest with Russians as to time.” (Text)
The April issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, included an article by Dr. Robert E. Marshak, entitled “Reexamining the Soviet Scientific Challenge.” In this article, Dr. Marshak, chairman of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Rochester, pointed out that Soviet preeminence in space does not necessarily mean that the U.S.S.R. has “achieved a decisive scientific and technological supremacy.” Comparing the “closed” economic and political structure of Soviet Russia with its controlled educational system to the “open” society of the United States, he suggested that the Soviet system was geared to the more tangible results of applied science while the United States had made greater strides in pure science. “Soviet space triumphs are due to an early and precise delineation of a major national goal in applied science and a most detailed and deliberate organization of the wherewithal to achieve it. “. . . I believe that our [the United States’] undoubted leadership in pure science will continue to be nurtured by the openness, freedom, and free enterprise spirit which characterize our society. Our accomplishments in pure science will provide a vast reservoir of ideas for important achievements in applied science, and our innate good sense and good will lead to a voluntary rational measure of coordination and control in those areas which are indispensable for the achievement of our national objectives in applied science. I believe that the Soviet methods of strict supervision and control will lead to numerous short-range breakthroughs in applied science but that the momentum will not be sustained unless there are also significant advances in their pure science. A great improvement in the quality of these achievements will depend upon their ability to fully establish the conditions of scientific freedom which are essential for highly creative work in pure science. “. . . If the Soviet Government comes to realize—and I believe that the Russian scientists already do—that scientific and political freedom go hand in hand and that it is difficult to guarantee scientific freedom without a major liberalization of Soviet society in all its aspects, there is bound to be a great efflorescence of pure science in the Soviet Union. And if a large measure of political freedom is established in the Soviet Union, it is quite likely that we shall be sending our American astronauts together with their Russian counterparts on joint expeditions to the moon and other celestial objects beyond.” {CR, 5/27/63, 9036-38) During April: Air Force launched an Atlas F with a Chrysler-built nose cone on a 5,000-mile flight from Cape Canaveral to the vicinity of Ascension Island in a continuation of the Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System (Abres) test program. The flight, which largely duplicated the initial Abres test of Mar. 1, was described as “highly successful.” (M&R, 5/6/63, 11)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the New York section of the aiaa in New York, pointed out that the U.S. maimed space program involves technical requirements “about 20 times the complexity of the Minuteman program.” For this reason, among others, he said leaders of the space program had recognized from the beginning that leadership could be achieved “only through a sustained, steadily accelerating effort.” He quoted Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, speaking on Apr. 26, 1958, when he said that without this big, long-term national commitment “I’d just as soon we didn’t start”; Dr. Wemher von Braun in 1958 telling the House Select Committee studying the Space Act that the biggest problem was “how we can eliminate this lethal and wasteful not-and-cold blowing that has plagued all our missile projects in the past. I think this lack of steady determination and unwavering support over the years has hurt us more than anything”; and Dr. T. Keith Glenn an, nasa’s first Administrator, speaking at the first nasa budget hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “If our space programs are to be run on an off-again, on-again basis, zigging and zagging with the turn of every new year, then we’d better spend our monev buying telescopes to watch the Russian pioneers in space/’ (Text)
Interview by Howard Simons of Dr. Donald F. Hornig appeared in the Washington Post, Chairman of the Chemistry Dept, at Princeton Univ., Dr. Hornig was appointed Science Adviser to the President on November 7, accompanied President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson on a tour of military and space installations in November, and was recently reaffirmed as Science Adviser by President Johnson. Dr. Hornig has been one of the 18 members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee since 1960. Dr. Hornig was reported as saying that the place of basic research was distorted by the legacy of World War II when concentrated scientists were able to convert the most abstract scientific notions into impressive useful devices: “The days of pie-in-the-sky promises of basic research are over. The mood 20 years ago was one that suggested by turning loose great numbers of scientists miracles happened. Well they did happen, and I suppose it was logical that after the war the same notion would carry over. “Only it doesn’t work that way today. Miracles of the kind performed during the war are a little harder to find. Scientists are no longer concentrated nor are their efforts. They do come, of course, but over periods of years .... “The meaning of Sputnik,” Hornig said, “was that it demonstrated the Soviets were capable of big-time technology; capable, if you will, of playing in the big leagues.” He declined to label the American attempt to send men to the moon as a “race.” “The moon is, after all, the first important object beyond the earth. . . . There are valid scientific objectives to be pursued on the moon’s surface all linked to gaining new insights into cosmology and to providing clues to man’s destiny. That is, where we came from. ... (H. Simons, Wash. Post, 12/15/63, E3) December 15: dod decision to develop military communications satellite system, probably beginning operation in 1966, reported in New York Times. Funds were contained in proposed dod budget for FY 1965, recently presented to the White House. Plans called for 24—30 satellites in random polar orbits with altitudes ranging from 5,000-12,000 ini., linking military forces around the world. No contracts would be awarded, however, until discussions with ComSatCorp resolve question of whether dod should use commercial facilities for its military purposes. (Finney, NYT, 12/16/63,1)
The space program would not change greatly under the new President, Lyndon B. Johnson, William Hines of the Washington Sunday Star predicted: “The reasons are twofold and simple. “First, Mr. Johnson is fully as enthusiastic about the space program as was Mr. Kennedy, if not more so. Second, the new President has been in on the space program from its start, and tVl W/M1 nrb + n	O A	*vi/\*.4V»n n-f *D wnr.1,/1 n«\ 4	U’	f nnimn w»An Lxiiuugu uiio	wt	mt/xiiiio vi x acoiuciii	ikcmicuV	o lcuuic nao	uxi • Space.’ ” Mr. Johnson was head of the Senate Preparedness subcommittee at the time the U.S.S.R. launched sputnik i, Hines pointed out. As Senate Majority Leader he caused the inquiry into U.S. space posture and sparked the special Senate committee that later became the standing Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “More than any other one man, President Johnson is personally responsible for the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and the sprawling agency which it created .... “With the advent of the Kennedy administration, the space program immediately grew in importance, largely through Mr. Johnson’s urging. The Space Act was amended to make the Vice President head of the [Space] council .... “Under then Vice President Johnson, the council took on real meaning. . . . “The Johnson-organized council staff prepared the studies which the Vice President used to persuade President Kennedy in the spring of 1961 that a manned lunar landing should be undertaken before the decade is out.’” (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/24/63)
A roundup of world press opinion on the manned lunar landing race, following Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia was not presently planning manned lunar flight, indicated that the majority of the newspapers thought Khrushchev had made a sensible decision which the U.S. ought to follow. (NYT, 11/3/63, 9E)
Japan sent a note of protest to the U.S.S.R. in reaction to the Soviet announcement of Nov. 29 designating two areas in the Pacific as test areas for a new series of Russian rocket launchings from Dec. 2,1963, through Jan. 25,1964. Japan reserved the right to claim damages if any were incurred by Japanese as a result of the tests. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/63)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Science, was the opening witness in hearings on the Government’s role as a patron of science and technology, conducted by the subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Seitz said that the period of almost unlimited growth of Federal investment in science and technology was coming to an end, would have to level off and force some “hard decisions” on choices, and expressed the fear that basic science would suffer in competition with more glamorous hardware projects. For the most part he thought U.S. science wras well ahead of Russia, but noted remarkable progress on the part of West Germany and Japan. (Finney, NYT, 10/16/63)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, president of Cal Tech, said in speech before Spring Recognition Dinner of Miracle Mile Association, Los Angeles: “The United States had put 118 space vehicles into orbit, whereas Russia has only placed 34. We are ahead of Russia on scientific data because of these space probes. “Proof of this is in the papers published by the Soviet Union. There has been very little scientific knowledge gleaned from their reports in the past few years, whereas the United States has given a wealth of information on space problems. “Through these probes we have been able to evaluate the temperature on the planet Venus. Of more important issue to us on Earth is the invaluable aid in predicting our own weather. . . .” (L.A. Herald-Examiner, 3/13/63)
The Russian Deople heard of President Kennedy’s U.N. proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration for first time. Pravda reprinted without comment Walter Lippmann’s column praising the President’s proposal. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/2/63)
Dr. Edward Teller, Univ. of Calif, physicist, declared at symposium on “open space and peace” held at Stanford Univ. that surveillance from space of every part of the world should be made legal. Noting that “open skies” policy was first proposed in 1955, he stressed that today the security of U.S. and Free World depend in “a most vital fashion on information obtained from Russia.” Surveillance from space should be conducted “publicly, freely and in the interest of the peace of our nation.” (Davies, NYT, 9/6/63,10)
Three ruby-colored spots appeared on the surface of the moon on the night of Oct. 29, 1963, and might have been volcanic eruptions, Dr. John Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., announced. Hall said that James Greenacre found the spots while studying the moon through a 24-in. refracting telescope. The spots stood out against the yellow-white surface of the moon. Greenacre said that in three years of studying the moon’s surface he had never seen spots similar to these, although a Russian astronomer had reported sighting a similar phenomenon in Nov. 1958 or 1959. (upi, Ban Diego Union, 11/1/63; Christian Science Monitor, 11/2/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, in Associated Press interview, was asked: “Mr. Vice President, as chairman of the Space Advisory Council [i.e., National Aeronautics and Space Council], you were intimately concerned in drafting the 5.7-billion-dollar space budget. Former President Eisenhower says the budget is spongy, and there is no hurry about getting to the moon. In view of this recent Russian shot [lunik iv], what is your reaction?” The Vice President replied: “The Administration has submitted to the Congress what we believe is a sane and responsible proposal to insure the maximum efficiency and effectiveness of our space program. I know of no reckless desire in any responsible quarter to get to the moon at all costs and without regard to the consequences to other vital aspects of our national policy. “The objective of reaching the moon is one aspect or our national space program which will be of great benefit to our country, and I think to all mankind. It may be possible by appropriating more money to speed up slightly the attainment of that goal and, of course, we all know it would be mighty easy to slow that goal down. But I don’t think that either alternative would be helping our country. Gaining a short period of time would almost certainly be at the expense of other crucial programs. Slowing down might bring us some one of these days face to face with the shocking knowledge that we had permanently assigned ourselves to second place. “So, all in all, I think the Administration has submitted a program which we can all embrace and both parties can fully support.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)	’
cosmos xix transmissions have beenpicked up by the Sohio Research Center near Cleveland, Ohio. The Center said that Russian satellites normally have an on-off switch which the Russians can activate for transmission as the satellite passes over Russian territory. They theorized that the switch might have stuck, causing the satellite to transmit continuously. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 10/6/63)
Dr. T. L. K. Smull, nasa Director of Grants and Research Contracts, said in commencement address, Univ. of Georgia: “Today we are dealing not only with profound changes in a social and economic structure of our country and of the world; we are dealing as well with even more profound changes in man’s own conception of the boundaries and limitations of his habitable environment and of his understanding of the forces of the universe. “Therefore, the opportunities available to you graduates in the next decade are, in a very real sense, boundless. The challenges of tomorrow are not just for the scientist, the engineer, and the technician working toward scientific developments, but for all men and women in all professions—for every one of you. Even if science is not your field, you must understand what it implies simply because science will continue affecting your lives with even greater impact as each year passes .... “Never before has a civilization seized upon and exploited a new technology at the rate man is now exploring the new dimension of space. In the 2,060 days since the Russians launched Sputnik, nasa has conducted 96 major vehicle launchings, an average of one every 22 days. In this period, the ussr has announced about 35 successful space flights. 741-623 0—64--21 “nasa’s impressive accomplishments will be dwarfed by United States activities during the rest of this decade as our understanding of the nature of space, the sun, and the map of the Universe is greatly enhanced. “In an age of exploding knowledge in all of the physical sciences no area of human activity better focuses and dramatizes the meaning of today than does this boldest, most challenging arena of space . . . .” (Text)
Sermon by Dr. Duncan Howlett, Washington Unitarian minister, was quoted in Washington Post. On June 18,1961, Dr. Howlett said: “Why can we not boldly propose now a cooperative moon-shot, built and manned by Russian and American scientists ? Why can we not send a capsule to the moon with a Russian and an American inside it; and when they get there let them claim the moon— not for Russia, not for the United States, but for humanity ? ... “We can claim space for humanity or we can make it a battle ground to which to extend the ancient quarrels of earth. Which shall it be? There is but one choice before us. We can try to make the exploration of space a cooperative venture. We cannot succeed unless we try . . . .” (Glaser, Wash. Post, 9/28/63)
U.S. tracking data on the Russian polet i maneuverable spacecraft substantiated the Russian claim of change in apogee but indicated that any substantial change in plane had to be made before completion of the first orbit. According to Aviation Week, norad’s initial orbital plane for the Russian satellite was 59.99°, later revised to 58.89°. Whether this 1.1° change was a result of a satellite maneuver or was merely a refinement of earlier data is uncertain. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63,28)
