Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was reported to have told visiting Japanese legislators that U.S.S.R. had developed a new “terrible weapon” capable of destroying mankind. Two days later, however, Mr. Khrushchev clarified his remark, denying he had said that the weapon could destroy mankind. “I said that scientists had shown me the terrible weapon, which shows what mankind can do. We did not say anything about unlimited power.” He also said the weapon was not a nuclear bomb. He blamed the earlier report on having been “misinterpreted” in translation from Russian to Japanese and then to English. (NYT, 9/16/64; Shabad, NYT, 9/18/64)
Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. designer of the F—12A (A—11) aircraft, said that the airplane could easily outfly Russian aircraft. He stated that the F—12A could capture all three absolute world flight records currently held by the Russians. (AP, Kansas City Times, 7/18/64)
Translations of reports in Russian journals indicated that space flights lasting longer than 24 hours produced changes in the human body, including bladder and kidney troubles, that could not be corrected. Future Soviet flights would be aimed at detecting the beginning of these disorders and attempting to prevent them. The translations indicated that the Russians planned to send up more doctors and physiologists and that the primary reason for the 16-mo. delay between flights by the U.S.S.R. was the seriousness of the disorders affecting astronauts after flights lasting for five days. Future crews would be selected “as medical teams as opposed to individuals,” said one Soviet journal. The men would also be picked on the basis of their medical compatibility— to see that one man’s personal germs, bacteria, or virus did not infect other members of the team. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 12/13/64)
Red spot on the moon was observed from 12:18 a.m. to about 1:00 a.m. by three lunar observers in Port Tobacco, Md. Using 16-in. telescope, the astronomers described the spot as a “red, pinkish glow” which was “located on the base of the central peak in the Crater Alphonsus.” This was said to be eighth sighting of such a spot on the moon in the last six years and the first in Alphonsus since the discovery of the phenomenon by a Russian scientist in 1958. The three observers, associated with Trident Engineer Associates of Annapolis, Md., were using equipment specially developed for detecting the red spots, in lunar observation project for NASA. (Wash. Sun. Star, 11/1/64; NASA Release 64—278)
At NASA background briefing for news media, Doctors W. Randolph Lovelace II, Orr E. Reynolds, and Frank B. Voris made presentations on space medicine, biosciences, and effects of space environment on man. Dr. Lovelace described the close working relationship between the offices of Space Medicine, Biotechnology, and Space Science and Medicine. He pointed out Center responsibilities as well as the “detailed task-level technical coordination” completed at the NASA—dod level “which ensures most effective use of all existing facilities” throughout the Nation. In question period, Dr. Reynolds discussed timing of life-detector experiments for Mars:	. . we had hoped that it would be possible to have a landing capsule on Mars for the 1966 mission. Just as the plans for that were being developed, questions were raised by recent astronomical data about the density of the atmosphere of Mars that made it very difficult, if not impossible, to design the proper landing system. “At the present time we are hoping to have a landing vehicle for Mars for the 1969 opportunity. This is not an improved program. But we are working on the development of plans in that direction. It has already been decided that the biological sciences payload, that is, the life detector instruments, or whatever else the biological community thinks are most appropriate for that flight, will have high priority on any landing mission. “So I think the best guess now would be that certainly our first opportunity would be for 1969, and we certainly hope we will have such instruments aboard.” Discussing space radiation, Dr. Reynolds said: “. . . a number of committees and meetings that have been held by the radiobiologists in this country have recommended that an experiment be done below the radiation belt carrying a known source of radiation. The reason for this is that there have been reports from organisms, living organisms flown in the natural radiation belt, of a higher than expected effectiveness of the radiation. There is no good theoretical basis for knowing why this should occur. . . Experiment for checking this would be flown in first flight of Biosatellite, carrying known source and dosage of radiation below the area of the Van Allen belts. Asked about the previous data, Dr. Reynolds said : “There are experiments both by United States experimenters in piggyback flights, and the Russian experiments that show a higher than expected effectiveness of the ambient radiation in genetic effect and in systemic effect. These experiments we strongly suspect had this result due to lack of adequate dosimetry, measurement of the actual dosage that was encountered. For this reason the radiobiologists who have been advising us have recommended this experiment with a known source so as to eliminate any question of whether the dosimetry was wrong. . . .” Dr. Voris discussed “our studies into the biological effects of extremely low magnetic fields and into alternating and high magnetic field forces. Because of a recently expounded theory that individual neurons possess individual and isolated electromagnetic fields of their own, it is conceivable that the functions of the human nervous system may suffer impairment as a result of exposure to electromagnetic fields that deviate markedly from ambient terrestrial levels. . . .” Asked about slow rotation for manned space stations to provide partial gravity, Dr. Voris said that it presented “a problem in disorientation and in the effects of mal de mer. Slow rotation is fine if you can keep your head immobilized and become acclimated to it and stay in one spot. If you move around, move with the turn or away from the turn, or move from the periphery of a circular station into the center, you are changing the field force there, you are developing what is called a Coriolis effect, and you then disturb the balance mechanism or vestibular mechanism of the body and you develop recurrent effects such as seasickness.” (Transcript) .	' 766—508 O—65----12
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
In press interview during Third International Symposium on Bioastronautics and Exploration of Space, in San Antonio, Major Duane E. Graveline, a usaf doctor who examined each of the Project Mercury astronauts after their flights, said there was no doubt that even brief forays into space created a certain physical debilitation. “What prolonged space flights, with the constant state of weightlessness and no gravity as we know on earth might do to the human body, we don’t know yet. We know that the Russian cosmonauts have suffered from the effects of prolonged weightlessness, and that U.S. astronauts Walter Schirra and L. Gordon Cooper had temporary debility for the same reason. . . . What we must do now is determine how to condition man for long-duration manned orbital missions and journeys into the universe. Frankly, we don’t have the answers yet.” (Macomber, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 11/19/64)
William B. Bergen, president of Martin Baltimore, said U.S. had closed the so-called “space gap” of Russian competition “without fanfare, and almost without knowing it ourselves.” Addressing National Space Club in Washington, Bergen said that, with all the “Hollywoodian propaganda” about enormous Soviet satellites, “there seems little doubt that the objective part of the scientific world is now convinced that our modest-sized couriers into space have brought back far more useful information than has been collected by the Russians’ more massive messengers.” (AP, Houston Post, 7/23/64)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, delivered keynote address at the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner. He compared U.S. and Soviet space accomplishments:	“1. As regards that key feature of booster power, the Soviets are ahead on an operational basis, although we are moving up rapidly, having attained the current weight-lifting record on a test shot by the Saturn I. “2. We have placed almost four times as many payloads into earth orbit, while they continue each year to increase their absolute lead in total weight of net payloads orbited. “3. Our numerical progress in orbiting payloads is impressive. Last year alone, the U.S. put more payloads into earth orbit than the USSR has since Sputnik I in 1957. “4. The increasing reliability of our launchings is also impressive. During the past three years, we placed successfully into earth orbit 82% of all the payloads which we attempted to put there. The Soviet record, while not identical, is comparable. “5. The Soviet heavy Vostok class of vehicle has accumulated some 1600 orbits, as compared with 37 for our smaller Mercury. . . . “6. The Soviets have devoted more of their attention to far-out space than we. have. As a percentage of total space launching attempts, they have devoted five times as much effort to escape-missions to the moon and planets as we have. The opposite is true as to near-earth orbits, in which the U.S. emphasis has been much greater than theirs. “7. Both countries have made impressive strides in accumulating scientific data about space. We may even be ahead in this regard, but it is not safe to assume so. “8. The U.S. is clearly ahead in world-wide sharing of space research in cooperative programs, and in direct application of space technology to practical use in communications, weather reporting, geodesy, and navigation. “In summary, we have made enormous gains in the past few years in the race with our able and aggressive competitor. “. . .1 want to emphasize that the Soviets have a strong orderly program, with every indication that it is continuing vigorously, apparently unaffected by adverse economic factors in their country. Wishful thinking to the contrary, we dare not slow down unless we are willing to pay the terrific price of second place. . . .” (Text)
A Commerce Dept, reprint of a Russian scientific article indicated that Soviet satellite cosmos V had detected and reported a high altitude explosion of U.S. nuclear weapon over Johnston Island in the Pacific on July 9, 1962. (NYT, 11/20/64)
echo ii passive communications satellite was used for transmission of two radiophotos between Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station at Manchester and Gorki University’s radioastronomy observatory at Zimenki. A third space telegram was sent from Jodrell Bank to Zimenki via the moon, and its quality was comparable to those received via echo n. The U.S. satellite was termed by Tass commentator “the Friendship Sputnik.” (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64; NYT, 3/2/64, 9; Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/1/64, 4, Atss-t Trans.)
An article in the Russian publication Krasnaya Zvezda {Red Star) reported a speech delivered by Russian Premier Khrushchev before a group of professors and students in Mishkol’tse in April 1964. In the speech Khrushchev noted that in the U.S. “the scientists to a considerable degree are not Americans . . . the U.S. has pirated its scientific staffs from the representatives of various nations.” The article went on to call attention to British criticism that the U.S. was drawing scientists out of Britain and detailed the activities of the American army at the end of World War II in attempting to capture German rocket scientists. The article concluded, “We can justifiably be proud that all our achievements in the field of rocketry and cosmonautics, to be sure in all fields of science and technology, are due to the brains and the talent of the Soviet scientists alone, without any help from the outside.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/17/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Yelena Andrianovena Nikolayeva, infant daughter of Russian cosmonauts Valentina Tereshkova and Andrian Nikolayev, was to be thoroughly examined for next few years to determine whether weightlessness or radiation of her parents had any effect. (Snider, CDNS, Houston Chron., 7/13/64)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) said in the House: “On Wednesday we saw the successful launching of the Saturn rocket carrying into orbit around the earth 18 tons. This included the largest payload ever placed in orbit by man and exceeds the largest Russian payload by 11 tons. For several years now this Nation has been plagued with the uncomfortable knowledge that the Russians were ahead of us in the space effort. This has been based primarily on the fact that they had a greater lift capability. The United States is now ahead in lift capability and in every other phase of the space program. . . .” (CR, 1/31/64,1443)
Dr. Boris Yegorov, the Russian doctor who orbited the earth in the VOSICHOD I spaceship, suggested that persons suffering from high blood pressure and heart trouble might one day be rocketed into weightless space for therapy. By relieving the gravitational load on the patients and giving them drugs, he said, “it will be possible to heal a person and give his wearied heart a chance to recuperate.” Dr. Yegorov said this novel heart treatment would be possible in the “foreseeable future.” (Toth, Boston Sunday Globe, 12/20/64)
Soviet Ministry of Defense said Pentagon was spying on Russian military and space installations in Moscow, via radio and radar monitoring stations on borders of U.S.S.R. and other Socialist nations and satellites. Allegation called for increased Soviet vigilance against such “espionage.” American embassy in Moscow called statement “nonsense.” (NYT, 6/11/64,10)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
New program combining study of science with study of U.S.S.R. at Columbia University’s Russian Institute was announced by Institute director Prof. Alexander Dallin. (NYT, 5/24/64, 21)
Interviewed in Washington Sunday Star, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh was asked how far U.S. now was on its way to the moon. “I suppose we went a good way toward the moon objective when the decision was made. Consequently, I would say that we are much more than a third of the way to the moon at the present time.” Asked about Administration policy to classify Soviet space failures, Dr. Welsh replied: “. . . The policy of classifying Soviet space failures was developed largely to protect sources of information, many of which in those days were individuals actually in the Soviet Union. “Most of the information we get today comes from sources outside the Soviet Union which need no protection. As a consequence, there is less j ustification at the present time for classifying Russian space failures than there was in the past. I am not saying that there is no justification. . . . “I think we will continue to examine this policy to see whether or not it can be relaxed, to see whether there is any justification at all for keeping from the American people information in regard to Soviet failures.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 5/24/64)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
out an agreement with the Europeans, and it was believed that the system would be greatly strengthened by Russian participation. The Geneva meetings, which would involve the U.S., European nations, and the U.S.S.R., would include a general discussion of recent developments in space communications. It was also reported that before the Geneva meeting a negotiation session in London between the U.S. and European nations would work on a preliminary agreement on an interim organization for a space communications system. (Farnsworth, NYT, 6/7/64,6)
Howard Simons of the Washington Post was awarded the 1964 American for the Advancement of Science-Westinghouse Science writing award. His winning entry consisted of stories on the Samos satellite, cybernetics in Russia, and the planet Jupiter. (Wash. Post, 12/18/64)
Seventh anniversary of the Space Age—orbiting of sputnik i by the U.S.S.R. on Oct. 4, 1957. Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin said in Trud interview that U.S.S.R. was preparing a manned space flight: “We are working and making studies and are preparing for a new launching. It is not our custom to advertise, but I’ll tell you that new and more complicated research work is in store for us.” (upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64)
Among the ten top scientific, medical, and technological advances in 1964 as selected by Dr. Watson Davis, Science Service Director, were: 1.	Close-up photographs of the moon taken by ranger vii. 2.	Orbiting of the earth by three Russian cosmonauts in the voskhod I spacecraft. 3.	Discovery of quasars, the brightest, most violent, and heaviest sources of light and radio waves, possibly fueled by collapse of gravity waves. (Sci. Serv., Wash. Daily News, 12/14/64)
Washington Star was informed of voskhod i’s safe landing 25 min. before Soviet Government made the official announcement, when Edward Baskakov of the newspaper Soviet Russia called from Moscow for a reaction to the flight. “Beat” of the Star was based upon their editorial on sputnik I in 1957.	(Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/64)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., space editor of Journal of the Armed Forces, discussed the Agena rocket stage, calling it “a highly reliable, extremely versatile piece of hardware which serves triple duty as an orbital injection vehicle for satellites, as an upper stage booster for lunar and planetary probes, and as a spacecraft. From the standpoint of frequency of usage, Agena is far ahead of the field. In the seven years since Sputnik I went up, there have been about 290 spacecraft sent into earth orbit or deep space trajectory; Agena, in various versions, has been in on 142 of them—almost half. It is currently being employed at the rate of about 30 shoots a year and it will figure in some very important upcoming projects. . . Haggerty described Agena contributions, notably its remarkable accuracy in sending ranger vii on its course to the moon. (J/Armed Forces, 10/3/64, 8)
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said in Saturday Evening Post “As a Republican I believe in what has been called the ‘conquest of space,’ but which I prefer to think of as a thorough exploration of a new scientific frontier to improve our living here on earth. This is an exploration we should pursue vigorously with a step-by-step program in line with our means and our needs. That was the aim of the space program as initially undertaken during my Administration: On the advice of eminent scientists we conceived a long-range effort, not a stunt, with costs to be stabilized around two billion dollars a year. That hardly could be called picayune by any reasonable standards. “But now, under the Democrats, this program has been blown up out of all proportion. With hysterical fanfare our space research has been presented as a crash effort, as a ‘race to the moon’ between the United States and Russia which we must win at all costs. And the costs are tremendous: They now are running well over five billion dollars a year. The Government now has more than 73,000 engineers and scientists working on the nonmilitary space program, either on the federal payroll or employed under contract. This swollen program, costing more than the development of the atomic bom'b, not only is contributing to an unbalanced budget; it also has diverted a disproportionate share of our brainpower and research facilities from other equally significant problems, including education and automation. “We are breezily assured that the cost and dislocation brought about by this moon race are worthwhile for the new ‘prestige’ they will bring us. There is no way of telling how true that may be, but we can be sure of one thing: The voyage to the moon will set a new record for a trip taken on borrowed money.” {Sat. Eve. Post, 4/11/64, 17—19)
British scientists at the Jodrell Bank radio astronomy station were reported searching the skies for the Russian space probe zond i which was believed to be approaching Venus. The Russians had never revealed the precise mission of the probe and refused to supply the Jodrell Bank scientists with the radio frequencies on which it was operating, but it was believed that the probe would closely approach Venus during the 72-hr. period beginning July 17. (Reuters, Minneapolis Morning Trib., 7/18/64)
