U.S. News and World Report commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory: “President Johnson has now committed this country to a vital and far-reaching race against Russia for military supremacy in space. “It is a strategic decision regarded as important as any since World War II. “The race actually has started. At this point it is largely silent and secret. But both powers are known to be conducting military missions with unmanned satellites, and results are described as striking and enormous. “Next, both countries will make major strategic moves by putting up space stations with military crews. Beyond that, plans are being readied for armadas of orbiting platforms and fleets of space planes— and, in case of hostilities, possible confrontation in space. “The U.S. goal: to make certain Russia is denied control of space that might enable it to tip the balance of power here on earth. . . .”	(U.S. News, 9/13/65, 10)
Several U.S. and foreign scientists would be guests on the 11th Antarctic expedition of the Soviet Union, Tass announced. Leonid Balakshin of the Arctic and Antarctic Institute in Leningrad said that 50 foreign scientists had already spent winters at the Mirny Observatory and other Russian stations near the South Pole. “The exchange of polar scientists is striking evidence of the constructive cooperation between Soviet and foreign explorers on the sixth continent,” Balakshin said. (Reuters, NYT, 8/21/65, 21)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that the time had come for the Administration to decide on what goals it wanted to set for the period after landing astronauts on the moon. The U.S. must use the tremendous space capability it had carefully built up since sputnik I, he said, “or see its value erode. If we do not use what we have created, continued expansion of the Soviet program will likely lead to future Soviet missions that will have the impact of Sputnik I.” (Text)
Russian communications satellite MOLNIYA i, because of its higher and sharply elongated orbit, could transmit continuously several hours longer than American Telstars, reported Tass. Tass claimed that Tel-stars could transmit uninterruptedly for only 30 min. (Reuters, NYT, 5/7/65, 3)
AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever said in the keynote address at the Air Force/Industry Planning Seminar in Dayton that “we need a broader perspective and greater vision in our conceptual planning ... we need to be more farsighted.” He continued: “The Soviet Union is making a major effort to surpass us in science and technology. The Soviets now have approximately the same number of scientists and engineers that we have. But every year they graduate an average of 200,000 scientific and technical students as compared with about 120,000 a year in this country. It is also worth noting that the number of scientific institutions in Russia has grown from about 3000 in 1957 to about 5000 in 1965. “Both of these facts indicate that the Soviets are deadly serious when they talk about the importance of science and technology to their global ambitions. We must more than match their effort, not only too maintain our national security but also to keep our world markets.” (Text)
North American Air Defense Command (norad) tracked a new Russian satellite (cosmos lii) for several hours before Moscow announced the launching. As of this date, norad’s space detection and tracking system was observing 488 man-made objects in space, of which 29 were actual payload satellites and the rest debris from previous launchings, (ap, Balt. Sun, 1/12/65)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. to receive an honorary doctorate, said in a speech:	“. . . while our national policy is to maximize the peaceful uses of outer space . . . and to avoid the extension of weapons, we have no choice but to acquire a broadly-based total capability in space; a capability that can enable us to insure the protection of our national security interests while we actively seek cooperative peaceful development. . . . “The Roman mastery of land and sea communications, the English mastery of the seas, the American mastery of the air and of nuclear energy were each accompanied by greatly enhanced prestige and followed by vast increases in power and position, new knowledge, the establishment of strategic international economic advantages, the wide use of new resources, great advances in military capability, and a quickening of national pride and vigor. Portentous realignments among nations were inevitable. These are the advantages the Russians now seek from their enormous investments in space. These are the advantages we cannot permit them to acquire and use against the non-Communist world. “In these lessons of history lies the real challenge of space. The portents for our own time are clear enough in the early lead of the Soviet Union with the first Sputnik, Vostok, and Voskhod. The spurt in Soviet prestige brought a new assurance and weight in the international political arena, a new pride and confidence in Soviet national purpose. We have reacted quickly and with ever-increasing success, but the challenge of the mastery of space remains to be accomplished for us as a nation and for you as a member of the new generation. We are meeting this challenge, and in doing so enhancing the broadest values for our society and our world. “Our power to survive as a great and vigorous Society is in the process of being proven again through our space efforts. Your own involvement in the actions and consequences will be far greater than you or I can fully appreciate today. . . .” (Text; NYT, 2/5/65)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
U.S.S.R.’s voskhod II, manned by pilot Col. Pavel Belyayev and co-pilot Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, was launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Tass reported. The spacecraft set an altitude record, reaching an apogee of 495 km. (309 mi.)—higher than any manned spacecraft had flown. Other orbital data: perigee, 173 km. (108 mi.); inclination, 65°; period, 91 min. During the second orbit, Lt. Col. Leonov, clad in a spacesuit with “autonomous life support system,” stepped into space, moved about five meters from the spacecraft (tethered by a cable), and successfully carried out prescribed studies and observations: he examined the outer surface of the spacecraft; turned on a film camera; carried out visual observations of the earth and outer space: took horizontal, vertical, and somersaulting positions; and returned safely to the spacecraft. Tass said: “Outside the ship and after returning, Leonov feels well.” He spent about 20 min. in conditions of outer space, including 10 min. free-floating in space. Entire procedure was carried out under control of Col. Belyayev, with whom continuous communication was maintained. A television camera fixed to the side of voskhod ii relayed pictures of the maneuver to Soviet ground stations. Biotelemetric data indicated that both cosmonauts had satisfactorily withstood the orbiting and the transition to weightlessness: the pulse rate of Belyayev and Leonov was 70—72 beats a minute and the respiration rate 18-20 a minute. All spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Tass said voskhod ii would complete at least 13 orbits of the earth. (Tass, ap, ALT’, 3/19/65; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 3/19/ 65, 1, atss-t Trans.; Haseltine, Wash. Post, 3/19/65)
Gen. Thomas Dresser White, usaf Chief of Staff from 1957 to 1961 and one of the chief proponents of a balanced air-space defense system, died. He had been a member of the naca 1957-58, and the first U.S. military attache in Russia in 1933. (Wash. Post, 12/23/65, D4)
Dr. Hideo Itokawa, professor at Tokyo Univ. and deputy director of Japan’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, was quoted on Japan’s role in space activity by Peter Temm in an article in the Washington Sunday Star: “Space research is not a competition. It should be a cooperative undertaking among all countries, to explore and study the universe. “Both America and Russia appear to be chiefly interested in artificial satellites and manned space vehicles. I see Japan’s role as filling some of the gaps skipped over by these two nations. “I believe it is possible that Russia may be preparing to abandon its project of putting a man on the moon in favor of assembling a satellite space station; at least, this how I interpret the recent Voskhod flight and its emphasis on carrying out tasks outside of the capsule. “I sincerely hope if this is so, that American space scientists will not swerve from their intentions of getting to the moon. There are many sides to space research, and the ideal approach is for all nations engaged in the new science to tackle different areas. “That way, we will all progress at a faster rate.” (Temm, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/25/65)
LUNA VII 3,313-lb. instrumented moon probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Tass said the last stage of the multistage launching rocket was put into parking orbit and then LUNA VII was fired on a trajectory toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. Launching occurred on the eighth anniversary of the orbiting by the Soviet Union of the first earth satellite, sputnik i. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/65, 1; ap, Wash. Post, 10/5/65, All; Nordlinger, Balt. Sun, 10/5/65, 5)
LUNA VII moon probe probably was destroyed in impact on the moon because the firing of the retrorockets was “only partially successful,” speculated Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Observatory. Sir Bernard said variations in the signals heard at Jodrell Bank showed luna vii’s retrorockets were fired at 4:58 p.m. EDT for six minutes. He estimated that LUNA VII, traveling about 2 mps., was slowed down by five-eighths of a mile a second during this firing. Signals began again at 5:20 p.m. and then stopped at 6:08 p.m.—the precise time when Russia had said luna vn would reach the moon. There was no official word on the /ate of the ton-and-a-half space probe, but Western experts believed the Soviets had failed in their third attempt to softland on the moon. (upi. Wash. Post, 10/9/65, A6; ap. Wash. Eve. Star, 10/8/65, A5)
An article in Human Events expressed fear that Russian military space capability surpassed that of the U.S.: “. . . Four times in the past 2 months, Red Star (a newspaper published by the Defense Ministry) has trumpeted the claim that Russia now has orbital space rockets with the capacity of wiping any aggressor off the face of the earth. “There is no doubt at all about the intended identity of the aggressor and among American scientists back home there is little doubt about the weapon. “There is little doubt because the United States spent 7 years and $10 million between 1958-65 to plan the nuclear-powered space orbiting system called Project Orion. We have high-ranking scientists who believe the Russians have copied or adapted Orion, which has been declassified since October, 1964. The Russians might easily have cracked the secrecy before that. “It is a first generation vehicular system that is capable of carrying 8 men and 100 tons of payload to Mars and back. It is a jet-propelled engine or engines powered by a nuclear reactor which, in effect, bombs a shield at the rear of the vehicle and drives it forward. The usual limitations of temperature do not affect this vehicle because the hot debris of the explosions makes only a momentary contact with the shield. The limitations of using full nuclear power are also absent because the reactor is outside the vehicle. “Guidance, mobility, range, the exchange of crew-members, and the restocking of the payload are all within this space cruiser’s capability. Its potentials as a raider of earth targets, and as an interceptor of our space satellites, are almost limitless. It may not be the never-never ultimate weapon, but it will do until another comes along.” {CR, 8/25/65, A4807-08)
U.S. would make the first lunar landing because the “Saturn 5 booster ... is the only one anywhere powerful enough to do that,” predicted NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the International Radio and Television Society in New York. He believed the U.S. was ahead of Russia in cumulative knowledge of manned spaceflight, but conceded that Russia was probably 18 mo. ahead in other areas—specifically, multimanned spacecraft and the building and use of big boosters. Webb refused to classify Russia’s LUNA VII mission as unsuccessful, explaining: “They’re practicing how to do these things. They must have gained a good deal of information from it.” (San Diego Union, 10/10/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to President Johnson and the Cabinet on both the two-man gt—3 flight and the ranger IX photographic mission. Mr. Webb made these points:	“The most significant accomplishment of the GT-3 flight was that ... it provided verification of the basic design, development, test and operations procedures NASA is using to develop manned spacecraft, man-rated launch vehicles and a world-wide operational network. . . . “We now know that at least two spots, and perhaps three, when we look more carefully at the ranger ix pictures, are at least smooth enough for the Lem [manned moon landing], . . .” An American astronaut probably would be able to open his spacecraft and partly emerge from the cabin during the gt-5 flight. Mr. Webb said under questioning that there might be some possibility of achieving this in the next Gemini flight, but that gt-5 was more likely. He regarded a Russian cosmonaut’s leaving a space vehicle briefly as spectacular but said the U.S. was more intent on developing a space suit that would enable American astronauts to work outside on space vehicles and develop or put together space centers. (Text; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
After 26 hrs. of flight, Col. Pavel I. Belyayev landed voskhod ii manually near Perm, Russia. Tass announced. The two-man spacecraft had completed 17 orbits of the earth, one more orbit than planned, and had traveled 447,000 mi. This was the first time landing of a Soviet spacecraft had been described as manual. Impact of voskhod II on the ground, later revealed as snow bank, was described as “soft.” (Tanner, NYT, 3/20/65, 1, 3; Shabad, NYT, 3/21/65, 3)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said previous Russian efforts to land a vehicle on the moon had failed because they could not slow it up enough at the point of contact. Dr. O’Keefe also advanced the view that the moon originally broke off from the earth and eventually assumed its present position in the universe. He spoke at the monthly meeting of the Catholic Laymen’s First Friday Club in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/65, A3)
Editorial in Life put into perspective the “break-throughs” and spectacular “firsts” recently achieved in space exploration—U.S.S.R.’s voskhod II, U.S.’s Gemini hi, ranger ix, ComSatCorp’s EARLY bird. “The first Sputnik was less than eight years ago, but already the space age has reached what President Johnson calls an ‘early maturity.’ Each technical advance is a planned and measured consequence of the previous one; Mercury fed Gemini and Gemini feeds Apollo; each hero stands on the shoulders of predecessors who are also his contemporaries. . . . “Our space program is, as Johnson puts it, ‘a national asset of proven worth and incalculable potential.’ Its cost is leveling off at about $7 billion a year. One hopes this includes enough to land us on the moon before the Russians—and what’s wrong with wanting to be first? . . . “Our program, which may or may not be overtaking the Russian, is well past its own first period of jumpy desperation. We can stick to it in confidence.” [Life, 4/9/65)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
Dr. A. J. Drummond of Eppley Laboratory, Newport, R.I., told Missiles and Rockets that a number of Russian cosmonauts were said to have died in booster failures at launch. Dr. Drummond got his information through unofficial sources while attending a technical meeting in Leningrad last year. He also said there were no large solar-simulation testing facilities in the Soviet Union and that Soviet spacecraft used crude bulk insulation for thermal control instead of emission-absorption coatings. (M&R, 1/25/65, 7)
Referring to the “real success of Luna 6,” an article in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin said: “This is not the first Russian failure in space. But it is the first open admission of failure. Americans, who have had their own failures, can’t help but warm up a little in the glow of such non-Marxist honesty.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/15/65)
By a 45%-to-42% margin, the American people believed the space program was worth an annual $4-billion expenditure, according to a Harris poll. By a 50%-to-38% margin, the public would oppose continuing the program at the present rate of expenditure if it were not for Russian exploits in space. (Harris, Wash. Post, 11/1/65, A2)
LUNA vi, Russian probe, passed the halfway point on its journey to the moon. All systems continued to function normally, Tass announced. (Tass, 6/9/65)
Editorializing in the Washington Evening Star about “lean years” beginning for the aerospace industry, William Hines said: “. . . Since the ’50s, aerospace companies have become accustomed to a diet of caviar, filet and champagne. The government has poured something like 100 billion into rockets, missiles and spacecraft since the Soviet Union’s Sputnik went up in October, 1957. The torrent of funds is now being reduced, if not precisely to a trickle, certainly to a more moderate flow. . . . “The aerospace crisis is serious enough that the management-consultant firm of Arthur D. Little, Inc., has just published a study, ‘Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry.’ It makes the following revealing point:
U.S. experts believed that Russia might attempt to launch a multimanned spacecraft on a 15-day mission as her next manned space effort, reported William J. Normyle in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Based on recent conversation with Soviet scientists, U.S. specialists felt that there was complete confidence in the Voskhod environmental-control system which had been qualified for 30-day missions, Normyle explained. They also believed that the Soviets were prepared to attempt a rendezvous mission more ambitious than Gemini 6. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 11/1/65)
Washington Post concluded that it might be embarrassing for the Russians to refuse President Johnson’s invitation to send a representative from the Soviet Academy to view the next Gemini launching. An editorial elaborated: “It just so happens that a high-level Russian space delegation will be in New York City in mid-October to attend a meeting of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. “It just so happens, too, that the Gemini 6 launching is scheduled for late October. “And, it just so happens that Mr. Johnson knew the dates of both scheduled happenings. . . . “There is no guarantee that the Russians will accept the President’s invitation—the first formal invitation of its kind extended to them. Hitherto, the Russians have not accepted informal invitations to witness an American space launching. . . . “Experts have suggested that one reason for this Soviet shyness was the tacit implication that if the Russians accept an American invitation to Cape Kennedy, Russia would have to respond with a like invitation. . . .” (Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A3)
“The Americans had not planned to let a man out until the end of this year. But after our flight they became bolder. A small group of American specialists, with the permission of our government, came to the Soviet Union and talked with cosmonauts [Col. Pavel I.] Belyayev and [L/Col. Aleksey] Leonov about their flight and we didn’t hide anything.” Questioned by newsman about the visit by “American specialists,” Kamanin said either three or five persons had interviewed the Russian cosmonauts for several days, but he could not recall their names. Kamanin was asked if the visitors were officials of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. “I don’t know,” he replied. “Officially they were here with a television company—allegedly.” NASA categorically denied General Kamanin’s allegation, UPI reported. A spokesman said: “We have been unable to uncover any United States delegation of scientists addressed by the Soviet cosmonauts.” Reuters, NYT, 8/26/65, 40; upi, NYT, 8/26/65, 40; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/25/65, 1)
U.S.S.R. had kept the U.S. under relatively continuous surveillance with photo reconnaissance satellites launched as part of the Cosmos program, said Edward H. Kolcum in an article in Aviation Week and Space Technology. In 1964 14 such satellites were launched, he asserted. The article continued: “Soviet photo reconnaissance payload is believed to be an unmanned version of the Vostok spacecraft, which successfully carried cosmonauts into orbit six times. The unmanned camera mission uses the same launch facilities and same recovery techniques developed from Russian manned satellites. The recoverable section is the pressurized cabin, which weighs about 5,000 lb. when it is ejected from the main spacecraft for a parachute descent on land. . . . “Six of these payloads were recovered after eight days; two after seven days, one after six days and another after five days. One came down after 24 hr. in orbit; one remained up five weeks, another eight and a half weeks, and another, launched Aug. 29, is still in orbit. Departures from the norm are believed to indicate retrofire malfunctions or failures. Most recent Soviet reconnaissance satellite was Cosmos 52, launched Jan. 11 and recovered Jan. 19. . . .” He stated that 11 of the 14 reconnaissance satellites orbited in 1964 were orbited at 65° inclination. The remaining three orbited at 51° inclination—“an inclination that also permits the payload to sweep over the entire continental United States.” The other Cosmos satellites, orbited at 49° inclination, had remained in orbit until they decayed naturally. They were “believed to be scientific applications and military development payloads.” (Av. Wk., 2/22/65, 22)
Kenneth Gatland, Vice-President of the British Interplanetary Society, urged U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration in New Scientist article. “. . . it seems we are faced with the ludicrous situation of the world’s two most powerful nations, each with massively expensive rival programmes, heading for a common objective which each proclaims is being pursued in the highest interests of peaceful scientific exploration.” A joint venture would have the advantage of providing for contingencies such as rescue of astronauts possibly stranded on the moon or in lunar orbit—a capability not included in Project Apollo. “This situation can only be satisfactorily resolved by the provision in lunar orbit of a second soft-landing vehicle and back-up crew capable of mounting an emergency rescue operation. To achieve this would require a specially adapted version of the craft already designed to soft-land astronauts. “This is where the merit of US-Soviet cooperation lies for, as an international venture, a project to land men on the Moon would surely not be undertaken as envisaged in project Apollo; and certainly not with such rigid constraints on time. In all probability it would be planned as an operation rather than a solo mission, with logistic support from a second space vehicle placed in lunar orbit ahead of the main expedition. . . . “The essential requirement in terms of the eventual lunar expedition is that launchings should be coordinated so that expedition components arrive in lunar orbit together. By the mid-1970’s, orbital rendezvous techniques should be well established with the ability of men to move between orbiting vehicles. An agreed crew could then descend to the lunar surface while another ship remains in reserve orbiting the Moon in case of need. Alternatively, a reserve vehicle might be landed, unmanned, in advance. . . . “Although at this stage such ... [a combined lunar expedition] would have little influence on overall costs, it could mean a great deal to the safety of initial manned missions. “Such a move would demand concessions on both sides. It would mean America abandoning her 1970 target date for placing men on the Moon, and while allowing Russia to keep her rocket secrets she would have to be prepared to reveal her programme for manned spaceflight. . . .” (New Scientist, 3/25/65, 774^76)
In a New York Times letter to the editor, Daniel Murphy commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop Manned Orbital Laboratory: “Once again we are asked to silently acquiesce to a questionable military dictum—‘if we don’t, they will.’ Because Russia has the capacity to send up such armaments, why does it so logically follow that they will do so? It is we, not they, who have a three or four to one superiority in icbm’s. . . . “By our action will we allow the Soviet Union any alternative but to respond in kind? Would not President Johnson’s invitation to the Soviet scientists stand a much greater likelihood of acceptance if coupled with an offer of diplomatically exploring the possibility of not constructing such armaments? “The Administration’s proposal can only increase the tensions of a world troubled enough.” {NYT, 9/1/65, 32)
Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, usaf Deputy Chief of Staff (r&d), stated in fy 1966 appropriations hearings of House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations: “I cannot help but believe, if we take a look at the last 40 years of Russian national development, that they are watching for an opportunity to gain a major military advantage over us. I cannot help but feel that they are examining opportunities in space very thoroughly for this particular purpose. “In order to be able to offset any advantage which they may discover, I feel we must move as rapidly as we can in this area, and take full advantage of any other national space programs such as the NASA activity. “The big program that we hope to get a go-ahead on here shortly is the Manned Orbital Laboratory. Here we think we will achieve a number of answers in the next 2 or three years. . . .”	(DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 148)
A spokesman for Britain’s Jodrell Bank Radio Telescope Observatory said concerning the Tass report that radio signals from cta-102 might come from intelligent beings in outer space:	“We have made measurements on these sources and confirmed that they are very weak and very small. But there is no observational evidence at Jodrell Bank to show any variation in the signal strength received. We would have to scrutinize carefully the Russian evidence before making any further statements.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 4/13/65)
In January, Dr. Donald F. Hornig began his second year as science adviser to President Johnson and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. In interview he mentioned that his job was created to prevent a recurrence of the kind of official surprise that greeted Russia’s launching of the sputnik i on Oct. 4, 1957. Hornig said the policy questions that he encountered were not ones of “right or wrong, but wise or less wise.” (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 16)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, made his first address on the U.S. space program at the Goddard Memorial Dinner sponsored by the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He said: “1 intend to be an advocate of a dynamic space program—a program which will succeed in reaching to goals we have set—and one which will see new goals—one that can see beyond the moon and into fields where we can only speculate about the knowledge awaiting us.” The Vice President spoke briefly about the Soviet Union’s VOSKHOD II flight: “It is well for us from time to time to take stock—to take a careful look—in order to see how we are making out in comparison with our main competitor. The facts are that we do have very strong competition and hence we have another big reason for a major space effort—namely, prudence. Our national security alone would suggest reason enough for us to strive for absolute leadership in space exploration.” Humphrey pointed out that the Soviets remained ahead in propulsion for their rockets, while the U.S. continued to lead “in the directly useful fields of weather reporting, navigation, and communications.” He continued: “The Soviets clearly have an advantage in studying the effects of space environment on human beings. . . . We can salute the Russian achievements . . . but we would be foolish if we did not understand the military implications of Soviet space science as well as our own. “Each Russian shock has produced action here. But a mature nation should not need shock treatment. We are a peaceful nation . . . but we would ignore the real interests of the free world if we diminished our military efforts in space.” In the principal presentation, the widow of the scientist presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and leader of the RANGER vii team that obtained the first close-up pictures of the moon’s surface. The National Space Club Press Award for “an outstanding role in adding significantly to public understanding and appreciation of astronautics” went to Aviation Week and Space Technology; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for “an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft, and space field” was presented to Florida Research and Development Center, Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to John Tascher, Case Institute of Technology, for U.S. Rocket Society Number Two: the Story of the Cleveland Rocket Society; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to the university of the recipient’s choice) for “the purpose of stimulating the interest of talented students in space research and exploration” was awarded Willard M. Cronyn, a graduate student in Maryland Univ.’s Dept, of Physics and Astronomy. (Text; Program; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/20/65)
In an article in the Indianapolis Star discussing Soviet medical practices observed during his visit to Russia at the invitation of the Soviet Academy of Science, Dr. John M. Keshishian, associate in surgery on the George Washington University School of Medicine faculty, said: “It is not generally known that just before Voskhod was ordered into reentry, the pulse rate of one cosmonaut dropped to 40. “When your pulse rate drops below 40 heartbeats a minute, you’re in trouble. “The Russians haven’t said anything about this . . . but it could be another one of the problems their space medicine is encountering for which there seems to be no ready solutions. “For example, some Russian cosmonauts have suffered severe, hallucinations, both in flight and afterwards. Others have suffered equally severe and, thus far, inexplicable vertigo during which they can’t be certain whether the floor’s coming up to meet them or vice versa, or whether they’re spinning, or the room is. And Russian physicians have found that . . . space flight environment—possibly weightlessness—draws calcium from the blood and expels it in the urine.” (World Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc., Keshishian, Indianapolis Star)
Russian Cosmonaut Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, first man to walk in space, was quoted as calling the Gemini iv flight of Majors James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Edward H. White n (usaf) “a very interesting one.” During an interview with the Bulgarian news agency, he congratulated the Gemini crew, wished them “a happy landing back on earth,” and said “no doubt the experience from our flight must have helped the U.S. space program very much in preparing and executing the flight.” (Reuters, NYT, 6/7/65)
A secret weapon, about which former Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev had boasted, blew up in 1960 killing the commander-inchief of the Soviet missile forces, Marshal Mitrofan I. Nedelin, and 300 others, the Manchester Guardian reported. The weapon was a missile with a nuclear propellant. The Guardian quoted secret reports of Oleg V.	Penkovsky, a Russian executed in 1963 for spying for the West, which would be published in November 1965.	(NYT, 10/17/65, 25; Wash. Post, 10/17/65, 1)
Two Russian airmen had set a world altitude record by flying mI^I helicopter with a load of nearly two tons to 20,894 ft., Tass reported. (Reuters, N.Y. News, 3/14/65)
Rep. Burt L. Talcott (R-Calif.) inserted in the Congressional Record a letter from E. J. Stecker, president of Holex, Inc., and an exhibitor at the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) : “At Paris the Russians made us look like idiots and we cooperated so beautifully that it almost looked as though our public relations program was being directed by the Kremlin. . . . “I walked through the aircraft park where the Russian and American exhibits were practically side by side. The Russian aircraft were exclusively commercial, the American almost 100 percent military. Think of the irony of the situation. . . . “There was a long line waiting to enter the . . . space exhibit of the U.S.S.R. . . . inside was a full scale model of the Vostok space capsule and its rocket motor suspended from the ceiling, what appeared to be an operational Vostok in a glass case and Mr. Gagarin, Russia’s first man in space, who shook my hand . . . and gave me a Vostok lapel pin. This was easily the most popular exhibit at the show and I would estimate that 70 percent of the attendees had Vostok pins and were wearing them. . . . “The Russians then flew in their great misshapen 750-passenger transport aircraft which really impressed the public. I examined it and as a pilot and engineer of many years standing, I feel it economically and militarily foolish, but the publicity value was tremendous. “Then there was the announcement of the proposed U.S.S.R. SST transport which looks like a retouched Concorde. This also hit all of the front pages. “In short, the Russians stole the show with an obsolete space capsule much inferior to our Mercury, an artist’s sketch of a supersonic transport and an overgrown, awkward monstrosity of an airplane. But they could do it because everything they did was aimed at and shown to the general public. . . . “When White, McDivitt, and the Vice President finally arrived, it was a triumphant tour surrounded by Secret Service, press, public relations and photographers and the great mass of the unwashed public including the exhibitors were generally ignored and forgotten. . . . “There were a few good points. James Webb, Administrator of the NASA, visited the U.S. exhibitors. He came unheralded and alone and had time to stop and talk for a few minutes without the aid of 50 photographers. In this, Jim was unique among the U.S. officials and should be commended. The usaf Thunderbirds and the U.S. Navy Blue Angels put on fantastic flying exhibitions on Thursday evening. But it occurred around 7:30 p.m. when most of the public had departed. “The point is this: The Russians appealed to the people; we ignored the people and appealed to the press. As a result, the Russians only lost the front pages once and that was when we made them through the unfortunate crash of our 2-58.” (CR, 7/6/65, A3555-6)
It is time now to put the manned military control of space on a crash basis equal in priority to the Apollo program,” said Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, in a letter U> the editor in the New York Times. He suggested the following steps be taken:	“The first M.O.L. flight is scheduled from two and one half to three years from now. This should be speeded up at least a year and the necessary sacrifices made to achieve it. The Gemini capsules required for the M.O.L. project should be ordered at once. To achieve our goals effectively the manned earth orbiting program should be placed under military control. . . . “I believe the only way the Department of Defense can meet its responsibilities in ‘near space’ is to assume direction of the manned earth orbiting program. It should reorganize the U.S. Air Force into the U.S. Aerospace Force and make it truly that. . . . “The decision we must make is not whether there will be military control of space but rather whether that control will be Russian or our own. . . .” (NYT, 6/19/65, 28)
“U.S. space officials are in no particular hurry to develop a ground landing because water landings have worked so well,” reported the Washington Post. The article said that the “Soviet landing system— partly due to the Russians’ large and sparsely populated land area and their lack of sea forces—required Russian astronauts to parachute out of the descending spaceship.” This put stress on the airman—especially after long periods of weightlessness, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/8/65, A14)
President Johnson, asked during a press conference, “where does our space program stand in relation to the Soviets’ in the wake of their latest feat?” replied: “The Soviet accomplishment and our own scheduled efforts demonstrate, I think dramatically and convincingly, the important role that man himself will play in the exploration of the space frontier. The continuing efforts of both our program and the Russian program will steadily produce capability and new space activity. This capability, in my judgment, will help each nation achieve broader confidence to do what they consider they ought to do in space. “I have felt since the days when I introduced the Space Act and sat studying Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2 that it was really a mistake to regard space exploration as a contest which can be tallied on any box score. “Judgments can be made only by considering all the objectives of the two national programs, and they will vary and they will differ. Our own program is very broadly based. We believe very confidently in the United States that we will produce contributions that we need at the time we need them. For that reason, I gave Mr. Webb and his group every dollar in the Budget that they asked for a manned space flight. “Now the progress of our program is very satisfactory to me in every respect. We are committed to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind. We stressed that in our hearings and our legislation when we passed the bill, and while the Soviet is ahead of us in some aspects of space, U.S. leadership is clear and decisive and we are ahead of them in other realms on which we have particularly concentrated.” (Transcript; Wash. Post, 3/21/65)
In advance excerpts of his book, Waging Peace, 1956-1961, President Dwight D. Eisenhower related his “reactions to Sputnik and the Gaither Report” in October and November 1957. President Eisenhower reviewed a meeting on October 8, 1957, with his principal military and scientific advisers. The late Deputy Secretary of Defense Donald A. Quarles reported: “There is no doubt that the Army Redstone could have orbited a satellite a year or more earlier. . . .” Quarles reviewed the reasons for the separation of the IGY Vanguard satellite from the ballistic missile programs, saying: “The Russians have done us a good turn, unintentionally, in establishing the concept of international space,” a principle confirmed by the orbiting of Sputnik over the air space of country after country. “Late that same morning,” President Eisenhower wrote, “I directed Secretary of Defense Charles Wilson to have the Army prepare its Redstone at once as a backup for the Navy Vanguard.” Of sputnik II, which orbited “Laika” on November 3, 1957, President Eisenhower said it did not arouse American public opinion because people “seemed to resent the sending a dog to certain death—a resentment that the Soviet propagandists tried to assuage a few days later by announcing that they had put poison in the last of Laika’s rations. . . . “The public, however, became bewildered and upset when word got out that a far from optimistic secret report had been made to me in the National Security Council . . . called the Gaither Report. “This was a period of anxiety. Sputnik had revealed the psychological vulnerability of our people. The Communists were steadily fomenting trouble and rattling sabers; our economy was sputtering somewhat, and the ceaseless and usually healthy self-criticism in which we of the United States indulge had brought a measure of self-doubt. Added to this was the failure of our first satellite launching attempt [Vanguard] in the full glare of publicity and the alleged missile ‘gaps’ which political observers claimed they had detected .. . “The Soviet satellites,” President Eisenhower said, “were a genuine technological triumph, and this was exceeded by their propaganda value. To uninformed persons in the world, Soviet success in one area led to the belief that Soviet communism was surging ahead in all types of activity.” {Wash. Post, 9/21/65, Al, A19)
AEC report said that nuclear fuel aboard a spacecraft which failed to go into orbit last April 21 had burned up harmlessly at high altitude. This was a reply to Russian and other critics who had accused the U.S. of causing radiation hazards by putting atomic generators aboard spacecraft. The generator involved was a Snap-9A aboard a Navy navigation satellite launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/8/65)
Moscovsky Komsomolets reported that the wife of Valery Bykovsky, Russian cosmonaut, was expecting a second baby. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 2/12/65)
“Within a decade . . . space could be as vital to defense as nuclear weapons are today,” postulated an article in U.S. News and World Report. It continued:	“The deep conviction of top U.S. Air Force leaders is that Russia is directing its main energies and resources not to the moon, but to mastery of space nearer earth. Some are convinced that Russia, far behind in the missile race, is now striving to leapfrog the U.S. and move ahead with manned satellite weapons.” (U.S. News, 4/5/65) In answer to the question of what man could do in space to contribute to the military mission, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, said at the Space Congress:	“I believe that the MOL will enable us to come up with some of the answers.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Space Congress, said:	“. . . extravehicular activity, as accomplished by the Soviets, and orbital changes, as accomplished by Gus Grissom and John Young . . . are essential to future progress in space exploration. Both are objectives of our Gemini Program and both are techniques that we must learn in order to carry out the Apollo Program. We have long assumed that both were objectives of the Soviet Program. “Given these assumptions, the difference between the scheduling of these experiments in the Soviet program and ours is a detail of relatively minor importance. It has been our judgment that maneuvering and changing orbits are more important than extravehicular activity for the progress of our program. For this reason, we scheduled the conduct of such maneuvers for the first manned flight in the Gemini Program. We must assume that the Soviets had their good reason for scheduling extravehicular activity on an earlier flight in their program.” (Text) E. Z. Gray, also of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed future programs. He stressed that one of the cardinal rules guiding the planning was that maximum use must be made of hardware either already developed or currently in development. (M&R, 4/12/65, 16)
Results o{ a recent Gallup Poll indicated that 47% of the American public believed that the United States was ahead of Russia in the “space race.” A 1961 poll had shown that most Americans viewed the space race as an even contest. Asked if they, themselves, would like to go to the moon, 87% of the people approached said no. (Wash. Post, 7/23/65, A2)
Need for creation of a “Buck Rogers rescue squad” with trained men and equipment to give aid on short notice to spacemen stranded or stricken in orbit was discussed by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. Hines said a persuasive case had been made by Michael Stoiko of the Martin Co.: “Stoiko estimated that in the next 20 years there will be about 280 manned space flights involving about 800 men. Half of each—men and flights—will be American, half Russian. Total flight time will be about 2.4 million man hours, compared with the world-wide total of about 1,200 man hours to date.” Stoiko projected “a 62 percent probability of at least seven emergency situations involving 22 men in the next 20 years; a 58 percent probability of two or three emergencies in the coming decade.” Hines said that now “astronauts stranded in orbit would have no hope of rescue and only a melancholy choice between two fatal alternatives: to sweat it out until the oxygen finally was gone, or to make a quick end of it by explosively decompressing both spacecraft and suit.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/2/65)
Soviet Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov appeared in public for the first time since they landed voskhod ii in the Perm region Mar. 19. They were en route to Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan where they were expected to undergo detailed medical checkups and debriefings by scientists and technicians before being welcomed in Moscow in Red Square. (Shabad, NYT, 3/22/65, 1,3)
Russia was developing long-range intercontinental missiles that could maneuver in flight, Col. Gen. Vladimir Toluhko, First Deputy Commander of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces, told Tass. (upi, NYT, 11/14/65, 74)
Laboratory research prompted by weight losses of American and Russian spacement on orbital flights had indicated a relationship between a person’s water-drinking habits, working ability, and real or imagined stresses and strains, reported William J. Perkinson in the Washington Evening Star. American astronauts had lost between three and five percent of their body weight in orbital flights; Russian cosmonauts had lost less—between one and three percent—partly because they perspired less in the shirt-sleeve environments of Soviet spacecraft than Americans did in spacesuits. One NASA report on hypohydration— condition when a person drinks too little water—noted a 5% weight loss due to water imbalance was tolerable, but a 10% loss could cause gross mental and physical deterioration. (Perkinson, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, B10)
Display of what the Soviets called an orbital missile at the military parade in Moscow Nov. 7 and “related Russian statements do seem to place upon the Russian government an obligation to make clear its future intentions with respect to the [U.N.] resolution” against weapons in space, State Department press officer Robert J. McCloskey told a news conference. Noting that the U.S. could easily put such a weapon into orbit, McCloskey said that the military value of this would be negligible, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/19/65, A10)
VOSKHOD iTs two-man crew, Col. Pavel Belyayev and Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, rested under medical supervision at an undisclosed place in the northern Ural mountains, Tass reported. Soviet space flight headquarters at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan reported that VOSKHOD n’s antennas had burned away as the spacecraft reentered the earth’s atmosphere. The descent had been tracked by radar units. Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev, Soviet Cosmonaut, said the order to use manual controls in landing voskhod ii was given by a Soviet ground station, Izvestia reported. It was not known whether the manual landing was part of the original program or was made necessary by a malfunction of the automatic controls. (Shabad, NYT, 3/21/65, 3) . . . . .
Soviet deputy minister of communications I. V. Klokov, commenting for Izvestia on orbiting of the second molniya I comsat, said: “The orbiting of the second Soviet Comsat ‘Molniya-1’ will permit us to verify the feasibility of organizing a communication system envisaging the combined use of several sputniks. This will offer the possibility of a marked increase in the duration of contact to the point of becoming a round-the-clock system. . . . “With the aid of the new sputnik, the first telephone communication sessions have already been conducted; Moscow and Vladivostok have exchanged the first TV programs. These tests have shown that the quality of the radio communications and telecommunications is superior to that found in the experiments with the first Soviet Comsat, Molniya-1.” (Izvestia, 10/16/65, 3; atss-t Trans.)
A group of amateur astronomers working on a lunar research project for nasa reported observations of unusual color glows on the moon and photographed this phenomenon. The group told nasa it saw the color in the crater Aristarchus during a four-hour period before daylight through a 16-in. telescope at Port Tobacco, Md. Although such events had been observed several times since the Russian astronomer N.	Kozyrev first recorded observations or red glows on spectrograms, this was the first time photographic equipment was used successfully to record the sightings in the crater Aristarchus. Observation was culmination of a 16-mo. vigil by members of a “Moon-Blink” team from Annapolis, Md. The team had made two previous confirmed sightings, including one in the crater Alphonsus last year, but they were much shorter and were not photographed. (NASA Release 65-370)
