Editorial comment on President Johnson’s proposal: ". . . In addition to rules governing space exploration a body of law is needed to govern the exploitation of useful resources that may conceivably be found on other solar bodies. Omission of this topic from the first international treaty on space law could produce future difficulties. But the President may well have felt that any present attempt to reach agreement on this delicate matter might prolong negotiations beyond the time of the first manned lunar landing. . . . There is no time to lose in getting international agreement to and ratification of this essential document.” (NYT, 5/9/66, 36) ". . . Someday such a treaty may save us from a new sort of far-out interplanetary imperialism. As revived by Mr. Johnson, however, the proposal has to do with a problem that will develop sooner and closer to home. After all between now and 1969 or 1970, Americans are going to be lofted to the moon’s surface, and so are Russians. This is a prospect full of very great historic importance. It lends special force to the President’s call for a renewed effort ... to negotiate an understanding under which the always unpredictable Russians will sign a treaty worthy of the name. . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/66, A6) "The first manned landing on the moon seems likely before 1970. The implications are immense, regardless of whether the first one is American or Russian. President Johnson’s proposal for an international compact to govern this and outer space explorations makes much sense. ". . .Perhaps a willingness by Moscow to entertain a treaty on space may also open the door to discussions about pooling some of the costs, as the late President Kennedy proposed.” (Boston Globe, 5/11/66) ". . . Probably the most succinct argument against a comprehensive treaty of this nature is, 'Who needs it?’ Monopolization of the lunar surface by military units and establishment of terror weapons on the moon or in orbit appear to be neither immediate dangers nor remote possibilities. The bugaboo of an orbiting multimegaton H-bomb seems, on close examination, to be more trouble than it would be worth. . . . "There is no slightest indication that the Russians propose to lay claim to the moon if their cosmonauts get there first, any more than we do if we win the race. The precedent followed by both countries in Antarctica—nearest thing to the moon on earth—is neither to assert nor to recognize territorial claims. This was U.S. and Soviet policy before the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/12/66, A20)
Soviet press reported that Belka and Strelka, dog passengers on U.S.S.R. ’s sputnik v in orbit more than 24 hrs. Aug. 19-20, 1960, were alive anp well. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/28/66, B7)
Aviatrix Geraldine Mock—who in 1964 became first woman to make a solo flight around world—set a new world nonstop distance record for women in a 4,550-mi., 31-hr. flight from Honolulu, Hawaii, to Columbus, Ohio, in single-engine Cessna 206. Previous distance flight record of 3,671 mi. had been set by three Russian women in 1938. (NYT, 4/12/66, 25; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A3)
Funeral of Soviet space designer Sergey Korolev was held in Red Square. After eulogies by Leonid Smirnov, deputy chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers; Mstislav Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences; Nikolay Yegorychev, Moscow Gorkom Secretary; and Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the funeral procession moved to the Kremlin wall where the urn containing Korolev’s ashes was placed in a niche. Commentary in the New York Times: "Death has finally declassified the role and identity of Academician Sergei P. Korolev, the man who provided the scientific and technical leadership of the vast Soviet rocket program. The extraordinary pomp of his state funeral in Red Square contrasted sharply with the almost complete anonymity imposed on him while he was alive. In the most fruitful years of his career, the man who led the Soviet Union’s march into the cosmos from the first sputnik to Leonov’s 'walk in space’ was normally referred to in the Soviet press only as the mysterious 'chief designer.’ Korolev’s rockets were powerful enough to send men into orbit and to put cameras into position to photograph the back side of the moon. But they were too weak to break the chains of secrecy that denied him, while he lived, the world applause he deserved.” (Tass, 1/18/66; NYT, 1/20/66, 31)
Pointing out that "space triumphs” had made "secrecy and the hoarding of scientific data less worthwhile,” editorial in the Baltimore Sun concluded: ". . . it is not surprising that, despite the relationship between military defense and some space activity, Russia and France seem about to agree to cooperate in space research—and the United States and Russia likewise.” (Balt. Sun, 6/27/66)
Seven U.S. scientists had consented to serve on joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Editorial Board provided for in agreement on space biology and medicine reached by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives Oct. 8, 1965, in New York City: Melvin Calvin, Univ. of California, Berkeley— U.S. co-chairman; Loren D. Carlson, Univ. of Kentucky; Dr. Robert W. Krauss, Univ. of Maryland; Robert B. Leighton, Cal Tech; Dr. John P. Marbarger, Univ. of Illinois; Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, nasa; and Wolf Vishniac, Univ. of Rochester. Agreement provided that Editorial Board, cochaired by a Soviet and a U.S. scientist, would supervise collection, preparation, and publication of materials on space biology and medicine. It would select compilers to assemble and prepare materials and authors —approximately equal number of Soviet and U.S.—to write the material. Work was expected to be published in several volumes, in both English and Russian, between 1967 and 1968. Cost of work performed by each country would be borne by that country, (nasa Release 66-49)
Discussing the urgency of nasa’s deciding "what to do in space after the first Apollo astronauts return from the moon about 1970,” William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is hard to forget a hint, dropped ... by a leading Russian space official several years ago. The Soviet Union, this functionary suggested, might very well celebrate the 50th anniversary of its great revolution by having cosmonauts plant a flag on the lunar surface. That deadline—if it is a deadline—is now less than 20 months away. "But suppose the Soviet Union is not racing us to the moon, or for that matter suppose that she is. In the present state of planning, the U.S. with the moon in its grasp would be very much like a dog chasing an automobile—what does he do with it if he catches it?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
The Washington Post commented on criticism of NASA spending: "What an uproar there was in 1957 when Sputnik showed us we were second in space! The Eisenhower Administration was roundly condemned. Congressmen and Senators clamored for a stepped-up space program and promised all the money needed. President Kennedy, in his 1960 campaign . . . said repeatedly: 'I am not satisfied to be second in space.’ "Well, we are no longer second in space. And the critics of the Johnson Administration are now not satisfied to be first in space—■ unless it can be done cheap. As a result of the space program we are not only going to be first on the moon and first in space. We are going to be first in a thousand fields of science, education, and industry. "This country does not have to choose between a space program that will keep it in first place and a poverty program that will keep it first ... in national exertion for the disadvantaged. It can be and ought to be first in both.” (Wash. Post, 12/2/66, A16)
Sergey Pavlovich Korolev, "chief constructor of space systems for the Soviet Union,” died in Moscow during surgery, Tass reported. Korolev had been active in rocketry since the early 1930’s and had directed gathering of information from captured German rocket scientists after World War II. As head of space system design for the Soviet Union, Korolev’s responsibilities had ranged from sputnik i in 1957 to voskhod ii manned spacecraft. He also designed the Luna series of unmanned spacecraft and possibly the Zond series. (Tass, 1/15/66; upi, Wash. Post, 1/16/66, A6; NYT, 1/16/66, 82)
U.S. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, contacted at Msc, said it would be of "enormous value.” Yegorov indicated that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration, saying: "If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights, they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
International press commented on luna ix’s soft-landing on the moon. New York Times: "Two facts indicate the magnitude of the advance that has now been made. One is the known failure of four earlier Soviet rockets to make the soft landing finally achieved by Luna 9. The second is the unhappy history of efforts in this country to build the Surveyor vehicle, which is intended to perform moon reconnaissance of the type in which the Soviet ship is pioneering. The Surveyor project is currently far behind schedule. The first flight is not planned until later this year, and it is impossible even to forecast when a Surveyor will duplicate the soft landing of Luna 9. "The whole process demonstrates again the wastefulness of the Soviet-American moon race. Were the United States and Russia cooperating fully, rather than competing, the hundreds of millions of dollars spent on Surveyor would have been applied to progress in fields still inadequately explored by either country.” Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo: "It is possible to say that the Soviet Union is considerably ahead of the U.S. in the moon development program. It is regrettable that the two nations have failed to exchange information and technology for the development of outer space.” La Nazione, Florence: "If the Russians already know how to land on the moon, they still don’t know how to effect a 'rendezvous’ in orbit. The inverse holds, naturally, for the Americans. This means that both are still faced by formidable problems and that the great contest is still open.” Times of India, Bombay: "At this rate it is not unreasonable to presume that a Russian-manned probe will land on the moon and return in about a year from now, beating the Americans to it by about three years.” (NYT, 2/6/66, Ell)
U.S.S.R. launched 3,608-lb. luna xi space station toward moon for "further testing of systems of an artificial moon sputnik and scientific explorations of near lunar space.” Preliminary data indicated that spacecraft was traveling close to calculated trajectory and equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 8/24/66)
Ninth anniversary of orbiting of sputnik i by U.S.S.R.
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) said in a speech before the American Society of Tool & Manufacturing Engineers in Westbury, N.Y.: "Two years ago I asked Administrator Webb for nasa’s future space plans and was told that none existed. I pointed out then that such plans were essential. Last year, we received assurance that the presentations of the fiscal year 1967 budget would reveal such plans. But none has been issued. Instead, nasa Administrator Webb has told us 'the future of the nasa program lies largely in the decision for fiscal year 1968.’ . . . "Our space program began in an atmosphere of perplexity and fear. Our adversaries in Russia had chosen a new arena for the struggle of international power and prestige. They threatened to achieve impressive capabilities which we would be unable to match. But, characteristically, the United States rose to the occasion in one of the biggest sustained technological efforts ever seen. Today, the U.S.S.R. is denied many of the options for surprising space spectaculars which they once had. From month to month, one country or the other may seem to be leading the so-called space race, but our proven capability shows that we are not to be placed at any military or strategic disadvantage. "Therefore it is time again for public opinion to assert itself. What do we want to do with this hard won space capability?” (Text)
France’s President Charles de Gaulle watched launch of cosmos cxxn unmanned satellite from Baikonur cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, into 625-km. (388-mi.) altitude circular orbit with 65° inclination and 97.1min. period. Tass said all instruments aboard satellite were functioning normally. De Gaulle was first Westerner to witness a Soviet launching and to visit Baikonur space center. (Tass, 6/25/66; Tanner, NYT, 6/26/66, 1; Wash. Post, 6/26/66, A20; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/26/66, A8)
There might be a connection between period of inactivity in Soviet manned space flight and Soviet efforts to create an effective antimissile system, speculated Crosby S. Noyes in the Washington Evening Star. ". . . The Russians, in assessing the present state of the world, [might] have radically readjusted their priorities in favor of earthly defenses over celestial exploration. . . .” Noyes suggested U.S. might have to choose soon "between the astronomical costs of continuing exploration of space, and those of the best possible antimissile defense system. If the Russians have, in fact, already made their choice, our own dilemma should bejeasier to resolve. But in any event, the new Russian defense system raises military and political problems which cannot be simply ignored.” (Noyes, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/13/66, All)
"Space Maintenance and Extravehicular Activities” meeting sponsored by usaf Aero Propulsion Laboratory and Martin Co. was held in Orlando. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. engineer Charles Brownell, together with three usaf space engineers, told the meeting that construction in space would cost approximately $100,000 per hour, but added: "These costs will be reduced drastically in the next few years.” Brownell said that because space labor would be so expensive, efforts were being made to automate as much repair work as possible. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A4) Man must learn how to rescue orbiting astronauts stranded in a disabled spacecraft because "it is a problem we all know will one day confront us,” Col. Emil G. Beaudry, vice commander of usaf Air Rescue Service, told the conference. He said one expert had concluded there was a 62 per cent probability of at least seven emergency situations in space involving 22 men in the next 20 yrs., and a 58 per cent probability of two or three emergencies within 10 yrs. Beaudry continued: "There is no reason today-—or certainly in the near future—why an operational rescue spacecraft could not be ready and standing by in the event of distress or tragedy during manned flights. "For example, a launch vehicle such as the Titan 3 with its great weight-lifting capability and mission versatility could easily carry a rescue crew, medical facilities, and technicians aloft to assist in any way required.. . .” (AP, New Haven Register, 3/7/66) NASA engineer David F. Thomas reported on his "jet shoes” to aid astronauts during extravehicular activity: "This device may be thought of as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the shoe soles in such a manner as to produce a thrust vector along the subject’s leg when the jets are activated.” Projecting from the front of each shoe would be hinged toe-plate which astronaut could depress or release at will to operate an electrical switch which controlled gas jets. Thomas said shoes, which would be slipped on over space boots, had been tested successfully on counterbalanced harness device at LaRC. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66, A18) Douglas Aircraft Co. engineers Thorne L. Runyan and John M. Dick reported that intensity of sunlight and blackness of shadows would cause astronauts working in space to "confuse spheres with points of light, cones with wedges, and pipes with strange shapes that appear and disappear.” To counteract these distortions, they recommended a bracket of strong lights "looking over the shoulder” of a working astronaut to fill in shadows and lessen contrast with sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, A5) Bell Aerosystems Co. test pilot Robert F. Courter reported that Bell had developed a rocket propellant "flying pogo stick” for transporting men and equipment on earth or over the surface of the moon. Pogo stick would be powered by hydrogen peroxide jets and its two rocket nozzles would be controlled directly by pilot’s hand, arm, and shoulder movements, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66) The space tool kit to be used by Astronaut David R. Scott during Gemini VIII mission was exhibited for the first time. Developed by Martin Co. and Black & Decker Tool Co. at a cost of $124,000, kit’s power tool used impact instead of torque as its motive principle because man in space, with neither friction nor gravity to give him a firm footing, would be sent spinning counterclockwise by the action of a handheld tool that rotated clockwise. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, Al) In a luncheon address, Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasc staff, warned that U.S.S.R. might soon recapture the lead in manned spaceflight: "They don’t lead now in manned spaceflight. They may again in the near future, but they don’t now.” Konecci said space experts expected Russia to launch a "major manned program in the near future,” possibly a manned laboratory, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
President Johnson was asked to invite a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut in a space mission in an open letter in Parade magazine written by editor Jess Gorkin. Gorkin admitted that, officially, there had been little cooperation in space science between the two countries, but said that "Russian and American scientists, guided by a tradition that scientific research belongs to all men, had been eager to cooperate. On a person-to-person basis, they had already exchanged more space data than their governments have officially sanctioned.” Gorkin envisioned joint space mission as proof that U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together for "the good of all men on earth” despite disagreement on "how they want to live.” (Parade, 1/9/66)
Endorsement of suggestion in Jan. 9 open letter to President Johnson that he invite "a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut for a space ride in a two-man capsule” was reported by letter’s author, Parade editor Jess Gorkin. Newspapers throughout the world had publicized the idea and written favorable editorials. Le Figaro (Paris) had given it front page coverage. Melbourne (Australia) Herald had said the idea had "great merit.” Asahi Shimbun (Tokyo): "As long as America and Russia accelerate space development separately, there will be much money wasted. Both countries will probably suspect that the other party is engaged in space development for military purposes. ... If the United States and the Soviet Union cooperate and 'all the families of the earth’ pitch in to further space development, war on earth will gradually become absurd.” New York World Telegram: "What do we have to lose? If we succeed and the two men orbit the earth together the psychological effect will be tremendous. If Russia turns down the idea, we will be on sounder moral grounds.” (Gorkin, Parade, 3/20/66) During week of March 20: Several hundred sightings of unidentified flying objects (Ufo’s) near Ann Arbor, Mich., were reported. Rep. Weston Vivian (D-Mich.) said he would ask dod to make an investigation. (upi, NYT, 3/22/66, 19; dm, NYT, 3/23/66, 22; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, Al; upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/66, A20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/66, Al)
