Former Vice President and current leader for Republican Presidential nomination, Richard M. Nixon, on TV said it was “very likely . .. some of those appropriations [for the space program] are excessive.” Referring to the space program as “a sacred cow,” he called for the President to be “a balance wheel” in evening off the pressure from “vested interests.” He defended a congressman’s right when representing an area with important space business to fight for more funds. (SBD, 11/29/67,140) Coupling a plea for constructive realism with a denunciation of U.S.S.R.’s mere lip service toward international space cooperation, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin discussed ways for understanding “international space cooperation.” No Russian attended the conference, two speakers and one cosmonaut declined invitations. Frutkin explained that cooperation meant “joint projects, jointly undertaken, jointly carried out, and jointly profitable.” Realistic projects practicing space cooperation on an international scale were cited by Frutkin to be: nasa’s program; esro/eldo complex for combining “ten European nations in spacecraft development and seven nations in large vehicle development;” and Intelsat satellite telecommunications consortium, including “some sixty nations in day-to-day operational space communications traffic.” He included in U.S. benefits from the NASA cooperative program “gold flow [for] foreign purchase of space hardware and services,” Canadian ionospheric investigations, West German barium cloud technique, Italian atmospheric density measurements, and French global wind circulation studies. Frutkin referred to esro’s program as “a true pooling of resources [which] goes well beyond the NASA cooperative program. In esro, “common facilities have been planned, financed and operated on an international basis by an international governmental agency.” MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth discussed manned space flight “from Mercury to Apollo.” He said Mercury defined man’s survivability in space, Gemini defined man’s operational capability, and Apollo would be first in utilizing space for manned exploration. “To progress in ten short years from exploring survivability to utilization on the most difficult exploration mission ever undertaken implies a rate of change in technical capability which has no real parallel in history,” he said. Deep space and lunar operations would be faced as “two new major dimensions to our space capabilities.” Space explorers would be coping with the need for huge amounts of energy, extremely precise navigation to hit target and reentry corridor, and radiation protection that could include the intensities generated by solar flares. Lunar explorers would require a vehicle designed to operate entirely outside earth’s atmosphere, descend to and ascend from lunar surface, and propel reliably while exhibiting “relative sophistication of a throttleable engine.” Man returning from first lunar exploration trip would have accomplished “an age-old dream [of visiting] his nearest neighbor in space [and found] a key to the riddle of Earth’s relation to its nearest neighbor [and] a chance of understanding the creative forces that formed his own home—Earth.” “For the first time he will have soared beyond the confines of Earth’s gravity and felt the pull of a foreign planet [and] personally viewed our whole planet as a small bluish ball only four times the span of the lunar disk. These experiences may well produce profound changes in man’s attitude towards himself and his world comparable to those wrought by Galileo’s dramatic demonstration of the Copemican theory, changes which should tend to inspire man to place the affairs of his very small house in order.” (Text) NASA’s Apollo Applications Program (aap) Director Charles W. Mathews listed basic objectives for aap: long-duration space flights of men and systems based on unique capabilities of man, habitability, biomedical and behavioral considerations, and systems development; scientific investigations in earth orbit based on solar astronomy, earth observations, and stellar astronomy; applications in earth orbit based on meteorology, earth resources, and communications; and extended lunar exploration. “The activities involved in [aap] represent major steps in the utilization of our space capability. The results , . . can serve to establish the direction of future space exploration and applications. In particular, increased knowledge on the effective integration of men into the total system should accomplish much in determining the character, systems configurations and operational approach in future programs. The ability to capitalize on the large investments already made in the Apollo Program affords the opportunity to carry on this work in [aap] in an efficient and economical manner.” (Text)
A manned Apollo spacecraft should be launched to recover Explorer 1, first U.S. satellite, whose orbit was expected to decay in late 1969, G. Snowden of Melbourne, Australia, suggested in a Letter to the Editor of Aviation Week. “When Apollo swings into action, maybe one of the tasks could be a rendezvous and retrieval of man’s first satellite. I say first because Sputnik 1 and 2 have decayed, leaving Explorer 1 at the head of the list. A replica can be built at a fraction of the cost of retrieval, but there is nothing like having the original. Not only would it have value as a historic memento of man’s venture into space, but also to scientists. I am certain after nearly 10 years in space it would be valuable to them. . . .” (Av Wk, 6/5/67, 110)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
Engine noise survey designed to study noise prediction during ground runups was postponed by NASA, reported Aviation Week. Tests, which would have been combined wth usaf studies of propulsion system calibration for amsa, were given lower priority because these' experiments would have caused two-week stand-down between flights. (Av Wk, 10/23/67, 23) Reviewing history of naca and NASA, giss Executive Officer Arthur L. Levine noted that forces which accounted for creation of naca in 1915 were both different from and far less intense that those behind creation of NASA in 1958. NASA played a much more significant role in the Nation and in Federal activity in science and technology than naca, he said, and NASA’s leadership was subjected to a wider variety and greater intensity of pressures from within Government and from outside interests. NASA Historian Eugene M. Emme reviewed historical evolution of U.S. aeronautics and astronautics in context of major national policies and decisions. Citing effects of World Wars I and II, the “cold war” of the 1950’s, and launching of Sputnik, he described how they helped' determine the pace and utilization of technological advances and reviewed major U.S. turning points and relevant factors contributing to the Apollo decision. (Program) m/g J. D. Caldara (usaf, Ret.), President of Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., suggested commonality between safety problems and solutions for underwater, aircraft, and space systems based on recognition, reasoning, and responsibility: “This process [of problem solving] spells out the basic building blocks in the structure of the man/machine relationships . . . involving safety. ... If every scientist-engineer accepts his rightful responsibility and applies his imagination and experience to his task, the end result will be . . . [operations that are] 100% efficient and . . . 100% safe.” (Text) GSFC engineers F. 0. Vonbun and J. T. Mengel proposed development of a worldwide tracking and communications system for manned planetary missions similar to that used for Apollo. Planetary Manned Space Flight Network (pmsfn)—consisting of three 30- to 50--ft-dia ground stations, three 210-ft-dia dish antennas, and three synchronous orbiting tracking stations (sots)—would obviate need for other radar, ships, and aircraft, sots, they said, while providing continuous communications, tracking, and telemetry functions, would be more cost-efficient by removing requirement for numerous new tracking stations. (Text; Program) Addressing Honors Banquet, use President Dr. Norman Topping stressed need for expanded program to search and disseminate data produced in space research. Although such data did reach social problems occasionally, “the arrival in the right place at the right time is largely a coincidence,” he noted. To realize the total potential of modern discovery, scientists had to communicate outside their separate, narrow fields, find a common language with the layman, and work together to “find places for their discoveries within the social, ethical, and moral framework of our civilization.” (Text) Princeton Univ. economics professor Oskar Morgenstem, participating in President’s Forum, “The Worth of the Space Program,” contended that the space effort, as a public investment of natural resources, had to be evaluated by comparing its benefits with other ways the resources could have been used. Although no basic discoveries as important as atomic fission, the transistor, or the laser could be attributed to space exploration, he said, U.S. could still afford a high degree of space exploration and could expect discoveries “of a magnitude that will astonish even this generation which has seen so much and is prepared to expect that our knowledge will increase without limit.” Dr. T. Keith Glennan, President of Associated Universities, Inc., and first NASA Administrator, submitted that the most important enduring contribution of the space endeavor to U.S. future was education. Progress in higher education, he said, had occurred as a result of the compelling challenge of space exploration along with nasa’s “clear and evident desire to assure an adequate flow of highly trained manpower. . . Current statistics on NASA investments in higher education were very impressive, he noted, but if NASA’s budget were trimmed further its support to education would have to be diminished. Dr. Willard F. Libby of ucla predicted that space program would “come out to be the best bargain the American people have ever made— both for its practical value in technological developments, and for its contributions to pure knowledge through science.” Space program had already contributed to and answered questions about geosciences, interplanetary sciences, astronomy, and chemistry but most consuming question was that of extraterrestrial life in solar system. (Texts) Major aiaa awards presented at Honors Convocation included: Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to LeRC Director Abe Silverstein for “imagination, technical excellence and leadership which have led to practical application of high energy liquid hydrogen fueled propulsion for space transportation, and for initiating and contributing to the free world’s first manned space transportation system”; De Florez Training Award to Edwin A. Link, chairman of General Precision Equipment Corp.’s Link Aviation Div., for “conceiving and implementing the idea of ground-based flight training equipment”; G. Edward Pendray Award to Columbia Univ. professor Robert A. Gross for “original contributions to gas-dynamics and plasma physics especially in the field of shock wave ionization phenomena”; and Lawrence Sperry Award to msc Flight Director Eugene F. Kranz for “outstanding contributions in directing spacecraft mission planning in developing flight control teams, and as Flight Director of manned Gemini spaceflight missions.” (Av Wk, 10/30/67, 13; aiaa Facts)	,
Dr. Donald H. Menzel of the Harvard College Observatory said in a letter to Time that he planned to propose naming features of moon’s far side for the three American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut who lost their lives in accidents connected with space research. Features were to be named at 1970 meeting of International Astronomical Union. (Time, 9/29/67,11)
Washington Evening Star editorial praised Senate’s unanimous approval of the space law treaty April 25: “The action lends timely support to President Johnson’s policy of seeking to promote a spirit of detente through various types of agreements designed to build Bridges between our country and the Communist East. “. . . the new space treaty is at best only a modest step in the direction of improved Soviet-American relations. Still, it is a step forward, and a good one. Anybody who objects to it on security grounds can rest assured: It will not interfere in the slightest with our country’s ability to detect Russian cheating between us and the stars if such cheating actually takes place.” (W Star, 5/1/67)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
Life magazine disputed critics who advocated cutting back NASA’s Apollo program: “We do not share the attitude that it doesn’t matter who gets to the moon first, we or the Russians. It does matter. . . . Remember the astonishment, the embarrassment, the apprehension, the loss of prestige we all felt so keenly when Sputnik I went up on Oct. 4, 1957? The prestige we then sought to regain was not mere prestige, an empty abstract symbol of superiority. The superiority at stake was real, not symbolic. . . . “NASA is now engaged in its customary annual defense of its budget requests. We recommend that its expenditures be kept at the $5 to $6 billion level for now. As we continue to compare NASA’s budget with other pressing needs, we must be aware of the challenges and opportunities that arise in space. . . .” {Life, 3/24/67)
Mass meeting in U.S.S.R.’s Palace of Congresses inside the Kremlin Wall heard l/c Aleksei A. Leonov recall heritage of fellow pioneers; he had been an associate of Col. Komarov who had been killed on Apr. 24 in the first flight of third-generation Soyuz I spacecraft. Cosmonaut Leonov said: “We cannot help recall our friend, test pilot Vladimir Mikhailovic Komarov. Grateful mankind will always preserve the memory of these wonderful people in its heart.” The mass meeting was the highlight of Soviet celebration of the 10th anniversary of Sputnik 7’s launching [see Oct. 4]. In the Soviet press on the same day, scientist Konstantin P. Feoktisov, veteran of three-orbit flight in 1964, listed a manned laboratory in orbit as first among coming space developments, then a moon landing, then a “starting to Venus and Mars.” (upi, AP, NYT, 10/5/67, C20)
U.S.S.R.’s next manned space flight would use a Soyuz spacecraft similar to the one which crashed April 24, according to Astronauts Michael Collins and David Scott who had discussed future space plans with Soviet cosmonauts at the Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 26-31]. In upi interview Collins and Scott said they were “amazed by the similarities between the two [U.S. and U.S.S.R. space] programs.” Collins said that Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Konstantin Feoktistov indicated “that there would be several earth orbital flights and then ... a circumlunar flight” (upi, W Post, 6/4/67, A9)
U.S. defense warning system was “highly vulnerable” to missile attack because of increasing Russian missile strength, report by Institute for Strategic Studies warned. Institute, 2m unofficial body of military and international affairs’ experts from 28 countries, recommended that U.S. establish a new back-up interceptor control against hostile missiles by mid-1970. {W Post, 4/11/67, A15) Computer technique which had been used to enhance 12 Surveyor I photos of the lunar surface in August 1966 might be applied to diagnostic x rays, Dr. Robert Nathan, jpl scientist who developed the process, suggested in speech over closed-circuit TV broadcast. Process, which separated significant from insignificant detail, could remove distortions and obscurities that often make it difficult for physicians to interpret x-ray films. Dr. Nathan also predicted technique might enable scientists to see the inner details of human chromosomes and gain a new understanding of birth defects. (Randal, W Star, 4/11/67, A3) faa would appoint 10 radiation biology experts to study the radiation aspects of sst operation, faa Administrator William F. McKee revealed. “We want to assure ourselves, beyond any doubt, that high-level altitude flights can be made routinely.” faa was also studying new pressurization on equipment to assure passenger safety at 40,000-ft flight levels as well as new escape devices and evacuation methods, McKee said. (AEr, 4/13/67,74)	_ nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh predicted that U.S. would have the best sst in the world. “Despite its timing, I nominate it for the ‘clean-up’ position in sales, safety, and economy.” Dr. Welsh said expenditures for the SST could be justified because it was important to “our international balance of payments, to our technological progress, to our private enterprise system, to improved transportation, as well as to our international prestige.” (Text) Philco-Ford Corp. and General Dynamics Corp. both displayed several monitoring devices which had grown out of technology acquired by NASA in the development of remote sensing equipment for astronauts. The corporations indicated they would attempt to market the devices for use in medical sciences. (Tech Wk, 4/17/67, 22) Dr. Charles F. Gell, chief scientist of Submarine Medical Research Laboratory at U.S. Naval Submarine Medical Center, received Eric J. Liljencrantz Award and $500 honorarium for his contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and space sciences through medical research. (Av Wk, 4/24/67,121)
Increased appropriations for riot-torn cities should take precedence over NASA’s request for funds to finance unmanned exploration of the planets, Washington Daily News suggested in an editorial. “James E. Webb . . . is concerned over cuts in the agency’s $5 billion budget including reduction in money for unmanned exploration of Venus and Mars. Russia, he says, is about to send up the biggest . . . rocket you ever saw. In the present state of domestic affairs, we’d say let ’em! “From all appearances our scientists already have more and more exact information about conditions on Venus and Mars than our police and war-on-poverty experts have on Los Angeles and Cleveland-----” (W News, 7/28/67, 16)
U.N. space law treaty had been ratified by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, Tass announced. Presidium acted on behalf of the Supreme Soviet when the full body was not in session. Ratified by U.S. Senate April 25, treaty would become effective when U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other nations had filed ratification papers. Washington Evening Star later commented: “. . . [the space law treaty] may not be one of the most significant agreements of our time, but it is surely the most far-reaching, encompassing nothing less than the infinities between us and the stars. It is an agreement, moreover, that puts America and Russia on the same side. It can be helpful as an example of what the two of us can do together—down here on the troubled earth—to promote a good and enduring peace.” (NYT, 5/20/ 67, 1, 5; AP, W Star, 5/20/67, A5; W Post, 5/20/67, 1; W Star, 5/22/67, A16)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
Soviet Union announced a new series of rocket tests believed designed to perfect a sea-landing system for Russian astronauts in preparation for a resumption of manned space flights. Soviet news agency, Tass, said the test of “carrier rockets” would begin Sept. 3. It warned all ships and planes to stay clear of two 80-mile-wide “bulls’ eyes” in the Pacific Ocean, one about 900 miles northeast and one 300 miles northeast of Midway Island, from noon until midnight every day through Oct. 30. (Reuters, W Post, 9/S/61, A16)
First flight test of Saturn V, designated Apollo 4, was scheduled no earlier than Nov. 7, announced m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director. “This is a target date,” he said. “We are in a very complex learning process and we are going to take all the time we need on this first launch.” Launch vehicle and Apollo spacecraft combination was 363 ft tall and weighed 6 million lbs. Thrust of Saturn V’s first stage was 7.5 million lbs. Key objective of flight planned for Nov. 7 would be evaluation of Apollo command module heat shield under conditions encountered on return from moon mission. Flight would also test thermal seals for use in new quick-release spacecraft hatch which would be installed on all manned Apollo missions. Apollo 4 flight plan would call for Saturn V to place spacecraft and launch yehicle 3rd stage (S-IVB) into 117-mi circular orbit. After completing two orbits, 3rd stage would he re-ignited to place spacecraft into orbit with apogee of 10,800 mi. After separation from 3rd stage, service module propulsion system would be fired to rafee spacecraft apogee to 11,400 mi. During descent the service module motor would fire again, boosting velocity of spacecraft to about 25,000 mph, the reentry speed of a lunar return flight, (nasa Release 67-274; B Sun, 10/26/67, A6) • GSFC officials completed week of checkout of Oso IV and turned on last of nine experiments. All experiments were performing well and spacecraft was transmitting satisfactory data. The 599-lb spacecraft, launched from etr Oct. 18, had received 1,500 commands. It was 3,000th object in orbit since Sputnik I in 1957; 100th satellite orbited in 1967; and 50th satellite orbited by Delta launch vehicle in 53 attempts. (NASA Release 67-273)
U.S., France, and U.K. had had excellent displays at Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 23-31], but visitors had seemed most impressed by U.S.S.R. exhibit, Time magazine noted. “The greatest Soviet surprise was the launch vehicle that in 1961 sent Pioneer Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into orbit in Vostok 1. . . . Visitors at the show flocked to a huge mock-up of the 13.6-ton Proton satellite, [to] ... a model of their advanced Molniya communications satellite, [and to] . . . the variety of new Russian jet liners. “. . . the U.S. went all out . . . [and] Britain and France also put their best fleet forward. . . . But it was the Russians who stole the show, simply by taking the wraps off space hardware—some of it a decade old—that they had never before displayed in the West. . . .” (Time, 6/9/61)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
Senate, in approving (60-5) NASA FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 12474) of $4.7 billion, accepted figures of Senate Committee on Appropriations. Measure would go to conference to reconcile differences between House and Senate versions. NASA FY 1968 funding in three categories tallied: r&d Senate appropriation of $3,955 billion was increase of $96.0 million over House appropriation, decrease of $152.1 million from authorization, and decrease of $356.5 million from budget. Construction of Facilities Senate appropriation of $55.4 million was increase of $19.5 million over House appropriation, decrease of $14.6 million from authorization, and decrease of $21.3 million from budget. Administrative Operations Senate appropriation of $628.0 million was decrease of $20.0 million from House appropriation, decrease of $20.2 million from authorization, and decrease of $43.3 million from budget. Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman, Senate Committee on 324-801 O—69 Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, said: “Ten years ago we did not have the knowledge or the equipment to meet the Russian challenge. ... But today ... we are at the crossroads of decision as to what our space program is going to be in 1970 and beyond. . . .’’ Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking minority member, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, stated that President’s signing of FY 1968 authorization bill “clearly signaled a new policy of relegating the space program to a secondary position.” (Testimony; CR, 10/6/67, S14367-82)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
Despite the high cost and dangers in exploring space, tragically dramatized by the deaths of three U.S. astronauts and a Russian cosmonaut in recent months, Americans overwhelmingly approve of the U.S. effort to land men on the moon,” the National Observer reported. Survey in 12 metropolitan areas showed that 77% of people questioned supported the lunar landing program; 17% opposed it; and 6% were undecided. There was less enthusiasm, however, for manned planetary exploration programs: 57% favored manned planetary expeditions; 31% opposed them; and 12% were undecided. (Nad Obs, 5/8/67)
Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell, was convinced the Soviet Union would attempt one or more space spectaculars during 1967, possibly during October, reported Richard Lewis of Chicago Sun-Times. October would mark the 10th anniversary of the launching of the first satellite, Sputnik I, and the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. The possibilities included a flight around the moon or a lunar landing with animals as passengers, a manned space station in earth orbit, and the first photographs of the planet Venus, the astronomer said. Sir Bernard Lovell said: “I have always believed that 1967 was the year they would try the circumlunar (around the moon) flight, but I should think they would do it unmanned because of the difficulties of the return at lunar flight velocity.” (Lewis, C S/T, 9/18/67, 16)
End of the “space race” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. was nowhere in sight, Holmes Alexander speculated in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “As matters stand today, the space contest is pretty much a race between the Communist and capitalistic systems. . . . Percentagewise the Soviet government is investing 2.5 times as much of its gross national product in the moon dash as we are. Moneywise, the investment is about equal. But the Russian economy, being much more ‘managed’ than ours, permits the ordering of what our economists call an ‘internal brain drain.’ Russian consumer industries are raided in order to feed the USSR space programs, whereas . . . NASA must compete . . . [with other agencies]. “It is wishful thinking to believe that the Russians will make any substantive concessions to ease the cost of the space race. As in Vietnam, we are locked in an expensive contest against Communism. Nobody has yet found a way to the negotiation table.” (Alexander, P EB, 5/9/67)
