U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXXIV from Baikonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 295-km (183.3-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.2-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reportedly softlanded in its home territory Aug. 5. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/68; 8/15/68; SBD, 7/31/68, 129; AP, NYT, 7/31/68, 3; 8/7/68)
U.S. News & World Report said story of how U.S. had been steadily stripping away “some of the most valuable military secrets of Soviet Russia for the past five years” was being revealed in bits and pieces. At heart of story were spy satellites orbiting earth. Powerful spaceborne cameras could photograph in detail objects less than one foot in diameter from 150-mi altitude. “Ultramodern” radar circling in outer space now penetrated cloud covers and forest vegetation to reveal hidden missile sites, tanks, and even troops. Infrared sensors could detect submarines and missile launching. Electronic sensors could monitor atomic explosions and pick up telephone messages from deep within U.S.S.R. or Communist China. President Johnson had said spy satellites alone made U.S. space investment worthwhile. USAF had, to date, launched more than 200 classified payloads. At least one intelligence satellite was always ready for orbit. Most stayed operational for 1 to 25 days. Even more useful, Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) was yet to come. U.S.S.R. was particularly concerned about its intelligence implications. “The Russians are starting now to understand that one of their centuries-old weapons against the rest of the world—their secrecy—is rapidly being removed.” (VS News, 9/9/68, 2)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on “Soviet Spectacular.” U.	S.S.R. had scored impressive advance with “boomerang-style” Zond V.	“Congratulations are in order. But handwringing assertions that the Russians will be indisputable masters of the universe are decidedly premature. The shot demonstrated two major steps forward in the space sciences: A degree of accuracy in the guidance and navigational systems that is new for Russian spacecraft, and a re-entry system capable of withstanding the searing heat of a 25,000-mile-an-hour plunge into the atmosphere. . . . But the essential fact is that neither Russia nor the United States has yet successfully flown its third generation spacecraft ■—the ships that will eventually carry men to the moon. The outcome of the ‘space race’ . . . will depend on what happens in the Apollo missions immediately ahead and the Soviet manned flights still to come.” (W Star, 9/24/68, A12)
Nearly 1,000 scientists and educators attended “crisis” meeting called by New York Academy of Sciences to demand science be declared “disaster area” because of threatened $6-billion Federal budget cut. Federal R&D funding, after decade of average 22% annual expansion, had risen only 2.5% annually since 1964, while number of scientists had risen 20%. It was feared resulting crush would damage U.S. leadership in science and technology. MIT Provost Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner said, “If the Congress continues to do what it is now doing we’ll wake up with another sputnik in a decade.” Federal R&D funding had risen from $74 million in 1940 to $16.9 billion in 1968 with October 1957 “shock of Sputnik” giving greatest impetus. Cut of $6 billion would mean “we’re going to cut not only into the fat, but into the flesh of lots of areas,” Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President’s Science Adviser, said. NASA’s sustaining university program had been one of chief casualties of recent cutbacks with budget slashed from $45 to $10 million yearly, forcing drop from 1,300 to 50 training grants which had produced more than 1,000 Ph.D.s since 1961. Government officials had chided scientists for being ill-prepared for leveling of Federal support and for alleged detachment from political realities. (Reinhold, NYT, 6/21/68, 1)
Soviet Prof. Georgy Petrovich, writing in Trud, praised U.S. space achievements hut pointed to 20 Soviet “firsts” since Sputnik I. Past neutral appraisals had generally agreed with Petrovich that U.S.S.R.’s payloads had been heavier and U.S. hardware more sophisticated. Recent contradiction had been intricate softlanding for Soviet Venus IV, Oct. 18, 1967, and successful U.S. test of Saturn V, world’s largest booster, Nov. 9, 1967. Petrovich praised NASA’s broad application of space equipment in practical commercial use of satellite technology for communication, meteorology, and navigation. (Winters, B Sun, 2/9/68, A3)
Cosmos CCXXXI was launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 391-km (243-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Equipment functioned normally and spacecraft reentered July 18. (upi, W Star, 7/11/68, A5; upi, NYT, 7/12/68, 7; SBD, 7/12/68, 41; gsfc SSR, 7/15/68, 7/31/68)
Dept, of State said it would issue visas to 35 Soviet space scientists to attend 19th Congress of International Astronautical Federation (iaf) in New York Oct. 13—19. However, it might recommend cancellation of sightseeing tour of KSC arranged with NASA by AIAA for scientists from 34 countries attending both IAF Congress and AIAA annual meeting in Philadelphia Oct. 21—25. No Soviet scientist had yet visited ksc, “apparently out of concern that the United States would ask for reciprocal rights in Russia for American scientists,” said New York Times. Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D-Fla.), in letter to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, had said visit was inappropriate in light of U.S.S.R.’s invasion of Czechoslovakia, imprisonment of Pueblo crew by> North Korea, Soviet aid to North Vietnam, and existence of Communist regime in Cuba. (NYT, 10/9/68)
Global military expenditures ranked first in world public expenditures. They had risen from $132 billion to 1964 to $138 billion in 1965, $159 billion in 1966, and estimated $182 billion in 1967—record high level. Preliminary data, said U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Report, World Military Expenditures 1966—67, said current military spending exceeded by 40% world’s expenditures on education by all levels of government and was more than three times worldwide public health expenditure. (Text; Shackford, W Post, 1/24/69, A21) During 1968: In 1968 U.S. orbited 64 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 74. U.S. total included 43 launched by DOD. NASA’s 21 included satellite orbited as secondary payload. Highlight of NASA’s 10th anniversary year was success in carefully planned series of Apollo missions—including first two manned flights in Apollo lunar landing program. Unmanned Apollo 5 and Apollo 6 completed inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. First manned mission, Apollo 7, carried three astronauts around earth for 11 days, verifying spacecraft operation before splashing down precisely on target. Mission included live TV transmission from space, largest number of inflight restarts of sps to date, and new record of 781 manhours in space. Apollo program climaxed Dec. 21—27 with highly successful six-day Apollo 8 mission on which three-man crew demonstrated operation of spacecraft systems in lunar environment while world watched live TV coverage via satellite. Spacecraft orbited moon 10 times, providing man with his first trip out of earth’s gravitational field and first look at moon’s far side and proving capability of crew, spacecraft, and support and control systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar-return velocity. Unmanned Surveyor VII, NASA’s first launch in 1968 and last spacecraft in Surveyor series, softlanded on moon, conducted on-site analyses of lunar soil, and took part in laser-detection communications experiment. Applications satellites launched included Intelsat—III F—2 comsat for ComSatCorp and Essa VII and VIII meteorological satellites for essa. Scientific achievements included orbiting of NASA’s Ogo V, Aao II, Explorer XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, and XL satellites and Naval Research Laboratory’s Explorer XXXVII. Oao II—heaviest and most complicated U.S. automated spacecraft ever launched—took first UV photos of stars, returning previously unobtainable data. Explorer XXXVI was successfully used by gsfc as target in first daylight operational laser tracking. Pioneer IX, launched into solar orbit, carried Tetr II pickaback and ejected it into earth orbit where it served as tracking target for nasa’s Manned Space Flight Network. Some 157 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—II spacecraft was launched on suborbital mission to obtain data on radio attenuation during reentry. X—15 rocket research aircraft made 13 flights, ending its flight program with 199 missions, including 154 at mach 4 or greater, 109 at mach 5 or above, and 4 at greater than mach 6. NASA—usaf flight research continued with 13 flights of XB—70 supersonic aircraft, usaf’s C—5A, world’s largest military cargo aircraft, made its maiden flight and three of the aircraft completed 31 flights for 88-hr total flying time. Design of sst was reevaluated and program was delayed until new fixed-wing design was selected, with prototype construction expected to begin in 1969. nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 12 successful glide flights and first powered flight. dod space program included orbiting of 8 IDCSP comsats, 1 Lincoln Experimental Satellite, 5 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, and 2 environmental research satellites; static test-firings of Titan III—M 1st stage; and near completion of mol launch complex at Vandenberg AFB. In joint NASA—aec effort, propulsion technology highlights included power tests of Phoebus 2A nuclear reactor, first tests of cold-flow test engine in flight configuration in new test stand, and first test-firings of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. U.S.S.R. launched 74 payloads, including 64 Cosmos satellites, 1 Luna, 1 Proton, 3 Zond, and 2 Soyuz spacecraft, and 3 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz III rendezvoused but did not dock with unmanned Soyuz II launched one day earlier. Unmanned Zond V and VI completed circumlunar flights and were recovered. Zond IV circled moon and apparently crashlanded. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully made 38-min maiden flight. (Pres Rpt 68; NASA Release 68-219; B Sun, 1/18/69, 28; Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; upi, W Star, 1/1/69 A7)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXXV from Baikonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 283-km (175.8-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.2-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered Aug. 17. (W Star, 8/9/68, 1; SBD, 8/12/68, 177; gsfc SSR, 8/15/68; 8/31/68)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
Associated Press roundup of comment by space authorities on U.S.S.R.’s Zond V mission: NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The most important demonstration of total space capability up to now by any nation.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: Hoped U.S.S.R. achievement would “cause some stir in Congress. . . . The Russians again did something we have not done. We slept until the Sputnik. That may be what we’re doing now.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station: “I think it is a very considerable achievement and I expect that a human being will be placed in a similar spacecraft in a matter of months.” Heinz Kaminski, Chief of West Germany’s Bochum Observatory: “Still in this year or at latest in first quarter of 1969 a three-man spacecraft of the Soyuz type will circle the moon. After that [in a later flight] they will land on the moon.” In Moscow, unidentified Western expert on U.S.S.R.’s space program said that, because of seasonal factors, best time for Soviet manned lunar circumnavigation would be no later than early November—or spring 1969. “They are now in a position to send a man around the moon and back to earth, without landing him on the moon. They might try one more unmanned shot, just to be sure, and then they could send up a man.” (AP, NYT, 9/23/68, E8)
Astronautics & Aeronautics noted that NASA-sponsored translations of Russian historical works compiled 1963—68 were available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information, Springfield, Va. 22151. It was a credit to NASA’s historians “that they have not neglected bringing to our attention the products of their opposing numbers.” (Stehling, A&A, 9/68, 76)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) told American Astronautical Society meeting in Los Angeles: “In evaluating space spending as a budget priority, it is vital to consider the relationship of space to defense. . . . Both Russia and the United States have advance surveillance capacity. ... As long as the threat of nuclear war from any source continues, Russia and the United States will be producing ever more sophisticated orbital ‘spies in the skies’. . . . That is why the space program of the United States never is going to be abandoned. It will always be high on the list of spending priorities. The reason is not charming, but basic. We need to be in space to protect ourselves. ... In the somewhat more distant future the harvest of human rewards . . . now only beginning . . . will prove that space research and space applications justify a continuing high priority.” (Text; Aero Daily, 10/29/68)
J. S. Butz, Jr., in Air Force and Space Digest article “The Men Behind Soviet Aircraft Design” wrote: “Top Russian designers are exuberant realists; and they operate under a ‘prototype’ system of development that is probably the most competitive and technically stimulating in the world. This system is similar to the one employed in the United States until the mid-1950s and the odds appear strong that the U.S. will return to such an approach in the 1970s, rejecting the strong dependence on ‘systems analysis’ and ‘cost-effectiveness’ studies that characterized the 1960s.” (AF/SD, 11/68, 62-7)
Uspekhi SSSR v Issledovanii Kosmicheskogo Prostranstva. Pervoye Kosmicheskoye Desyatiletiye 1957—1967 [U.S.S.R. Achievements in Space Research (First Decade in Space, 1957—1967)] was published as Sputnik anniversary edition by Nauka Publishing House, Moscow. Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, Academician and chief editor, wrote introduction. Text included results of scientific studies, experiments, and exploration. Appendix listed satellites, spacecraft, and their characteristics. Joint Publications Research Service of U.S. Dept, of Commerce published translation, jprs 47,311, on Jan. 24, 1969. (Texts)
Dr. Henry J. Reid, former Director and Senior Staff Associate at nasa Langley Research Center, died in Gloucester, Va., after heart attack at age 72. He had become LaRC Director in 1926 and retired in June 1961, after 34 yr continuous service. (AP, W Post, 8/1/68, B10) During July: Ralph Kinney Bennett in Data scored U.S. complacency in year which might “see some of the greatest Soviet space spectaculars of the decade.” In U.S., he said, early glamour of space race had faded and NASA projects were neither as ambitious nor as well-funded as they once were. In contrast, he noted, U.S.S.R. showed signs of “a new spurt of activity, new technical accomplishments above our planet, an accelerated assault on the moon and dark rumblings of advanced military uses of the threshold of space. The time for a Soviet resurgence could hardly be better. “. . . Soviets are badly in need of a great techno-propaganda feat to reassert their influence on world public opinion. . . .” Soviet hold on European satellite nations had shown evidence of advanced erosion. “Their position in relation to the rest of the communist world is no longer clearly defined.” U.S.S.R. was spending estimated $9 billion a year on space and half that sum went toward military applications of space technology. “There is an American attitude ... of waiting until you get burnt before you shed complacency. When Sputnik I burnt us, we came back with a vengeance. Now complacency has set in again. Perhaps we will feel the fire from the Soviets in space before this year is out and react accordingly. But in space technology . . . it’s a tough way to play the ball game.” (Data, 7/68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXIV from Baikonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 311-km (193.2-mi) apogee, 167-km (103.8-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite functioned normally and reentered June 12. (AP, NYT, 6/5/68, 7; SBD, 6/5/68, 172; gsfc SSR, 6/15/68)
Pravda released description of preparations for launching of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin in history’s first manned space flight April 12, 1961. Songs by 110-member folk music choir—instead of one man’s voice—had been selected for radio tests to avoid arousing rumors that U.S.S.R. had put a man into orbit. Pravda reports were excerpts from The First Four Stages, book recognizing leading role in Soviet manned space flight of Sergei P. Korolev. U.S.S.R. acknowledged malfunction had occurred during first unmanned test of Vostok spacecraft launched May 15, 1960, as Sputnik IV. Because of improper alignment, spacecraft was hurled deeper into space when retrorockets fired instead of braking for reentry. (Anderson, NYT, 1/25/68; A&A, 15-60, 123, 147)
In Washington Post, columnist Joseph Kraft said post-Apollo programs had been sharply cut in Congress and space spending had been compared unfavorably with money for pressing internal needs. “In this situation, it makes sense for this country to disengage while it is ahead. There is no need for the United States to race Russia to every new milestone in space. On the contrary, what the United States wants is a program closely connected to explicit American requirements—a program of exploration for its own sake, not for the sake of beating the Russians. In that way, this country can continue to develop a capability in space, without having to respond in a panic to the ups and downs that are necessary part of the space business.” (W Post, 12/26/68) Outgoing Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, recommended reexamination of concept of Federal Dept, of Science since science “has now assumed such importance to the nation that its position would be stronger if it had a voice in the Cabinet.” He advocated annual report on state of science similar to annual economic report and said Office of Science and Technology “could eventually evolve in an office of planning and analysis, looking broadly at national problems with some scientific or technological component, but extending well beyond the purely technical areas.” Under questioning, Dr. Hornig said he agreed with Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, President of Univ. of Oklahoma and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce, that Federal Dept, of Science, with NSF as its core, might encompass oceanographic agencies, high-energy-physics research currently funded by AEC, ESSA, Bureaus of Census and Labor Statistics, geophysics branches of Geological Survey, and some NIH programs. Dr. Hollomon also suggested NASA be added when it could be included “without having it become the tail that wags the dog.” Dr. Hornig insisted no massive “science agency” should be created to usurp supervision of Nation’s science effort. Bacteria might have caused gastrointestinal upset suffered by astronaut Frank Borman on Apollo 8 mission, Dr. Rudolf H. T. Mattoni, head of Biological Systems Div. of Nuclear Utility Services, Hawthorne, Calif., told meeting. Effects of weightlessness on bacteria on Biosatellite II flight (Sept. 7—9, 1967) suggested that lack of gravity might have allowed common, normally benign, intestinal bacteria to cause illness like Borman’s. Drs. Bouilin Browning of St. Thomas Univ. and Irwin Oster of Bowling Green State Univ. reported first experimental evidence that weightlessness can cause chromosomal damage of genetic significance, based on sperm cells flown 45 hr aboard Biosatellite. Cornell Univ. map expert, Prof. Arthur J. McNair, said sophisticated photographic mapping by satellites at 140-mi altitude would provide faster, cheaper, broader, and more detailed coverage than now possible by airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo, he said, would be equivalent to 1,000 photos taken by aircraft. U.S. could be fully mapped in one year from photos from satellite in near-polar orbit for four weeks. Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. Dr. Robert H. Hardie of Vanderbilt Univ. said planet Pluto had appeared to be dimming for past 10 yr. It was moving in 248-yr orbital period to point where it reflected little sunlight and its surface temperature had dropped two degrees. He speculated that planet froze into mass of stone and solid nitrogen as temperatures reached —250° C when facing away from the sun. When bathed in sunlight, planet warmed to —200° C and formed reflecting puddles which astronomers saw as variations in light intensity. (Text; UPl, W Post, 12/28/68, A9; Lannan, W Star, 12/30/68, A3; AP, W Post, 12/30/68, A6) December 27: At White House press conference President Johnson discussed Apollo 8’s effect on U.S. position in space race: “We are very pleased with the progress we have made. . . . Each side has different examples of its achievements. But in the 10 to 11 years since Sputnik I . . . when we didn’t even have a space committee in the Congress, when we were talking about the basketball up there in the air, when we have weathered the storms that have brewed—everyone who wanted to cut anything, the first thing they wanted to cut was the space program —when we have seen the editorial professors inform us that there was really no value in doing all of this anyway, it gives me great pleasure now to see the thrill that even they are getting out of it.” President described anxiety about complex mission and said he had repeatedly asked himself whether U.S. was ready, whether date selected was best one, whether every possible precaution had been taken, and whether every man had performed his requirements. “About all you can do ... is to pick men that you have confidence in, that you trust, give them the support they need, and then hold on.” Remembering he had “recommended this goal for this decade” to President Kennedy, he said: “There have been many pitfalls every step of the way. I don’t know how many folks have just wanted to abandon it, clip it, cut it, take the money for the cities or the war or just anything else. Space has been a whipping boy. “So when you see the day approaching when visions, and dreams, and what we said to the Congress when we created the Space Administration back in 1958 are becoming reality, you naturally are hopeful.” Later, in telephone message to Apollo 8 astronauts, President congratulated crew and said: “You have made us very proud to be alive at this particular moment in history. You have made us feel akin to those Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard stories of the New World for the first time. . . . My thoughts this morning went back to more than 10 years ago . . . when we saw Sputnik racing through the skies, and we realized that America had a big job ahead of it. “It gave me so much pleasure to know that you men have done a large part of that job.” {PD, 12/30/68, 1744-50)
