In editorial directed to “Americans who think Soviet Russia is ‘mellowing’ ” and who opposed President Nixon’s Safeguard abm plan, New York News noted U.S.S.R. had paraded no military gear in Moscow May Day parade and limited oratory “to a peace-it’s-wonderful speech” by Brezhnev. Paper then quoted April 30 issue of Partinaya Zhizn in which Marshal Matvey V. Zakharov, U.S.S.R. Chief of Staff, described Soviet stockpile of nuclear missiles: “ ‘These rockets are always prepared for immediate firing. Global rockets have unlimited range, and are able not only to carry colossal payloads but to overcome the antimissile defense of the adversary.’” (NY News, 5/2/69)
Soviet Academician, Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, conceded that competition with U.S.S.R. might have been major factor in U.S. determination to reach moon and said that in space there was no way to declare a winner, Space Business Daily reported. “I don’t preclude the idea that such a boosted preparation of the Apollo project was in some measure the result of competition with us. Basically a healthy competition is no obstacle to success. . . . Science is boundless in its development and it cannot be compared to a horse race—there is no finishing line. The interests of science are bound to win anyway. . . .” U.S.S.R. would continue research in “several major scientific areas,” make “extensive use of automatic devices for exploring outer space,” and pay “due attention” to moon and to both manned and unmanned missions. Cosmos, Zond, and Proton spacecraft would continue to be used for research and Soyuz spacecraft would be converted into “modules of orbital space laboratories designed for research in lengthy flight.” (,SBD, 7/31/69, 79)
Press in U.S. and around the world underscored Apollo IPs landing on moon and man’s first steps on another planet. St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “There is no doubt that the United States should continue to support a substantial spacefaring program. Anything else would be a denial of the scientific spirit of the century and the qualities that have made America what it is. But its scope should be measured by findings and probabilities—and one other factor. Future spacefaring ought to be a co-operative effort of all nations able to participate, with the benefits to be shared by all.” (St. Louis P—D, 7/20/69) Washington Sunday Star: “A creature that can stand where Armstrong and Aldrin stand tonight—that can, in the future, move among the spheres and literally explore new worlds ... is unlikely to give up on the hard task of perfecting himself and his life in his natural environment on earth. The God who brought him thus far from a blob of squirming protoplasm ... is unlikely ... to let man blow it all now. Here . . . must be the answer to the national debate as to whether we go ahead in space, or whether we tend to our knitting at home. We are bound to do both. . . . The progressive expansion of the physical and spiritual domain of man inevitably will intensify our determination and ability, in concert with other nations, to build a home world where hunger, fear and violence no longer have a place.” (W Star, 7/20/69, Gl) William Hines in Washington Sunday Star: “One cannot question the majesty of conception or magnitude of effort that made Apollo 11 possible.” But one could ask, “Is this trip really necessary?” One saw in Apollo “that fundamental failing called hubris, which got so many protagonists into hot water in the old Greek mythology. Hubris in English is usually taken to mean prideful arrogance; in ancient Greek the word meant simple insolence. The Apollo enthusiast rejects the concept of hubris; he says we go to the moon not because we are arrogant, but because we are driven, and thereby implicitly rejects the concept of free will and substitutes sappiness for sassiness. The majority asks, ‘But if we didn’t go, what?’ and the minority responds, ‘If we didn’t go, so what?’” (W Star, 7/20/69, G2) Humorist Art Buchwald in Washington Post: “Sometimes one gets the feeling that the right hand germs in the Government don’t know what the left hand germs are doing. This was brought home to me . . . when I read about the millions of dollars that were being spent to see that the astronauts did not bring back a single germ from the moon. Unfortunately, across the page from that story was another that the Army was going ahead with open air testing of nerve gases and germ warfare.” (W Post, 7/20/69, B6) Los Angeles Herald-Examiner: “America’s moon program has benefited all mankind. It has brought better color television, water purification at less cost, new paints and plastics, improved weather forecasting, medicine, respirators, walkers for the handicapped, laser surgery, world-wide communications, new transportation systems, earthquake prediction system and solar power. . . . The Mars goal should bring benefits to all mankind even greater than the tremendous contributions of the moon program.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/20/69) Baltimore Sun: “. . . it is still almost incredible that in the afternoon of a Sunday on earth two humans found themselves within a vehicle resting on the surface of the moon. Nothing could quite prepare one’s mind for that, or for the subsequent moment of climax, the actual setting of a human foot on the substance of our barren satellite. One of the mysteries that had engaged the infinitely inquisitive mind of man is now made tangible. Others remain beyond our planet and upon it.” (B Sun, 7/21/69, A16) Chicago Daily News: “These have been moments to savor—moments in which uncounted millions have shared the immediacy of a turning point in history. This time there was no lapse of weeks or months, waiting for the event to be confirmed. We were all there, bound together by the miracle of communication that intertwined all the other miracles of technology that marked man’s first step on a celestial body.” (C Daily News, 7/21/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Superlatives pale before the magnificence of the achievement. . . . but how many years before the astounding performance of Armstrong and Aldrin will seem as primitive as the pioneering work of the Wright brothers?” (MJ, 7/21/69, 14) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Man’s store of scientific knowledge will be vastly enriched by the landing on the moon. In no other single event in history has there been greater opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the universe.” (Plain Dealer, 7/21/69) London Daily Sketch: “America’s moon triumph offers this old world’s bickering and jealous people a parable of hope.” (B Sun, 7/22/69, Al) Montreal Star: “The deepest hope for a world starved for some form of symbolism, of an attempt at harmony in place of selfishness and narrow nationalism, came from the astronauts,” CFOX Radio, Montreal, broadcast. “Eliminate war? Yes! Eliminate poverty? Yes! But the exploration of space will help us, not impede us, in reaching these goals.” (Am Consul, Montreal) Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden (principal organ of Social Democratic Party): “No Soviet politician has ever before used such conciliatory tones toward the U.S.A. as did Foreign Minister Gromyko recently in his speech before the Supreme Soviet. . . . This Russian position seems generally to be based on fears of a confrontation with China. . . . One of the side effects can be increased Russian interest in broader scientific cooperation in space research. Nothing else could be better designed for global cooperation, since nothing else gives us clearer testimony that we live in one world.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Terre Haute [Ind.j Star said: “In backing Columbus, according to Samuel Eliot Morison, historian, Queen Isabella had two motives: To make a buck in the spice trade, and to open new territories for her Catholic missionaries. It did not occur to her that she was about to change the history of mankind. That is the way of most turning points in human history. The Manhattan Project which resulted in the atomic bomb was basically a defensive move against the danger of Germany’s doing it first. It launched the atomic age. Johann Gutenberg found a way to print with movable type for the simple reason that he wanted more people to read the Bible. He had no idea that he was introducing mass literacy. These great human adventures had two things in common: They were done for practical reasons, and most contemporaries said, 'who needs it?’ The space program began for practical, everyday reasons. Russia’s Sputnik scared the pants off most Americans. The initial goal of catching up with the Russians has been achieved, and this is part of the reason why there is now a slowing interest. However . . . this country now has the potential of changing the world. . . . The U.S. should continue in the forefront of space exploration, with a well-funded and stable program. Space should continue to have a permanent, though not extravagant, position in the priority of national goals.” (Terre Haute Star, 5/29/69)
New York Times Magazine profile quoted NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine: Late President John F. Kennedy’s decision to try to put man on moon by end of 1960s was “bold act that is standing the test of time damned well,” Dr. Paine had said. “Our ability to function now in a new environment a decade after Jack Kennedy is going to be a very challenging test for us. Do we understand that environment? Can we achieve a new consensus without the ‘Pearl Harbor’ of a Russian lead in space? We’re not really talking about the space program anymore. The space program is finished. You wouldn’t speak about Columbus’s voyage as the sail-powered water craft program. What Columbus’s journey was all about had nothing to do with water. It was the extension of man’s dominion, new life styles, new forms of government, new societies.” Dr. Paine believed U.S. had no choice but to push ahead. “A nation that turns down a challenge like this is a nation that’s on its way out.” (Buckley, NYT Magazine, 6/8/69, 34-63)
Space/Aeronautics described 1969 as U.S.S.R.’s “most active and most frustrating” year in space. “In the fall of 1968 it was possible to believe . . . that the Soviet Union might fly men around the moon before the United States. A year later it was possible to ask: ‘Where are the Russians?’” Most failures were in attempts to prepare man’s way to moon. “The inglorious performance of Luna 15, just as America was landing men on the lunar surface, could almost be called the least of Russia’s lunar problems. By far the worst . . . must be repeated technical troubles with the long-awaited ‘super booster,’ the rough equivalent of Saturn 5. If semi-official rumors are to be accepted as accurate, the Russian vehicle is in a great deal of difficulty. “The . . . launchings of Soyuz 6, 7, and 8 were impressive in many ways—but Western officials still counted the group flight as a disappointment to the Russians. . . . The most skeptical Western estimates now are that the Russians may have abandoned the big booster, that they will not land men on the moon before 1972 . . . and that no large Soviet station will be assembled in orbit before the last half of the ’70s.” {Space/Aeronautics, 12/69, 24—6)
Atlas said its “Talk of the World” section had “got a little hoarse” on subject of Apollo 11. It quoted “a few of the more unusual moon-thoughts” from international press. El Tiempo in Bogota had reported Colombian wool fabrics were used in Apollo 11 spacecraft upholstery. Canada’s Kitchener Waterloo Record had said lm had touched down on moon with legs made in Canada by Montreal firm. Oiga, in Lima, Peru, had said when Sputnik went into orbit “it was noted that Pedro Paulet Mostajo had invented a jet-propelled rocket back in 1895.” Atlas commented that “this could go on forever.” (Atlas, 9/69, 10)
New York Times commented on Soviet linking of Soyuz spacecraft: “It is probably not too soon to begin planning for- standardization of space vehicles—a move that would permit joining these vehicles regardless of their national origin. It would be tragic, for example, if a group of Soviet spacemen needed rescue and could not be saved because the only available vehicle was an American space ship impossible to link with the Soviet ship. Here is an area in which international cooperation could not only save lives but help pave the way for the joint operation of stations in space for the benefit of all mankind.” (NYT, 1/17/69, 46)
Surprise had been expressed over enthusiastic reception in Moscow of U.S. lunar rock exhibit, Washington Evening Star editorial noted. There was really nothing surprising, however. “From a narrowly nationalistic point of view, the Russian people and the Soviet government can claim that, were it not for the early Russian successes in space, that piece of rock would still be resting on the moon. But it is more likely that the Russians, and the other peoples of the Earth, see the first moon landing for what it truly was: A triumph for the collective ingenuity of Man.” (W Star, 12/17/69)
President Nixon announced James H. Wakelin, Jr., former Assistant Secretary of the Navy for R&D, would be chairman of new Presidential Task Force on Oceanography [see Sept. 22]. (PD, 10/13/69, 1393-4) Soyuz VII, carrying Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko, Vladislav N. Volkov, and Viktor V. Gorbatko, was launched from Baikonur at 3:45 pm Oct. 12 into orbit with 217-km (134.8-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass said spacecraft’s mission was “maneuvering in the orbit, staging joint navigation observations of the spaceships ... in group flight, observation of celestial bodies and the horizon of the Earth, determination of the real luminosity of stars, observation of changes in illumination created by the Sun and other scientific experiments.” Third spacecraft, Soyuz VIII, carrying Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Dr. Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, was launched from Baikonur at 3:29 pm Oct. 13 into orbit with 278-km (172.7-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Its mission, Tass said, was “comprehensive simultaneous scientific studies in near-terrestrial space in accordance with an extensive program; testing of the complex system of controlling a simultaneous group flight of three space ships; mutual maneuvering of ships in orbit with the aim of solving a number of problems of developing the piloted space system.” TV viewers received announcement of flights about 30 min after launches and saw video-tape recordings of launches about U/2 hrs later. Ultimate goal of three-spacecraft mission was not given. In prelaunch interview shown on TV several hours after launch, Dr. Yeliseyev said group mission would conduct experiments leading to “creation of still more powerful orbiting stations.” Tass reported crews had checked out equipment and communicated with each other. Soyuz VI	was conducting medical-biological tests, Soyuz VII was observing and photographing earth and celestial bodies, and Soyuz VIII was conducting research on polarization of solar light reflected by atmosphere. On Oct. 14 Tass reported Soyuz VII and Soyuz VIII had moved close together, carried out “mutual observation-photography and movie filming,” studied “possibility of exchanging information with the aid of light signals and visceral optical methods,” conducted series of medical experiments, and observed “effect of erosion by micrometeorites on the condition of illuminators and optic systems of the craft.” On Oct. 15 spacecraft approached to within 500 yds during rendezvous, while Soyuz VI hovered nearby. On Oct. 16 Radio Moscow announced Soyuz VI had successfully completed mission and had softlanded in preset area 100 mi northwest of Karaganda at 12:52 pm Moscow time. No information on other two Soyuz spacecraft was given until Tass announced softlanding of Soyuz VII	at 12:36 pm Oct. 17 and of Soyuz VIII at 12:10 pm Oct. 18. Western officials speculated missions had not achieved all objectives. Tass said all major tasks were carried out with “high efficiency.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 10/12-14, 18/69; SBD, 10/14/69, 195; 10/ 21/69, 230; Reuters, W Post, 10/15-16/69; AP, W Star, 10/16/69, Al; Reston, LA Times, 10/19/69, A2; gsfc SSR, 10/15/69; 10/31/69)
Leonard Mandelbaum in Science briefly examined history of U.S. decision to adopt Apollo program. “Cautious approach” to manned space flight gave way after impact of April 12, 1961, “Russian spectacular” —flight of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—and U.S. Cuban foreign policy fiasco, Bay of Pigs. “Congress acted without hearing testimony of compelling military need. The Apollo decision was made without reference to any comprehensive and integrated national policy designed to maximize the use of scientific and technological resources for social objectives. ... It was a typical Cold War reaction.” (Science, 2/14/69, 649)
Harvard Univ. biologist Dr. George Wald and mit physicist Dr. Bruno Rossi disclosed that some 251 nas members out of 806 had signed letter to President Nixon expressing continued opposition to deployment by U.S. of abm system. Letter said, “Russia is as well prepared to build such devices as we are. This can only introduce a new and perhaps disastrous spiral in the arms race. Our science and technology, rather than being used to add further to the present ‘balance of terror,’ needs to be redirected to solving pressing problems of poverty, malnutrition, control of population, and improvement of the human environment for our own people and people everywhere.” (AP, W Post, 3/22/69, A5)
Europeans were “as excited as many Americans” about Apollo 11 launch, New York Times reported. But “only the sharpest observer of the Soviet news media could guess, as he went to bed tonight, that Americans will try to send men to the moon tomorrow,” according to Baltimore Sun. Last mention of Apollo 11 in Soviet press had been July 9 meeting of President Nikolay V. Podgorny with Astronaut Frank Borman. In U.K., bbc and commercial TV were planning extensive Apollo 11 coverage, some live via comsat. British newspapers were competing with special space supplements and guides. Exceptions to generally “adulatory” reportage was The Times of London article in which philosopher Lord Russell had said: “Men will not be content to land upon the moon and try to make it habitable. They will land simultaneously from Russia and the United States, each party, complete with H-bombs and each intent upon exterminating the other.” American Embassy in Warsaw was packed every day with Poles viewing space films. Spain’s Evening Daily Pueblo had sponsored contest to send 25 readers to Apollo 11 launch. In France 22-page space supplement issued by France-Soir had sold 1.5 million copies at $1 each. Bild Zeitung in Germany had noted 7 out of 57 Apollo supervisors were of German origin. Austrian press had lionized Dr. Wernher von Braun during recent visit to Salzburg. Volume of Western European newspaper space devoted to lunar landing mission rivaled that in U.S., New York Times said, and “the whole story of the moon effort is improving the ‘prestige’ of the United States. . . . But. .. respect voiced by individuals is often for America’s technological power, not her humanity or civilization.” (Lewis, NYT, 7/16/69, 20; B Sun, 7/16/69, A8, Mills, A9)
Economist editorial commented: “If the Russians are ever going to get another prestige victory over the United States, and not the sort of worldwide humiliation they have endured with Luna 15 during the American moon landing, and then with the triple Soyuz anti-climax, they will have to pull something off soon. For if not the Soviet planners may see increasingly less reason to continue spending even 1 per cent of the country’s gross national product on its cosmonauts. . . . What is ironic is that a Soviet slowdown could be seen as a mirror image of the running battle in the United States between the scientists and the space engineers, but with the Russian scientists coming out on top. The Academy of Sciences is widely regarded as the repository of all that is most stuffily conservative in Soviet science. That may have been the central cause of the Russian flop.” It was also blow to Americans who relied for new space funds on Nixon Administration’s “continuing fear of what the Russians may yet do.” (Economist, 11/8/69, 12-3)
Philadelphia Inquirer cited possible danger to Apollo spacecraft from “drifting junk” in space. “One notable sidelight to the Apollo 10 flight came in a report that the spaceship brings the number of man-made objects in space to 1691. Although the chance of Apollo 10 colliding with any of the objects is infinitesimal, it is significant that there is so much hardware floating around in space 12 years after Sputnik I. . . . “U.S. and Soviet scientists should find ways of bringing back or destroying rockets and satellites and their separate components after they have become inoperable. If some sort of solution isn’t found, it may not be long before a tragic collision will occur.” (P Inq, 5/20/69)
New York Daily News editorial said: “For some years, the U.S. Air Force has had an entirely feasible project for orbiting by 1972 a 30,000-lb. space laboratory carrying two men, at a cost of around $3 billion. About $1.3 billion having been spent on the program, Deputy Defense Secretary David M. Packard announced Tuesday that it has been junked, scrapped, scrubbed, in order to save the taxpayers some money. We’re hot for government economy. But this looks to us like a most dubious move in that direction. You can bet that Soviet Russia, poverty-stricken though it is, is not skimping in its drive to make space serve the Kremlin militarily.” (NY News, 6/12/69)
Norrlandska Social-Demokraten, Boden, Sweden, editorial commented that Russian press was surprisingly generous with praise of men behind Apollo 11 and American space research in general during mission, but now press seemed to fear landing might have increased respect for U.S. around the world. “It is surely disturbing for Pravda and the Russian Party leaders that the American conquest of the moon . . . witnessed by the greater part of the Communist world, crushed the myth of the Communist system’s superiority.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts, in joint space efforts, could succeed in improving U.S.-Soviet relations where “tired old politicians” had failed, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said during visit to msc. “Maybe this would be a way to break through to the rulers of Russia. When you get professional people together—scientists, aviators . . . you find you have many common problems.” Sen. Goldwater said he hoped Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would not seek Senate seat in 1970 but would wait awhile “and take mine.” (upi, NYT, 11/16/69, 79)
Administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson ended as President Richard M. Nixon was sworn in as President of U.S. Johnson had served U.S. space program continuously since Sputnik l in October 1957, first on Capitol Hill as Chairman of Select and then permanent Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. As Vice President under late President Kennedy, he had served as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, post held by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey during Johnson Administration. (EH)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXVII from Baikonur Cosmodrome. Orbital parameters: apogee, 331 km (205.7 mi); perigee, 202 km (125.5 mi); period, 89.8 min; and inclination, 65°. Satellite reentered March 6. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/69; 3/15/69; SBD, 2/27/69, 212; C Trib, 2/27/69)
