Christian Science Monitor editorial: “China’s successful orbiting of her first satellite is further proof of her continuing effort in space and rocketry—even if her entering of the space age comes nearly 13 years after Sputnik I. It is proof, too, that even if China still lacks industrial brawn and remains basically an underdeveloped country, she is not lacking in scientific and technical brilliance. What she has achieved is all the more remarkable because—as the Chinese themselves report it—the Soviet Union reneged in 1959 on its 1957 agreement to help China with ‘new technology for nuclear defense.’ Thus what China has done has been done on her own—and by her scientists and technologists in spite of the self-inflicted torment of Chairman Mao’s cultural revolution.” (CSM, 4/29/70)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
Stewart Alsop said in Newsweek: “The story of the failure of the Russian moon-exploration project... is interesting and rather puzzling. The first test of the Soviet space vehicle comparable to Apollo was operationally successful in March 1967. The most recent SL-12 mission—an unmanned, nonrecoverable lunar probe—aborted in February, the eleventh to do so. “The Soviet Government and the Soviet press had not a word to say about this string of failures.... But in the American intelligence community there is no doubt at all about the failures, and no doubt either that the Soviet space-exploration program has been a thoroughly miserable performance.” (Newsweek, 4/27/70)
Christian Science Monitor editorial on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space discussions: “While not wishing to minimize the long road which still lies ahead before America and Russia have peacefully resolved all their major disagreements, we see the new space pact as an extraordinarily heartening development. It has created a new bond, a new mutual interest, a new feeling of joint participation. It is from the multiplication of such ties that international peace and friendship grow. And from such a vision of space togetherness there can come a stronger desire for greater brotherliness on earth.’’ (CSM, 10/31/ 70) During October: Scientists at Boeing Space Center in Kent, Wash., were studying piece of Surveyor III, 5 cm (2 in) long, returned from moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, to determine why original white paint had discolored, Boeing Co. said. White paint reflected intense solar rays in space and helped prevent heat buildup inside spacecraft. Boeing researchers thought paint degraded in space because of contaminating film from rocket exhaust, constant proton bombardment, or other radiation from sun. If discoloring came from contamination, paint could be restored to whiteness through oxygen plasma process. If paint had changed through radiation damage, Boeing could replenish depleted atoms. Results of study would enable Boeing to renew reflective paint of future spacecraft which might need to function for 10 to 20 yrs. (Boeing Release S-0788)
AP quoted Soviet geophysicist Sergey Timofeyev as saying Europe had entered period of colder summers and winters because moon was closer to earth than usual. Situation created “atmosphere tide” that disturbed normal movements of warm and cool air. (NYT, 5/20/ 70) Among 32 NASA officials and scientists attending meeting were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Armstrong received tumultuous welcome from predominantly Russian audience, AP reported. During question-and-answer period before his report, Armstrong said that when he viewed earth from moon, “I thought it was impossible that a little island like that in the sky could have so many problems on it.” He had found it “more pleasant on the moon than on earth as far as gravity is concerned.” In report on experiences on moon, Armstrong said, “Since the sky is black the impression is somewhat like being on a sandy athletic field at night that is very well illuminated with flood lights.” Further improvement in mobility of pressure garments would improve ability of astronauts to carry out lunar experiments. At later session when Armstrong attended as observer, guards had difficulty restraining cheers of audience, which included 800 Soviet delegates and 420 representatives of 30 countries. AP said it was “dramatic and unusual” tribute to foreign visitors in U.S.S.R. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL scientist, reported to COSPAR meeting on study and comparison of 60 Surveyor photos taken in April 1967 and 20 Apollo 12 photos that showed moon’s extreme stillness. Photos indicated only one small pebble had moved during 31 mos at Surveyor III site. Rate of meteoroid impact or surface movement was low in area of Ocean of Storms where Apollo 12 and Surveyor III had landed. Camera and several portions of Surveyor spacecraft had coating of One dust stirred from lunar surface as Apollo 12 LM descended nearby. Only other change observed in Surveyor was that its white paint had turned to tan, “partly due to deposition of material on the spacecraft.” nas-nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1969: “Popular interest in the space program, which reached a high point with the first successful lunar landing, has diminished somewhat. Furthermore, a reassessment of national priorities has resulted in reduced financial support for space research and technology during the past year, and the support will probably be even more limited this year and next. It is our intention, despite these limitations, to try to maintain a reasonably balanced program, with continuing effort in all areas of space research in which we are currently engaged and to support mutually advantageous international cooperation in space research wherever possible.” (Text) Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov told meeting U.S.S.R. would launch two French sret earth resources satellites as part of 1966 French-Soviet agreement on scientific cooperation. French Roseau (Radio Observation par Satellite Excentrique a Automatisme Unique) program, with multisatellite payload to be launched in 1971-1972, had been postponed because of budgetary restrictions and sret (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique) had been retained. Joint French-Soviet space program also included plans for emplacement of French laser reflector on lunar surface by Soviet Luna spacecraft; stero, launching of French experiments for measurement of solar radio emission; and arcade, study of solar energy particles with French and Soviet equipment on board Soviet spacecraft. (NASA Release 70-73; upi. NYT, 5/24/70; Reuters, NY News, 5/24/70; AP, NYT, 5/26/70, 31; Reuters, B Sun, 5/26/70; AP, W Star, 5/27/70, All; SBD, 5/27/70, 125; jpl, Release 554)
First volume of third edition of Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsklopediya, new Soviet encyclopedia, was released in U.S.S.R. It credited Wright Brothers with first airplane flight. Second edition, which appeared from 1950 to 1958, had contended that Russian, A. F. Mozhaisky, was designer of first airplane, which had been flown first during summer of 1882. This version had appeared in U.S.S.R. as late as 1968, in history of Russian aviation and astronautics published by Ministry of Defense. New edition of encyclopedia said Mozhaisky’s airplane was built in 1885 and “crashed on take-off.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 3/24/70, 6)
Appointment of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., as ost Director and presidential science adviser had evoked surprise, D. S. Greenberg said in Science, because “unlike his five predecessors” he was not “member or protege of the fairly small group that had dominated the upper levels of government science since Sputnik.” Dr. David had been “picked by members of President Nixon’s personal staff without consultation with the then-incumbent, Lee A. DuBridge.” There had been “no inclination to ask the White House science advisory apparatus to assist in finding a successor when it was time for Dr. DuBridge to go.” (Science, 10/23/70,417-19)
U.S.S.R. was spending two percent of gnp on space and U.S. one half of one percent, Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Div. of Library of Congress, said in speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. U.S.S.R. gnp in 1969 was estimated at $420 billion; U.S. total was $931 billion. Successful Soviet launches had totaled 44 in 1966,74 in 1968,70 in 1969, and 40 thus far in 1970. Largest element in Soviet space program had been photo-reconnaissance. U.S.S.R.. had led U.S. in payload launch weight every year since launch of 83.5-kg (184-lb) Sputnik in 1957 except 1969. Total payload weight for U.S.S.R. was 2 million kg (4.5 million lbs); for U.S. total was 1.9 million kg (4.25 million lbs). (B Sun, 8/20/70. A3)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “Of course Peking still runs far behind America and Russia in nuclear and space development... . But not nearly so far behind as only a few years ago. And apart from conjectures about progress in missilery, "Following Star' [satellite] is a reminder of the potential military dimensions of space which may acquire a new importance now that China has entered the extraterrestrial realm.” (B Sun, 4/28/70, A10)	_ April29: Members of Apollo 13 Review Board entered Apollo simulator alMSC and, using recorded data, reconstructed tense moments after explosion disabled spacecraft April 13. Board member Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said purpose of reconstruction was to give investigators better appreciation of accident from crewmen’s point of view. (W Post, 4/30/70, A27) *	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, presented Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy to Apollo If crew—astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, since named Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs—in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award, established by National Geographic Society in 1961 for USAF members and units, honored crew for making most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress during 1969 by accomplishing first manned lunar landing, (dod Release 35970)	.	. *	essa announced award of $1.6-million contract to Gulton Industries Data Systems Div. to construct infrared temperature profile radiometer (ITPR), advanced satellite instrument for obtaining temperature sounding through atmosphere to earth’s surface, essa was de
First launch of Poseidon missile from submarine had been postponed by USN [see July 25] because of proximity of heavily instrumented Soviet trawler to U.S. nuclear submarine James Madison, AP reported. Informed source had said there was nothing wrong with Poseidon or support systems and that dod officials “became a little apprehensive after the Russian trawler. . .moved in so close [within 183 m (200 yds)]” during test July 24. (B Sun, 7/28/70, Al)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences conducted hearing on S.R. 49, providing for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum at Roswell, N. Mex., as fitting memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified: “Americans can ill afford to ignore the contributions of Robert H. Goddard in the history of the coming of the space age. Young Americans need to appreciate that what appear as unsoluble problems today are not new to man’s experience. Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s rocket artifacts and his lifelong labors should be an inspiration to each generation of youth as they grapple with their concerns of their day and their dreams of a better world of their tomorrows in a dynamic universe. This nation cannot afford not to have Robert H. Goddards in the future.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, testified: “It seems very important that we and our children after us never lose awareness of what key individuals such as Robert Goddard provided to a fuller understanding of the progress of mankind. He, like Konstantine Tsiolkovsky of Russia and Hermann Oberth of Germany, correctly theorized on the use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel with liquid oxygen for high-energy thrust. Based upon the liquid-hydrogen work at the Lewis Research Center, NASA developed the upper stages for the Saturn V which enabled us to achieve the Apollo missions to the moon.” Hearing took place on 44th anniversary of first successful launching of liquid-fuel rocket by Dr. Goddard. (Testimony; CR, 3/17/70, S3828-30; Huntsville News, 3/17/70)
