Moscow newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya quoted unidentified “Chief Designer of Spaceships” as saying U.S.S.R. was preparing further manned orbital flight of long duration as prelude to creation of permanent space laboratory. Soyuz spacecraft had “undergone necessary modifications to insure fulfillment of a long and extensive program.” Later New York Times said designer was believed to be Mikhail K. Yangel, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (NYT, 3/15/71)	_
Donald K. Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, sent cable on behalf of U.S. astronauts to Soviet Academy of Sciences: “We share with the world community deep sorrow for the loss of Cosmonauts Georgy Dobrovolsky, Vladislav Volkov and Viktor Patsayev, and we mourn with all the Russian people the deaths of three brave countrymen.” (Reuters, B Sun, 7/1/71, A2; msc pio)
nasa’s Apollo 15 was 5351st man-made object launched since U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 Oct. 4, 1957, according to Air Defense Command Hq. figures reported by AP. Center was tracking 2454 objects still in orbit. (NYT, 7/27/71, 14)
Boris Sergievsky, World War I aviator with Imperial Russian Air Force and later leading test pilot in U.S., died in New York at age 83. He had set seaplane records with Pan American World Airways’ Brazilian Clipper, flown Sikorsky amphibian aircraft to Chile in 1931, and been vice president of Helicopter Corp. of America. (NYT, 11/26/71, 38)
Launching of eight Soviet Cosmos satellites, Mars 2, and Mariner 9 had raised number of man-made objects in space to 2378, Reuters reported. Of total, little more them one fifth were satellites or payloads; remainder was space junk. Spokesman for usaf Air Defense Command had said usaf had recorded 2840 objects, 760 payloads, and 2080 bits of debris that had decayed since launch of Sputnik 1 Oct. 4, 1957. (LA Times, 6/17/71)
The Russian Space Bluff by Leonid Vladimirov, Soviet engineer-journalist who had defected in 1966, had been published in U.K., AP reported. Book said Soviet space program had begun as series of publicity stunts to persuade West that U.S.S.R. had reached level of advanced technology equal to that of U.S. Vladimirov had said that U.S.S.R. knew “she could not beat America to the moon because she cannot build a moon rocket. Even today the Soviet Union cannot produce any significantly big jet nozzles.” Mid-1960 flights in Voskhod series had been short because spacecraft were overloaded earlier Vostok type with some equipment removed. Last-minute modifications had been engineering disgrace. (AP, W Star, 11/25/71, H7) On Nov. 27 Mariner 9 failed in attempt at closeup photograph of Martian moon Phobos. JPL ground controllers said spacecraft’s camera wasn’t pointed correctly when attempt was made. Orbit of Phobos was not known precisely enough to ensure getting photo. Successful photo of Phobos would have shown greater detail than recent picture of Deimos, Mars’ other moon, since Phobos was twice as large as Deimos and spacecraft passed 1600 km (100 mi) closer. Mariner 9 had photographed Phobos Nov. 13 from 150 000 km (93 000 mi) out. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/27/71, A4; W Star, 11/28/71, A6)
Conversation between Mary Ann Harbert, U.S. citizen released Dec. 14 after nearly four-year internment by Chinese Communists, and escort Col. Leonard W. Johnson, Jr., Commander of 9th Aeromedical Evacuation Group at Clark afb in Philippines, was reported by AP. Miss Harbert had asked, “Have you put any men on the moon yet?” Col. Johnson had responded with description of U.S. space program that had put eight men on moon. Miss Harbert had said, “I really don’t know, I hadn’t heard about it. Many people in China don’t know that. The last thing we knew about space was that Russia had something circling the moon.” (B Sun, 12/15/71, A9)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during hearing on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation: Recent agreements had been directed toward “achieving common objectives,” not “exchange of technology.” Review of relations between NASA and U.S.S.R. “suggests that we should exercise considerable caution in assessing the prospects for prompt and effective implementation of these agreements.” But U.S. negotiators of October and January agreements had observed “definite improvement” over past decade. Negotiations had been “more straight forward, less political. ... A closer kind of relationship seems to be intended by the Soviet side. The top level of the Soviet Academy for the first time participated directly. The negotiations were attended by the first instances of meaningful access to Soviet facilities.” Dr. Low said he had “spent a half-hour or more inside the Soviet simulator with a young Russian engineer who explained in detail the working of that spacecraft and answered every question that I had. Later on, I was in the docking and rendezvous trainer with one of their cosmonauts and was allowed to attempt to fly a docking of one Soyuz against another. I did not succeed in bringing the two together. In addition, in January our delegation was invited to the principal Soviet tracking station in the Crimea. Unfortunately, the time available . . . did not permit us to make this visit, but we have every intention of doing so in the future.” Advocating “air of cautious optimism,” Dr. Low said U.S.S.R. had, “in effect, met the schedules laid down in the first agreement with a variance of only a few days. In any event, we have laid out and agreed to specific milestones for an even-handed exchange, so that neither side will gain more than the other.” In response to question, Dr. Low said military components of U.S. and Soviet space programs had not been discussed at NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings. (Transcript)
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 mission: “What is significant ... is not the docking, in itself, but the evidence of the Soviet Union’s zealous determination to exceed everybody in space—for whatever purpose. There is nothing in all this that the U.S. space agency cannot, when it chooses, accomplish—given the funds and priorities. It is not a question of firsts—the U.S. has had its share of those, and more. The difference is that to Russia the priorities and judgments are made in one place, the Kremlin. In the United States, not only the space agency but the President, Congress and the prevailing public mood share the decisions.” (W News, 6/8/71)
Threat of military superiority was “inherent” in Soviet space program, New York Daily News said. “For it was the the development of a Russian rocket for intercontinental bombardment that led the way to the technological race in space in the first place. We certainly had nothing like it on Oct. 4, 1957, when the Russians startled the world with the orbiting Sputnik and came along a month later to launch Sputnik II, a 1200-pound [500-kg] vehicle carrying a live dog.. . .” U.S. Saturn rocket had no military usefulness; “one doubts that the Russians can say the same about their spacecraft launching vehicles.” (Greene, NY News, 1/31/71)
Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States space program that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.” (C Trib, 7/1/71) Christian Science Monitor:	. . those men who fly such missions are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limitations of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them. As a result, the Soyuz 11 event argues the more determinedly that nations—for the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet Union—should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71) Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event does not proceed from their numbers—three deaths next to, say, thousands among the world’s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daily, men in combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share. So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer limits of human knowledge and endurance—and beyond.” (W Post, 7/1/71) New York Times: “. . . it should be apparent that the staggering dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition. The real lesson of this tragedy is . . . that space exploration ought to be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71) Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23 days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B Sun, 7/1/71)
President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. . . . But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion . . . the one who was briefing the President . . . turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.” In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge. . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space, but because there is something there, something there that we must explore. It’s there to find. . . . this Nation with all of its capability and with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set for ourselves. “Now, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engineering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407—11)
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said at Washington, D.C. press conference, “I hope to see the day when our astronauts go up in Russian spacecraft and the Russian cosmonauts in ours.” He would explore idea with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin before he left for visit to U.S.S.R. in August, “if our own government will permit me to do so.” (upi, W Post, 7/10/71, A3)
Discovery of diamonds in 1.4-kg (3-lb) .meteorite that fell through roof of storehouse on Finnish island of Havro Aug. 2 was announced by Smithsonian Center for Short-Lived Phenomena. It was sixth such meteorite to be found. First discovery of meteoritic diamonds had been made by Russian scientists in 1888 while analyzing meteorite found near Novoured. (upi, NYT, 11/13/71)
New civilian program to “absorb the nation’s technical talent, respond to our unmet social needs, and enlist widespread enthusiasm and support” was proposed by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech before National Society of Engineers meeting in Washington, D.C. “The development of new cities may be the important challenge we face, because it dramatizes the need for new research and engineering in the way the challenge of the Soviet Sputnik spurred the American space program in the late fifties and early sixties.” (Text)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, was first speaker in Leuc Awareness Program series. Dr. Von Braun said at LeRC: “Our agency is at the crossroads. Our success story is our greatest enemy.” After four successful manned lunar landings, people had become complacent. If nasa fell behind U.S.S.R. in space, it would create another “Sputnik” environment. (Lewis News, 12/3/71, 1)
International aspects of U.S. space program were discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in luncheon speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: Cooperation with Western nations in past decade had included 70 countries, 250 specific agreements, and more than 24 joint satellite projects at run-out cost in excess of $400 million. More than 50% of total had been funded by other nations. In 1970s, “opportunities exist for cooperation on a significantly larger scale.” U.S. wished “to build a foundation for important benefit- and cost-sharing in the major space programs of the future.” Canada, Japan, and Australia—“countries having the most obvious potential for post-Apollo work-sharing”—had been given “every chance to become fully acquainted with our plans and studies” to enable them to decide whether they wished to commit their own resources. European Space Conference had put several million dollars into studies of post-Apollo program possibilities and some member countries had invested still larger amounts. British, French, and West German firms were working with NASA prime contractors on space shuttle design studies. Europe would have to choose between significant participation in shuttle funding and funding independent European rocket program. Decision would be necessary “even if Europe funds only 10 per cent of the shuttle’s price tab.” U.S. had said it would “sell launch services for projects consistent with peaceful purposes and existing international agreements . . . [and] that general technical access to the entire program would be available, but that technology at the level of commercial know-how would be transferred in either direction only where one side required it to complete its commitments to the other.” Since Europe was talking of only 10% share of shuttle program, “we said that we would retain decision-making responsibility except where European costs were directly affected, in which case decisions would be joint.” In U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space, “it is particularly important that we give clear recognition to both . . . competition and cooperation.” U.S. was competing with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” U.S. was cooperating with U.S.S.R. “because we both live in a vast universe that must be explored, where important new knowledge is to be gained, for the benefit of all men, everywhere.” While U.S. retained demonstrated lead over U.S.S.R., “it will not be an enduring lead without major new initiatives on our part— initiatives like the space shuttle and the exploration of the outer planets. . . .” In Jan. 18—21 Moscow talks with Soviet Academy of Sciences, “we specifically agreed, initially, to exchange three grams [0.11 oz] of sample obtained from Luna 16, for three grams each from Apollo 11 and 12. These relatively small amounts are sufficient for detailed scientific examination of a comparative nature.” Additional meetings on compatible docking arrangements had not been held because “docking discussions are well underway, and the planned exchange of information is taking place.” On visit to Soviet cosmonaut training area at Star City, “we were welcomed by Cosmonauts Beregovoy, Nikolayev, Leonov, Shatalov, and Valentina Tereshkova. We were shown the Soyuz mission trainer, and were invited to attempt to dock two Soyuz spacecraft in their docking trainer. While there, I also presented a plaque in memory of Yuri Gagarin [first man in space] from the U.S. astronauts.” (Text) • President Nixon announced appointments of members of President’s Science Advisory Committee for terms expiring Dec. 31, 1974: Dr. Lee A.	DuBridge, former Presidential Science Adviser; Dr. Herbert Friedman of nrl; Dr. Daniel P. Moynahan, former Counsellor to the President; Kenneth H. Olsen, President of Digital Equipment Corp.; and Dr. John G. Truxal of Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. {PD, 2/1/71,
Administration officials expected U.S.S.R. to test-fire SS-9 icbms within few months, New York Times reported. Two silos were being rebuilt at Baykonur test center in Kazakhstan to same dimensions as larger silos that had been appearing all over western Russia since December. (Beecher, NYT, 5/19/71, 1)
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4 Cosmonaut Pavel R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft; examined display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A. Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz cm; and admired Lunokhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 spacecraft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model of Soyuz spacecraft; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges. (fbis-Sov-7 1-108, 6/4/71, FI; NYT, 6/3/71, 41)
