Claim that Central Intelligence Agency had “stolen” Soviet Sputnik spacecraft for three hours to examine it while it was on tour in 1958 was included in new book critical of CIA by former CIA agent, Baltimore Sun reported. Book was CIA—The Myth & the Madness, by Patrick J. McGarvey. (B Sun, 10/20/72, Al)
Selection of Dr. Manson Benedict, Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear physicist, to receive Enrico Fermi Award for 1972 was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission. President Nixon had approved nomination. President had informed Dr. Benedict that award was being given “in recognition of your pioneering leadership in the development of the Nation’s first gaseous diffusion plant, while paying equal tribute to your imaginative contributions in the development of the nuclear reactor and its safe use for generation of electrical power.” (aec Release P-366) November 4:	President Nixon, in foreign policy speech over nationwide radio, referred to U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements signed during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings: “We agreed ... to cooperate in protecting the environment, explore in space, fight disease. This means the day is fast approaching when a Russian cosmonaut and an American astronaut will shake hands in space, when a Russian chemist and an American biologist will work side by side to find a cure for cancer, and each time our nations join hands in the works of peace, we advance the day when nations will no longer raise their hands in warfare.” {PD, 11/13/72, 1639-41)
U. Alexis Johnson, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on space agreements with U.S.S.R. signed in May, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ special hearing. Johnson said agreement signed May 24 endorsed at highest level understandings reached over past 18 mos between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences for cooperation in space science and applications such as meteorology, study of earth’s environment, further exploration of moon and planets, and space biology and medicine. It permitted development of compatible rendezvous and docking systems which “should enhance safety and value of space flight” and opened possibility of further areas of cooperation. It demonstrated “in full view of the world that the two great space powers have both the will and the capability to work together on important and difficult tasks. We have high hopes . . . that this agreement will be a milestone in our relationship with the Soviet Union. ... It serves our broad national purposes, as well as our specific foreign policy objectives.” Dr. Low outlined earlier agreements and gave details of joint rendezvous and docking mission agreed on for 1975. During April visit to Moscow, agreement had been reached that astronauts must understand Russian to extent normally used in both regular and contingency operations. Soviet cosmonauts also would need to understand other language and be able to respond. Dictionary would be.developed of commonly used phrases. Some astronauts, all interested in flying this mission, had begun studying Russian on their own. Astronauts selected would take formal language training. Others in NASA would also learn Russian. (Transcript)
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
Houston Chronicle editorial commented on Soviet attempt to restrict satellite TV broadcasts as threat to world peace: “We should be very-slow to accept any limitations upon the use of satellites. We have just begun to tap the benefits that can flow from the exploration of space. Our international space program stands in contrast to Russia’s secret effort. While we are opening new avenues of communications, Russia typically is acting to keep its citizens in ignorance.” (H Chron, 10/17/72)
Fifteenth anniversary of space age inaugurated by 1957 launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1, first man-made satellite. Soviet cosmonauts commemorated anniversary with interviews published in Soviet press. Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said: “Mankind’s entry into space has opened up . . . enormous prospects for the study not only of extraterrestrial space but also of the Earth. Modern space technology can be used to solve mankind’s vitally important tasks, such as the protection of the natural environment and the rational utilization of the Earth’s resources.” Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov discussed future in space in Komsomolskaya Pravda interview. In applied space research, “practical cosmonautics will move from purely informational tasks to exerting an active influence on . . . natural phenomena.” It would be possible “to destroy embryonic hurricanes, influence weather .... And both automatic and manned craft can serve as instruments in resolving these tasks.” Other space tasks of future would be study of Earth’s environment and study of universe, but “I do not believe that the exploitation of the planets’ natural resources for terrestrial needs will begin in our century.” (fbis-Sov, 10/17/72, L2-4)
New York Times editorial commented on data returned by Soviet Venus 8 probe, which had landed capsule on Venus July 22: “Since the first Sputnik went into orbit a decade and a half ago, the world has seen so many major accomplishments in space by both the Soviet Union and the United States that the original sense of wonder has been largely lost. Yet even in today’s jaded atmosphere, it must be recognized that what the Soviet scientists accomplished with Venus 8 was one of the great technological accomplishments of the age. The scientists and technicians responsible for this great feat deserve the world’s congratulations. It is self-evident that this work needs to be continued with respect to other planets . . . and that it can be done by international cooperation.” (NYT, 9/13/72, 42) September 13—15:	First national conference on remotely manned systems was held at- Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Stanley Deutsch of NASA Office of Life Sciences said in keynote address that usefulness of remotely controlled machines was “virtually limitless” both in space and on earth. “Using a remote system to scout Mars in advance of manned missions will enhance the safety of the man when we do send him to Mars.” Remotely controlled systems also could be used in future to rescue and return an incapacitated astronaut and provide a method for capturing unstable satellites. Remotely controlled systems technology developed for space was also being applied to nonspace applications such as Navy undersea manipulators, Air Force and Army remotely piloted aircraft, handling material in radiation laboratories, industrial safety, mining, medicine and hospitals, police work, and fire fighting. Dr. Ewald Heer of Jpl’s Advanced Technical Studies Div. said “intelligence” of automated systems would have to be increased greatly to ensure success of future earth orbital and planetary satellites. “Remotely manned systems are man-machine system® that augment and extend man’s sensory, manipulative and intellectual capabilities to remote places. However while machines may have superior strength and endurance and resistance to hostile environments, they still depend on human intelligence for decision-making in the performance of complicated tasks. Advanced engineering automation is essential in space station and shuttle operations and scientific data gathering must be microminiaturized for sustained interplanetary operations of two or more years.” (jpl Releases 625, 626; Swain, Pasadena Star-News, 9/14/72) September 14:	Senate approved U.S.-U.S.S.R. Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic Arms by vote of 88 to 2. Agreement was passed after adoption of amendment proposed by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) that urged President Nixon to seek future treaty which would not limit U.S. to levels of intercontinental strategic forces inferior to limits provided to U.S.S.R. (CR, 9/14/72, S14859, S14868-14913)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford made joint “flight” with Soviet Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev in Soyuz spacecraft simulator at Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), cosmonaut training center near Moscow. Stafford was member of NASA delegation to Oct. 9-19 Moscow meetings on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), joint rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. (upi, W Star & News, 10/18/72)
Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov had attributed 15-mo hiatus in Soviet manned space flight to major changes being made in Soyuz spacecraft, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Changes to improve cosmonauts’ living conditions were believed to include retrofit of miniaturized control and communications equipment for more space in command module. Dr. Sedov had said faulty hatch system had been corrected and spacecraft was ready for 30-day orbital laboratory mission. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 11)
President Nixon accepted resignation of John H. Chafee as Secretary of the Navy, effective at undetermined date. President also submitted to Congress nomination of r/a Allen L. Powell to succeed r/a Don A. Jones as Director of National Ocean Survey in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Dept, of Commerce, r/a Jones was retiring effective April 30. Senate confirmed nomination of Powell May 3. {PD, 4/10/72, 722, 725, 737; CR, 5/3/72, D484) April 4-6:	Moscow meeting of NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences delegations confirmed desirability of joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking test mission and established understanding on management and operation of mission to be conducted in 1975, subject to government approval. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, led U.S. delegation. Soviet delegation was headed by Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, Acting President of Soviet Academy. Parties agreed to use of U.S. Apollo spacecraft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft with systems developed by both sides, to specific documents for development of joint documentation, and to principles for preparatory and operational phases of mission. (Summary of results; NASA Release 5/24/72) April 5:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that LeRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information on the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be operated in about 6 months. Results . . . indicate that we may expect to better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given to industry on a continuing hasis. . . . We can expect some of our improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before completion of our program.” NASA—aec Spade Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein testified: “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future. For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening—mandatory for certain military missions—and low recurring costs for multiple missions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For unmanned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications missions as communications satellites. In manned missions . . . overriding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor systems were needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy missions to far planets. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski reported that satellite network included 10 electronic ground stations operated by NASA, supplemented by optical tracking network operated by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Electronic stations provided worldwide system that tracked each satellite, determined status of onboard systems, commanded satellite functions, and acquired data. Optical stations, which included laser capabilities at selected sites, provided specialized services in precision orbital tracking. (Transcript)
Soviet scientists were studying “collective effect” accelerators with high-current electrons to achieve very high energies needed to split atoms at lower cost and effort than by larger traditional accelerators. Traditional circular accelerators raised energy of electrons 50 mev per m. Collective-effect principle increased energy gain to 1000 mev per m. Very-high-current electron accelerators had been developed in U.S. and U.S.S.R. to generate beams of relativistic electrons with speeds close to velocity of light. (Shabad, NYT, 5/7/72, 64) May 8:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed space prospects in interview published in U.S. News & World Report: Chances of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. mission were “quite good.” It hadn’t been decided “exactly how it would work, but there might be two or three astronauts and the same number of cosmonauts.” U.S.S.R. probably would be “very active” in manned space flight until U.S. space shuttle was flying in 1978. “So it may appear that we have lost our leadership during that period.” U.S.S.R. would “try to be first in something— probably with manned and unmanned missions” during 1974 to 1978. “If and when they land men on the moon—even if they land on the same side . . . where we landed—that would attract a lot of public attention. ... If they were to land on the far side of the moon, that would be even more spectacular.” It would also be spectacular, Dr. Fletcher said, if U.S.S.R. announced it was “putting up a space station as the first step in a program to get to Mars.” Gap in U.S. space program had been caused by “series of things” including cancellation of two Apollos. “We probably should have worked it so that the shuttle would be operating earlier, but we spent a lot of time studying the shuttle—and that was good. . . .” Only possible fill-in was to “fly more Apollo components, and we are looking at that possibility. We have leftover Saturn rockets and leftover com-mand-and-service modules, and we’re looking to see if they can be used between 1974 and 1978.” It would take another Sputnik to accelerate U.S. space program to peak force, “but I don’t see that it’s necessary. ... I honestly think that we could do a reasonably good job on the budget that we’ve programmed for the ’70s. I think the main problem with the five-year gap is going to be loss of national prestige during the period.” Space program critics and decreasing space budget “may have a negative impact on people wanting to stay with the space program.” If there were no gap-filling missions, “we may have to phase part of the astronaut group into some other kinds of work while we wait for the shuttle.” When shuttle was operational it would “enable us to make space flight a routine event. Maybe we’ll have an every Monday-morning flight out to space. This will change the nature of what we do in space completely. When we can get into space cheaply, easily, quickly and routinely, this will open up space for new ventures at present not predictable.” (US News, 5/8/72)
British press correspondent Arthur Smith presented British view of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs since Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: “Two major events in space marked 1971—both of them signs that America’s formidable lead in space exploration is being whittled away by the incredibly dynamic program” of U.S.S.R.: launch of Soyuz 11, which put U.S.S.R. ahead of U.S. in total launches for first time since 1958, and U.S.S.R.’s landing of Mars 3 capsule on Mars—“relatively unproductive from the scientific point of view,” but impressive. “These two events demonstrate that the Soviet space program is now making great strides after many years of relatively minor achievement in both manned and unmanned exploration and application. The characteristic pattern was a Soviet achievement announced to a surprised world, followed some months later by a more sophisticated and more useful U.S. version of the same mission, yielding far more scientific data, but little prestige.” U.S.S.R. program was characterized by excessive secrecy because, according to Soviet officials, rockets used in space program were similar to those used in military program. Smith said genuine reason for secrecy “is the desire to guard against a failure in the full blaze of world publicity.” U.S.S.R. “guards against ever having to admit failure by announcing launches only post facto. If there is a launch pad failure there is no announcement at all. If orbit is reached by the spacecraft, but it does not function as planned, no mention is made of this in the curt bulletin.” If lunar or planetary probe failed to enter planned trajectory, mission objective “is not mentioned, and the spacecraft is merely allocated a number in the catch-all Cosmos series. ... It is impossible to be absolutely certain how many of these escape stage failures there have been, but there may have been as many as 10 or 15 aimed at Venus and Mars alone.” Soviet program had “little ... of the technical virtuosity of the American approach,” but had more impetus and would “obviously continue on a growing scale. Apart from the progress in individual projects, the ever increasing number of Soviet launches demonstrates that the Russian equivalent of NASA is financially more secure. And the speed with which the Soviet space establishment can respond to a failure is also a pointer to the massive scale of the back-up precautions which are taken.” Soviet program, by its nature, was ensured greater financial security. “By their very success in being able to reach an unparalleled level of technology in their spacecraft, the American engineers have been working against their own best interests.” {Bull Atom Sci, 4/72, 18-24)
NASA had definite plans for international rendezvous and docking mission to link three Soviet cosmonauts with three U.S. astronauts in 1975, Washington Post reported. Tentative date was June 14, four days after U.S.S.R. orbited Salyut station and three days after cosmonauts docked Soyuz spacecraft at one end of Salyut 15 m (50 ft) long. Apollo spacecraft would dock with orbiting Salyut on 15th Apollo orbit of earth, day following Apollo launch. For 56 hrs astronauts and cosmonauts would work and live together under guidance of mission control centers in Houston and in Baykonur. There were “no longer any technical doubts that the feat of flying an American and a Russian spacecraft together can be accomplished.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Manned Spacecraft Center, had said, “We haven’t seen anything in a technical sense that says we should stop.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/7/72, B2)
U.S.S.R. apparently was testing spaceborne satellite intercept system at high altitudes, Aerospace Daily reported. “In five earlier tests of the system . . . Russian satellites had shown they could disable target satellites flying at relatively low altitudes.” But Cosmos 520, launched Sept. 19 “into practically the same inclination as the earlier . . . vehicles, has gone into a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee of more than 39,000 kilometers [24 000 miles]. This could mean that the Russians are showing that their interceptor can reach to synchronous orbit . . . where more than half of future U.S. military satellites will orbit.” Orbit of Cosmos 520 was not equatorial—as was that of U.S. vehicles in Air Force and TRW Program 647 ballistic-missile early-warning satellite system—and its high point was apparently over Northern Hemisphere and its intermediate altitude rather more than the 32 000-km (20 000-mi) altitude of U.S. satellites. Military implications of Cosmos 520 mission were strong “since all SS-9 launched satellites are military vehicles. SS-9s have launched not only the interceptor series but all Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (fobs) satellites and another class of satellites . . . strongly related to weapons development.” (Aero Daily, 9/28/72)
Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev died in Moscow at age 84. During 50-yr career Tupolev and associates had pioneered design of 120 different aircraft from 35-hp ANT-1 in 1920s to Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport scheduled for service in 1975. He had been regarded as originator of all-metal aircraft, which he first designed in early 1920s. In 1934 he had built huge eight-engine aircraft with 63-m (207-ft) wingspan. Aircraft, named Maxim Gorky after Russian author, actually flew, but was demolished in 1935 crash. Tupolev, one of most decorated Soviet citizens, had won three Stalin Prizes and one Lenin Prize and was three-time Hero of Socialist Labor—highest Soviet civilian honor. He had been imprisoned in 1936 for allegedly divulging Soviet aviation secrets to Germany. During three years of forced labor he designed Tu-2 dive bomber which was flown by U.S.S.R. in World War II. Among postwar airliners designed by Tupolev design bureau were Tu-134 medium-range, 80-passenger transport and Tu-154, three-engine, 150-passenger transport scheduled to replace Tu-104 on Soviet domestic routes. (NYT, 12/24/72, 42) December 24:	NASA released Apollo 17 photos including one of best full-disc photos of earth taken from space. Photo, taken Dec. 7 as Apollo 17 spacecraft headed toward moon, showed earth from North Africa and Arabia to Antarctic polar icecap. (Photo 12-H-1578; NASA pio)
Relation of U.S. space program to national interest was discussed in Foreign Affairs article by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator: “To some, space is, or should be, pure science; to others, it is prestige and the American image; to still others, space means national security.” Some space program students had said “its impact will be felt in other respects than the costaccounting of economic productivity versus technological investment. There has been much discussion of the influence of space exploration on the mind and spirit of man, as an extension of the revolution in thought that was initiated by Copernicus and continued by Newton and Darwin. A study of the history and pre-history of man suggests that the human drive is expressed through just such tentative movements out of the world of tried experience into a new world of untested promise. “Sputnik and the moon landing signaled the opening of a new frontier across which man can now travel into the endless reaches of outer space. The new frontier of space will not be closed quickly, for astronomical knowledge shows that billions of stars, some undoubtedly accompanied by earthlike planets, surround us in the galaxy. Space exploration has brought home to more people than ever before the reality of this vast complex of stars and planets. ‘Out there’ is really there, a place that one can get to. Never again can we make the mistake of identifying our speck of planetary matter as the universe.” (Foreign Affairs, 4/72, 532-44)
New York Times editorial praised President’s launch assistance policy announced Oct. 9: “Only a few days ago the fifteenth anniversary of the orbiting of Sputnik I—the beginning of the space age—passed into history. President Nixon’s announcement provides welcome evidence that the initial stage of nationalistic and irrational space competition may now be succeeded by a second stage of widening international space cooperation for the benefit of all peoples.” (NYT, 10/11/72, 42) October 12:	U.S.S.R. proposed global ban on unrestricted use of satellites for direct TV broadcasting during debate on peaceful uses of outer space by United Nations First (main political) Committee. Soviet delegate Yakov A. Malik submitted draft of proposed convention as presented to U.N. Secretary General Kurt M. Waldheim Aug. 8. Signatories would agree to transmit to other countries by satellite only if recipient countries agreed. U.S. delegate Ambassador George Bush, speaking first, told Committee U.S. was concerned over limiting “what promises to become an important new means of making information widely and immediately available to the people of the world.” (Astrachan, W Post, 10/13/72, A23; Worldwide Press Service, Inti Her Trib, 10/14-15/72, 5)
Neil H. McElroy—Secretary of Defense from 1957 to 1959, during President Eisenhower’s second term—died of cancer in Cincinnati, Ohio, at age 68. He had taken office five days after U.S.S.R. launched Sputnik 1 (Oct. 4, 1957), in midst of controversy between branches of U.S. armed services over responsibility for missile and satellite programs. McElroy, former executive of Procter & Gamble Co., ordered no cuts to be made in $l-billion budget that had been approved by Congress for basic research. Research led to successful launchings in 1958 of Navy and Army satellites that helped U.S. to recover some prestige in space field. McElroy resigned in 1958 to return to private industry after receiving Medal of Freedom from President Eisenhower. (W Star, 12/1/72, B7) During November:	Space shuttle impact was described by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Administrator for Planning, in American Scientist magazine article: Shuttle was “key to future exploration and use of space” that represented “significant new operational capability rather than a discrete mission or missions. Its ultimate impact will be to expand space activity while at the same time reducing the high costs of the space effort.” Shuttle combined in one transport “capability to launch or carry out unmanned or manned missions repeatedly and routinely. It will be the first true ‘aerospace’ vehicle in that it can fly and maneuver in both space and the atmosphere.” Shuttle would contribute more than any previous rocket vehicle to NASA’s progress in advancing technologies and capabilities for space flight and exploration, space science and study of aerospace phenomena, and expanded use of space and space technology for human benefit. “To achieve the smoothest, most economical progress and benefits at lowest cost to the taxpayers, all three objectives should go forward in fairly close concert, not piecemeal or with fluctuating budgetary peaks and valleys.” (Am Sci, 11-12/1972, 730-8)
NASA and Soviet Acadfemy of Sciences had approved results of fourth meeting of joint working groups on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) at Manned Spacecraft Center July 6-18, NASA announced. Croups had agreed to base future work on three astp documents: Project Technical Proposal, Organization Plan, and Project Schedules. Number of working groups would be increased to five. Groups had agreed to launch Soyuz spacecraft before Apollo spacecraft and had decided that sufficient progress had been made to proceed with system design and development for 1975 joint mission. Areas requiring future study included possible crew transfer by extravehicular activity (eva) in emergency situation, possibility of changing spacecraft pressure to shorten time required for crew transfer, TV system for docking, and choice of specific July 1975 date for mission. Next meeting of working groups was scheduled for October in Moscow. (NASA Release 72—190)
Houston Post editorial commented on international aspects of space program: “The history of the world has provided few efforts more conducive to worldwide participation than space exploration. Its benefits are mutual. The space shuttle is emerging as a practical, selfsupporting project and needs wider participation. Meanwhile, space investigations need to be continued. An international space agency would seem to be a practical way to perpetuate what the U.S. and Russia have started.” (H Post, 12/8/72)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. space mission scheduled for 1975 would include 48-hr linkup of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and crew exchange, Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said in report released by Tass. Coyuz spacecraft, manned by two cosmonauts, would be launched first. “In seven and a half hours, Apollo spaceship manned by three astronauts will be launched from Cape Kennedy. In 24 hours, Apollo will approach the Soyuz ship and link up will be made. The system that will be formed will be operated as a single spacecraft. Within two days, spacemen will move from one ship to another, scientific and technical experiments will be made and there will be television transmissions to the earth. At the end of the third day, the spaceships will be undocked and will soon land on their respective territories.” Shatalov said he hoped manned Mars mission before end of 20th century would be international flight—“Possibly it will be the Soviet-American flight.” (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, L2)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
