The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
President Nixon sent to Congress United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Shaping a Durable Peace. The report recalled agreements made during the May 1972 Moscow Summit Meetings, including the agreement on a joint rendezvous and docking of Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. “Since the summit, all of the agreements have been carried out as expected. Our space agencies have conducted preliminary tests of models of the spacecraft docking system and crew training will begin this summer. The Joint Committee on Environmental Protection met in Moscow in September 1972 and planned 30 collaborative projects on a variety of subjects. . . . The Joint Commission on Science and Technology met in Washington in March 1973 and agreed to carry out some 25 projects in . . . energy, chemistry, biology, and agricultural research. American and Soviet naval officers will meet this year to review the agreement on reducing incidents between ships and aircraft. This process of cooperation has begun to engage an ever widening circle of people in various professions and government bureaus in both countries. Direct contact, exchanges of information and experience, and joint participation in specific projects will develop a fabric of relationships supplementing those at the higher levels of political leadership. Both sides have incentives to find additional areas for contact and cooperation, and I anticipate further agreements patterned on those already concluded.” (PD, 5/14/73, 455-653)
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
A Science editorial commented on the energy crisis: “A combination of environmental concerns and energy shortages is fostering wide-spread beggar-your-neighbor attitudes. Everyone wants cheap, unlimited energy, but all are prepared to fight tooth and nail to protect the environment and to prevent the location of energy facilities in their vicinity. It so happens that we are going to have neither cheap energy nor a perfect environment. Moreover, if we do not learn how to think nationally rather than parochially and to balance energy needs against environmental concerns, we are headed for trouble.” (Abelson, Science, 10/16/73, 657) November 17:	Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov discussed progress and problems of the astp to date in an interview published in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Generally, everything was progressing according to plan, but “as yet there is no unified search and docking system either on our or the American spacecraft. Only now are designers creating such a system on Apollo and Soyuz.” Spacecraft design and technical difficulties were being overcome, but there had been many problems. Personal relations between U.S. and Soviet crews and experts were very good: “The American astronauts are knowledgeable and highly skilled specialists. Suffice it to say that my opposite number, Colonel [Thomas P.] Stafford, has flown in space three times. Among ourselves we call the program . . . ‘the meeting on the Elbe’ in space. It was in 1945 that Soviet and American soldiers marked their joint victory over fascism by meeting on the Elbe. Thirty years later we dream of marking a victory over the accursed ‘cold war’ with a unique space ‘meeting on the Elbe.’ ” The language barrier had not yet been surmounted. “We are learning English, the Americans are learning Russian. It is said that Russian is the more difficult. But Stafford is courageously surmounting the barrier. Recently we were visited by Dr. [George M.] Low, deputy director of NASA, Eugene [N.] Cernan and Tom Stafford. Stafford made an entire speech on the space meeting [see Oct. 1-18] in relatively fluent Russian. And I assumed the role of translator.” (fbis-Sov, 12/6/73, B3)
The U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and NASA had agreed to a joint exhibit of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at the 30th International Exposition at LeBourget Airport, Paris, May 24 to June 3, NASA announced. Each agency would exhibit actual size models of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in docked configuration, (nasa Release 73-28)
The dismantling of the Federal fellowship program would liquidate some excesses but, “on balance, is a destructive move” at a time “when the need for some kinds of scientists and engineers is actually growing,” a Science editorial said. “After Sputnik was launched, this nation engaged in a frantic effort to expand its scientific capabilities. For a number of years government funds available for research in the physical and biomedical sciences increased rapidly. At the same time, the Apollo program was implemented. These developments created a shortage of scientists and engineers.” When Government support ceased to grow and unemployment arose, those in the Government who wanted to dismantle the fellowship program had had a useful excuse. But the unemployment argument was no longer valid. “The index of employment opportunities has climbed above 100. In some regions there already are shortages of engineers.” In years ahead, “this nation will encounter many unexpected problems requiring the skills of scientists and engineers. We may well come to regret bitterly the fact that we have been unable to do better than follow destructive blow-hot, blow-cold educational policies. We should adopt the more realistic assumption that this nation must have good science, good medicine, and good engineering, and we should make it possible for the top students, regardless of financial ability, to participate.” (Abelson, Science, 4/6/73, 13) April 6—13:	Two satellites, five aircraft, and ten surface vessels were used to study the New York Bight. The waters extending from Staten Island to more than 32 km (20 mi) east of Asbury Park, N.J.—used as a dump for sewer sludge, acid wastes, and dredging and excavation materials— were dyed green. Water circulation at and near the surface was mapped to plan balanced use of the coastal environment and to assess the impact of natural and man-made substances on the coastal zone. Data gathered by sensors on the aircraft and on Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) were checked for accuracy by measurements gathered by surface vessels. The program was managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with participation by NASA and the Navy, Environmental Protection Agency, Coast Guard, Federal Aviation Administration, and State of New Jersey. (noaa Release 73-60) April 8:	The first closeup radar images of the moon’s surface—obtained during the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission—had been assembled by scientists and engineers from Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the Univ. of Utah, the Univ. of Michigan, and the Center for Astrogeology of the U.S. Geological Survey, NASA announced. The “pictures,” products of the Apollo lunar sounder experiment, would eventually provide a geological cross-section of the moon, detailing subsurface structure to a depth of 1.3 km (0.8 mi), (nasa Release 73-65)
Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, U.S. Secretary of State, said in a speech before The Pilgrims in London that the 1973 energy crisis should become “the economical equivalent of the Sputnik challenge of 1957. Only this time, the giant step for mankind will be one that America and its closest partners take together.” He proposed “that the nations of Europe, North America and Japan establish an energy action group of senior and prestigious individuals, with a mandate to develop within three months an initial action program for collaboration in all areas of the energy problem.” (Text)
The U.S. flight crew for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission was announced by NASA. Prime crew: Thomas P. Stafford, commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; Donald K, ) Slayton, docking module pilot. Backup crew: Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Louama. Support crew: Richard H. Truly, Robert F.	Ovennyer, Robert L. Crippen, and Karol J. Bobko. Joint crew training would begin in the summer of 1973, when Soviet cosmonauts would visit the U.S. for several weeks. U.S. astronauts would spend an equal time in Russia in the fall of 1973. (NASA Release 73-15)
A Tass photo published by the New York Times showed Soviet ApolloSoyuz Test Project Cosmonauts Valery N. Kubasov and Aleksey A. Leonov practicing moving from a Soyuz spacecraft in the water to a rescue raft. The site of the training was not identified. {NYT, 7/19/73, }) . . . .
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Natal, Brazil, carrying a Univ. of California barium cloud experiment. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 18-Dec. 1: U.S. flight crews for the July 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission visited the U.S.S.k. for familiarization with the Soyuz spacecraft and discussions with Soviet counterparts on the flight plan. The discussions, held mostly at the Yuri A. Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training near Moscow, included joint crew activities and onboard documentation. Astronauts participating were Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. astp commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; and Donald K. Slayton, docking module pilot; backup crew Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma; support crew Robert F. Overmyer and Karol J. Bobko; and Eugene A. Cernan, Special Assistant to the U.S. astp Technical Director. At a press conference following the Nov. 29 concluding meeting, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said the U.S.S.R. planned further manned space flights—individual Soyuz missions and linkups of Soyuz with .the Salyut orbital platform—before the joint U.S — U.S.S.R. mission. Stafford told newsmen he was completely satisfied that the Soyuz would be “a great ship to fly.” He said there would be two joint training sessions in 1974, in Moscow in July and at Johnson Space Center in September, (nasa Release 73-250; Smith, NYT, 11/30/73, 9)
A Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the U.S. stake in the Skylab missions, endangered by damage to the Sky-lab 1 Workshop during launch May 14: “Even if the present Skylab must be written off, the nation should not dismantle its unique capacity for manned space exploration. We have the equipment, including the Saturn V rocket, to mount another attempt in 15 months or so. More importantly, NASA currently has the brains and knowhow to operate in space with amazing powers of foresight and improvisation, which are being put to a severe test this week. The dispersal of this talent would be a loss to mankind in ways that can only be imagined.” (W Star & News, 5/24/73, A18) May 24-June 3: The 30th and largest Paris Air Show at Le Bourget Airport, marred by tragedy at its end, featured the first joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. pavilion—displaying models of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft to be used in the July 1975 joint mission—and a record display of aircraft, subsystems, and equipment from manufacturers in 19 countries. The aircraft included the Anglo-French Concorde and Soviet production model Tu-144 supersonic transports, U.S. prototype Northrop F-5E international fighter and Grumman Navy F-14 variable-geometry air-superiority fighter, Soviet I1-62-M medium-range transport and Yak general-aviation aircraft, and the first European A-300B Airbus. nasa Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley said at the opening of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. exhibit that NASA was “pleased to have the opportunity to demonstrate . . . the rapid progress our joint working groups have made. . . . During the past year, American and Soviet engineers have worked closely together in an atmosphere of good will to solve many complicated and technical problems. We are confident that the target date for a joint mission in Earth orbit in 1975 can be met. This joint mission will be an exciting adventure as well as a highly visible expression of our nation’s belief in the great value of exploring and using space in cooperation with other nations.” On May 30 the Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt met with Soviet Cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov, Valery N. Kubasov, and Anatoly V. Filipchenko— of the U.S.S.R. prime and backup crew for the Apollo-Soyuz mission— and Dr. Aleksey S. Yeliseyev at the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Pavilion. They inspected a model of the Soviet Lunokhod 2 lunar roving vehicle and Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft models and were invited aboard the Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport by its principal designer Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev. On June 3 the Tu-144 crashed into the French village of Goussainville, near Le Bourget Airport, while finishing a series of demonstration flights. All six crewmen, including pilot Mikhail Kozlov, and seven persons on the ground were killed and 28 injured. The aircraft was destroyed. A team of French and Soviet officials was appointed immediately to investigate the accident, which observers said might have resulted from attempted aerobatics. Witnesses said the Tu-144’s performance had been erratic just before it crashed. {Av Wk, 5/28/73, 6/4/73, 6/11/73; Shapley text; Tass, fibs-Sov, 6/1/73, F5; 6/4/73, F3) May 25:	Skylab 2 was launched from Kennedy Space Center Complex 39, Pad A, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle to carry Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz to join the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop for repairs and a 28-day mission [see May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission], (nasa prog off)
NASA and Soviet space officials had agreed to permit representatives of the U.S. and U.S.S.R. to observe and advise in Apollo and Soyuz flight control rooms during orbital phase of July 1975 joint mission, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. No agreement had been reached to permit U.S. observers at the Soviet launch site during liftoff of Soyuz spacecraft. [See March 15-30.] (Av Wk, 1/1/73, 13)
Kennedy Space Center announced a $10 517 967 contract extension, through July 31, 1975, to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp. to process the Saturn IB 2nd stage for launching the Apollo spacecraft to rendezvous and dock with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft during the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. The award brought total contract value to $101 995 628. A six-month, $7 909 148 contract extension to Bendix Corp. Launch Support Div. brought to $240 857 165 the total value of a contract for launch support services, including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39. An $11831263 extension to an International Business Machines Corp. contract would provide launch support services to Saturn IB booster instrument units, for possible Skylab rescue vehicles and the astp launch. The extension, through July 1975, brought total contract value to $58 772 009. (icsc Releases 290-73, 291—73, 292-73)
Johnson Space Center announced the issuance of requests for proposals to build hydraulic actuators for space shuttle applications and to test them under simulated space conditions. The actuators were being considered for aerodynamics-surface and thrust-vector control on the shuttle. Proposals, leading to a firm-fixed-price research-and-development contract, were due by April 2. Work was to be concluded 12 mos after the contract award, (jsc Release 73-27) March 15-30:	Five U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint working groups met at Johnson Space Center and reached agreements on the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Technical specialists from each country would be in the other country’s control center during the mission and flight crews and specialists would be trained and made familiar with each country’s spacecraft and systems. Under a flammability agreement, the U.S. would provide fire resistant material for the Soviet cosmonauts’ flight clothing; the cosmonauts would use an Apollo headset in the Apollo spacecraft for communications to the Soyuz spacecraft over the Soviet communications link; the Soviet TV camera used in the Apollo spacecraft would be in a fireproof hermetically sealed container; and the still camera and film used by the cosmonauts in Apollo would be stored in a flameproof container. The U.S. would provide a 16 mm camera for Soviet use during docked operations in both Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. Agreements were reached on the prescribed procedure if either country encountered anomalous results during test activities that concerned the other country and on mission planning for rendezvous. The groups agreed that additional testing was required on the docking seals, that the U.S. would limit Apollo control system thrusting in the roll axis to two thrusters to preclude excessive structural loads on the Soyuz spacecraft, and that an additional docking test could be performed on the second day, with the Apollo systems passive and the Soyuz active. Both countries agreed to perform and exchange safety assessments in fire, pyrotechnic devices, cabin pressure, and propulsion and control systems. The 47-man delegation of Soviet scientists and engineers included Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and the Soviet astp Technical Director, Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev. At a March 19 press conference Bushuyev and U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney agreed that cordial, friendly, and cooperative progress was being made in planning the joint mission. Preliminary drawings of the two spacecraft had been exchanged so that mockups could be built. (C. M. Lee presentation to Aerospace Advisory Panel, 4/10/73; msc Release 73-24; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; Wilford, NYT, 3/20-73, 32; jsc pio)
“The public has grown increasingly sanguine about NASA’s manned missions, almost considering them routine, because of the agency’s perfect safety record on manned missions.” The Aug. 2 oxidizer leak had shown “that the missions are anything but free of hazard, and the mental stress imposed upon the three astronauts must be intense. We hope, of course, that the mission will continue for the full 59 days and that the astronauts will then make it home safely. But if there is any serious question about the condition of the Apollo ship, then NASA certainly should exercise its option of sending a rescue ship up to Skylab and ending the mission in advance of schedule.” (B Sun, 8/5/73) August 6:	A Chicago Sun-Times editorial commented on space rescue capability as the Skylab 3 astronauts, manning the Orbital Workshop since July 28, conducted their first extravehicular activity: “There is a certain amount of calculated risk involved at this period of space experimentation. In a real emergency Russia might be able to help out with one of its spacecraft. When the shuttle program becomes effective, a reusable winged spaceship could be made ready for launching in two hours.” Meantime, “all we can do is trust that the good luck, astronauts’ skill and inventiveness of the space program people that have provided magnificent results to date continue during the current series of missions.” (C Sun-Times, 8/6/73)
A Washington Star and Daily News editorial commented on the June 3 crash of the Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft during the May 24-June 3 Paris Air Show: “Coming on the heels of a series of Soviet air disasters which have killed more than 600 people in the last 18 months and many failures of its space program, the image of Soviet technology at this point is not so reassuring. . . . The crash of the Russian SST is certain to affect the commercial prospects of the Concorde as well.” (W Star & News, 6/8/73, A18)
It was “puzzling,” a Washington Star and Daily News editorial said, “that Soviet leaders remain so secretive about their space problems, when the general nature of a mishap cannot be hidden from modem tracking equipment and more openness could lead to a sharing of corrective knowledge. The Russian announcement that the last Salyut had merely completed its mission . . . fooled no one. Greater frankness, certainly, will be needed in the joint mission [U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project] requiring the confidence of each country’s experts in the other’s equipment and ability.” (W Star & News, 5/9/73, A23) May 10:	Skylab 1, scheduled for launch May 14, would carry 950 kg (2100 lbs) of food, including lobster newburg, prime ribs of beef, filet mignon, asparagus, strawberries, and after dinner mints, the Washington Post quoted Dr. Malcolm C. Smith, Chief of Food and Nutrition at Johnson Space Center, as saying. Each Skylab mission would carry more than 70 different foods prepared by an automatic meal-reconstitution module. Semisolid food could be eaten out of the can with a fork and spoon and prevented from flying around in the weightless environment by a polyethylene membrane. Beverages could be consumed one swallow at a time from a multichambered bellowslike canister. Previously, astronauts had to drink the entire beverage at one time once the valve was opened. Fruit juices were fortified with potassium gluconate to replace the potassium lost in weightlessness. The use of alcoholic beverages had been rejected because of medical drawbacks and public opinion. The astronauts arranged their own meals with the correct combinations of nutrients and calories. Frozen foods would be used the first time in the U.S. space program. The cost of the Skylab food was $26.35 per man per day. Twenty percent more food than required would be carried. There would also be a rescue food supply of 16 days for three men. (Ross, W Post, 5/10/73, El)
Science & Government Report commented on results of the March 19-21 Washington, D.C., meeting of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation: “What is clear is that after two postponements of the Commission’s debut and a good deal of indecisiveness, at least on the Washington end, concerning how much R&D [research and development] cooperation to offer the Soviets, both parties are approaching the relationship with caution and no evidence of haste. We will no doubt be seeing more Soviet researchers than ever before, and access to labs in the USSR will be eased a bit for American visitors, but the politically inspired match of the two research communities should not be mistaken for a raging love affair.” (Sci & Govt Rpt, 4/1/73, 3)	... April 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified on nasa’s role in supersonic transport aircraft development before the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans during FY 1974 appropriation hearings: “I don’t think we can turn our back on supersonic technology. This is a fact of life. Military planes are flying supersonically in this country; ssts are flying in Europe and Russia. We can not just say we don’t want to build a transport ourselves and therefore we should turn off all technology in this area. What we are doing in NASA is trying to address ourselves to the main problems with supersonic flight, both military and civilian. The main problems include the economic factors involved, the pollution of the stratosphere, and the noise.” NASA was the only agency qualified to investigate these problems but “I do think that the Congress has responsibility to determine any future development of a supersonic transport in this country, at least as far as the Government’s support of such a program, and it is not our intention to in any way change that decision.” (Transcript)
Russian translation computers of the Foreign Translation Div. of WrightPatterson Air Force Rase, Ohio, would be used in the exchange of technical and scientifie information necessary for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The computers, called Systrain, translated Russian to English at the rate of 100 000 to 300 000 words per hour using 10 topical glossaries and 300 000 terms. Systrain could translate multiple-meaning Russian words, resolve problems of ambiguity, analyze sentence structure, and provide finished English translations of technical documents, (afsc Newsreview, 3/73, 12) April 1:	Kenneth E. Hodges joined NASA as Director, Aeronautical Operating Systems Office, in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. He had recently finished a one-year tour of duty with the Aeronautics and Space Council and formerly had been a flight-test engineer with Lockheed-California Co. (nasa Hq WB, 4/9/73, 1)
Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. director of cosmonaut training, denied Western press reports of recent Soviet space failures and said there would be manned Soviet launches before the 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission, during a Moscow interview with U.S. correspondents. Of Soyuz 2 (launched April 3 and reported to have disintegrated in space) he said, “This craft this time was not intended for manned flight. The experiment was successfully completed and we are satisfied with the results.” Salyut 2 had had a “much more narrow purpose” than Salyut 1 (launched April 19, 1971, as a space station). Salyut 2 was “intended to finalize some design peculiarities. As soon as it fulfilled its task, it finished its existence.” Several manned space flights were planned as part of the Soviet space program and to test design changes in the Soyuz spacecraft for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp). The U.S.S.R. was considering admitting Western journalists to their space facilities for the first time and the establishment of a press center at Baykonur Cosmodrome, but newsmen would not be permitted beyond 7 km (4.3 mi) of the launch site, (upi, Inti Herald Tribune, 6/27/73; B Sun, 6/27/73, A2)
Concorde 02, reproduction model of the Anglo-French supersonic transport, flew from Washington, D.C., Dulles Airport to Paris’ Orly Field in 3 hrs 33 min. The aircraft had participated in dedication of the Dallas-Fort Worth airport Sept. 21. (Concorde Bull 12, 1/1/74) September 26-27:	Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D—Wash.) explained S. 2495, a bill to apply NASA’s expertise to solving domestic problems, during the first day of two-day hearings on the state of the aerospace industry by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Sen. Magnuson, with Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Sen. John V. Tunney (D-Calif.), introduced the bill Sept. 27. The bill, the Technology Resources Survey and Applications Act, would amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to provide “an organization within NASA to carry out programs ... to resolve critical national problems. This would expand an activity already underway within NASA and enable us to better utilize a capability which has already exhibited an impressive record of success.” The programs would be determined by a National Technology Resource Council of Cabinet members and heads of technological agencies, which would make its recommendations to the President. Sen. Magnuson suggested changing NASA’s name to the National Applications of Science Administration. “I do believe the name . . . would accurately reflect the new role which my bill attempts to create for NASA.” Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified that foreign competition for U.S. and international aerospace markets was currently “of a scope, determination, and quality that we have not had to face since World War II. The underpinning of strong research and development programs—vital to our technological advance—is being downgraded to a serious degree. There is an alarming scarcity of private sources of financing for the development and production of new commercial aircraft. As a low-profit industry, traditionally averaging a profit about half that of other manufacturing industries, we lack the resources for reinvestment, cushioning against risk, and attracting investors. Above all, there is uncertainty in this transitional period about future national gods which might utilize our capabilities. Will we continue to contribute primarily to space exploration, defense, and long-range air travel, or will we next find ourselves emphasizing such efforts as environmental control, law enforcement, health delivery services, housing, and urban mass transit?” Dr. Wernher von Braun—Vice President, Engineering and Development, Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning—testified on the future of satellite communications: “There is no field in which the goals of space applications are expanding at a faster rate.” Ever since NASA demonstrated “that radio signals bounced off passive reflection satellites such as the Echo balloon or rebroadcast by active repeater spacecraft such as Early Bird, worldwide communications by satellite have been growing. . . . Satellites, by providing international telephone and television service, are an important force in overcoming regional and national barriers. It is difficult to maintain hostility and isolation in the presence of free communications.” Satellite communications would “soon be commonplace in our country.” With the advent of the reusable space shuttle to service and repair satellites in the 1980s, “even nations with limited fiscal resources can put in a network of smaller, far less expensive ground stations.” Thanks to NASA programs initiated a few years ago, “the United States is still quite active in the area of pioneering new technology for communications satellites.” (Transcript) September 27—29:	The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 12, carrying cosmonauts l/c Vasily G. Lazarev and flight engineer Oleg G. Makarov, from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:18 pm local time (3:18 pm Moscow time; 8:18 am edt) into earth orbit with 229-km (142.3-mi) apogee, 180-km (111.8-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Soviet news agency Tass announced the objectives of the two-day mission were to test improved flight systems, test manual and automatic control in various flight conditions, and obtain spectrographic data of separate sections of the earth “for the solution of economic problems.” The flight would further improve development of manned spacecraft. After six hours in flight the cosmonauts reported they had adjusted to weightlessness and were carrying out all scheduled activities. All spacecraft systems were functioning normally. During the first day, Lazarov—45-yr-old air force test pilot and physician—and Makarov— 40-yr-old engineer who had taken part in developing the control board and flight program for Yuri A. Gagarin’s Vostok 1 mission of April 12, 1961—maneuvered their spacecraft in orbit to test manual and automatic control and piloting techniques. The spacecraft was moved into a higher and nearly circular orbit, with parameters reported by Tass as 345-km (214.4-mi) apogee, 326-km (202.6-mi) perigee, 91-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The cosmonauts also made spectrographs of natural formations of the earth’s surface. They were reported Sept. 28 to be in high spirits and good physical condition. Tass reported a new spacecraft design and a new spacesuit, “very simple and comfortable,” were being tested. Spacesuits were worn for launch and descent but not during the flight itself. On Sept. 29 the crew oriented their spacecraft and fired the braking engine. The landing module separated from the spacecraft and entered descent trajectory. The parachute system was deployed at 7.6 km (4.7 mi) above the earth and engines softlanded the craft 400 km (250 mi) southwest of Karaganda in the Kazakhstan Steppe at 2:34 pm Moscow time (7:34 am edt). A medical check at the landing site showed “the state of [the cosmonauts’] health is good.” Soyuz 12 was the first Soviet manned space flight since the 1971 Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 mission. Soyuz 10 (launched April 23, 1971, carrying three cosmonauts) had docked with the orbiting Salyut 1 space laboratory (launched April 19) but the cosmonauts had not boarded. American observers believed the Soyuz spacecraft had spun out of control, causing the cosmonauts to become ill and necessitating an early return to earth. Three cosmonauts launched June 6, 1971, on Soyuz 11 had docked with and boarded Salyut 1. They worked successfully in orbit for 24 days but were found dead on landing, from pressure loss in the landing craft, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; fbis-Sov, 9/28/73, Ul-A>; 10/1/73, Ul—3; SBD, 9/28/73, 138; Kaiser, W Post, 9/28/73, Al; Shabad, NYT, 9/30/73, 1; Seeger, W Post, 9/30/73, 145) September 27:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite on a Titan IIIB-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base into an orbit with a 384.6-km (239-mi) apogee, 128.8-km (80-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.5° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 29. (Pres Rpt 74; Wilson, W Post, 10/16/73, A7)
Cosmos 573 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 401-km (249.2-mi) apogee, 195-km (121.2mi) perigee, 90.5-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The satellite reentered June 17. The Western press later quoted a Soviet source as identifying the mission as a test of an unmanned Soyuz spacecraft in preparation for an upcoming manned launch. Western tracking stations reported the orbit was identical to one used during manned Soviet flights. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/18/73, 265; B Sun, 1/6/13)
