The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was “one of the few tangible survivors of that champagne-bubble atmosphere of detente along with the badly tarnished SALT [Strategic Arms Limitations Talks] agreements,” Aviation Week and Space Technology said in an editorial. From the Soviet viewpoint the goals were obvious: to tap into the mainstream of U.S. technology, to blur the international image of U.S. superiority with the appearance of parity by flying a joint manned mission, and to develop the technical base for international space rescue capability. U.S. goals remained obscure. The mission would provide the answers to some experimented questions: Could the U.S. and U.S.S.R. work together in a joint space program? Could an international rescue capability be developed? Could the ASTP experience be expanded to future joint space ventures? That ASTP had survived to the final countdown was a tribute to the flexibility, stamina, and ingenuity of the technical working groups of both countries. A formidable series of technical, philosophical, linguistic, and operational problems had been solved and the investment by both countries had been substantial. ASTP had been “partially worth the effort.. . to have a sizable group of NASA and industry technicians get some practical hard-headed experience in working with their Soviet counterparts and acquiring a realistic view of their technical capabilities and philosophy. We think the rest of the value of the mission will come from determining just how serious the Soviets are about future joint ventures in space and how much they really want to give and how much they want to take.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5 May 75, 7) U.S. communications equipment checkout and docking target alignment tests were completed at the Baykonur cosmodrome by midMay, in time for Dr. Low and a group of NASA officials to take an inspection and orientation tour of the cosmodrome. The group visited the launch pad from which the ASTP Soyuz spacecraft would be launched and the Soviet equivalent of Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) where the group inspected the prime launch vehicle and prime backup Soyuz spacecraft. At the 22 May flight readiness review (FRR) chaired by Dr. Low and Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, acting president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences replacing the ailing Mstislav V. Keldysh, Soviet and U.S. space officials signed the report indicating that the “Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was proceeding in accordance with the agreed schedule and ready to proceed toward the launching planned for July 15,1975.” Before the signing, U.S. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney and his Soviet counterpart Konstantin D. Bushuyev gave a 5-hr review of the technical histories of their respective spacecraft. Reporting that no major problems remained, Lunney and Bushuyev said that 133 documents had been negotiated and signed and only the postflight review, remained to be prepared. Working Group chairmen made their final presentations indicating that all major tasks had been completed. (NASA Release 75—156; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285—301; Reuters, NYT, 23 May 75, 33)
NASA’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Chester M. Lee said at a NASA Headquarters press briefing that a number of modifications had been made on the Apollo command and service modules to accommodate the special requirements of the July U.S.—U.S.S.R. ASTP mission. Changes to the command module included a modified umbilical to accommodate docking-module functions, an additional TV camera and recorder for coverage of joint activities, modified controls and displays for new equipment and experiments, additional equipment for communications and TV coverage via Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974), modified stowage, added intervehicular intercom, and additional VHF-FM communications capability at the U.S.S.R. frequency. Changes in the service module included added heaters and insulation of propellant systems for solar inertial attitude, added propellant storage module for increased attitude-control and backup deorbit capability, and deletion of the unused main propellant tank. The docking module would be carried in the same position in which the lunar module had been during lunar landing missions. It would be extracted in the same manner, by separating the CSM from the booster once in orbit, turning around, and pulling out the docking module with the nose of the CSM. In response to questioning, Lee said that the U.S. cost of the ASTP mission would fall within the $245-mi]lion congressional authorization. Although the Soviets had not quoted a specific amount, Lee believed that the launch of the two unmanned Soyuz spacecraft to check out modifications made for ASTP, the launch of a manned mission, and the preparations for two complete spacecraft and crews would indicate that the Soviets were investing “at least the equivalent” in resources. (Transcript)
NASA’s Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May 1974 into geosynchronous orbit) began a 6-wk move from its position 35 900 km over the Pacific Ocean west of the Galapagos Islands to a new location above Lake Victoria in eastern Africa. The satellite, which was expected to reach its new location by 1 July, would be checked out in time to participate in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in mid-July. During that mission Ats 6 would track the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and relay TV and data from the two spacecraft to earth, marking the first time a satellite had been used to relay TV from a manned spacecraft. The new location also would bring Ats 6 within range of India for the 1-yr Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) scheduled to begin 1 Aug. During the experiment—a cooperative effort by NASA and the Indian Space Research Organization—the Indian government would relay daily educational TV programs to 5000 villages and cities throughout India. After the experiment, the satellite would be moved back to a position within range of the U.S., where it would be used for further experimentation. (NASA Release 75-153)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived at its new operating station at 35° east longitude over equatorial East Africa where it would relay communications from the docked Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft during the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Upon completion of ASTP, Ats 6 would be used by India to transmit educational TV programs to several thousand remote villages. The satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one of the three momentum wheels used to control spacecraft attitude. A group of hydrazine gas thrusters was being used as a backup system for stabilization while ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center were analyzing the problem and developing remedies. (NASA Release 75 — 194)
President Ford, in a White House ceremony, presented the National Space Club’s Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Skylab 4 Commander Gerald P. Carr on behalf of the nine astronauts who inhabited the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 14 May 1973) during periods in 1973 and 1974. The astronauts were cited for their “exceptional accomplishments in the Skylab program .... When the entire mission was jeopardized the first crew, through uncommon ingenuity, saved the mission. The scientific content of the program is of extraordinary significance, in all disciplines. The demonstration that men can live and work in space for extended periods sets the stage for future exploration of space.” At the Space Club’s 18th annual Goddard memorial dinner, the following awards were presented: Award Recipient (Affiliation) Citation Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Memorial Trophy NASA Skylab Astronauts Charles P. Conrad Joseph P. Kerwin Paul J. Weitz Alan L. Bean Owen K. Garriott Jack R. Lousma Gerald P. Carr Edward G. Gibson William R. Pogue For their exceptional accomplishments in Skylab program Astronautics Engineer Award John M. Thole (NASA) For direction of the OSO and ATS programs Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award NASA-Fairchild Industries Ats 6 team For demonstration of a significant advance in space communications Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship Dr. Bruce F. Smith (NASA) For demonstrated abilities in addressing, theoretically and experimentally, a broad range of astrophysical problems Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Scholarship Alice K. Babcock (Georgetown Univ.) To continue higher scientific education Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Historical Essay James E. Oberg (USAF) For essay, “Russia Meant to Win the Moon Race?” Nat’l Space Club Press Award Roy Neal (NBC) For resourcefulness in reporting the U.S. space effort {PD, 14 April 75, 372; program)
Soviet engineers had been working on a “spaceplane” to carry cosmonauts to and from orbit as part of a long-term project to establish a major space platform in the 1980s, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Western observers had expected the reusable spacecraft to be launched by an expendable booster, but CSM reported that the rumored aim was to fly it from the back of a ramjet-powered boost vehicle that would return to base. The project was thought to be linked with development of a large multiman modular space station that the Soviets expected to assemble in orbit before 1980. CSM reported that U.S. Air Force reconnaissance satellites had noted preparations at the Baykonur Cosmodrome to retest the huge SLX—14 booster, scheduled to launch the station. The SLX—14 had been delayed for 5 yr by a series of mishaps: Two launch complexes had been built for the SLX—14, one of which burned during a 1969 fueling test. Intelligence reports indicated it had been rebuilt. In an August 1975 issue of Sputnik magazine, reprinted from the Soviet Naukal Zhin, U.S.S.R. Chief of Cosmonaut Training Vladimir A. Shatalov confirmed Soviet interest in a reusable space vehicle. Although “the future of cosmonautics is largely connected with longterm orbital stations,” he said, the fact that carrier rockets were extremely expensive and could be used only once was “becoming a serious brake on the development of cosmonautics and relevant research.” Neither the airplane nor the spaceship had proven capable of flying into orbit and then reentering. But there is every reason to believe that in the not-so-distant future aviation and cosmonautics would “draw appreciably closer together.” Shatalov said Soviet and U.S. scientists had already made important high-altitude and highspeed experiments. Shatalov visualized “a new-type spaceship” consisting of a smaller one launched from a larger one after reaching required speed. The carrier craft would return to a landing field, and the smaller craft would orbit, accomplish its mission, and then land. “Creation of an apparatus with greater orbital maneuverability would . . . make it possible ... to deliver satellites on orbits in the spacecraft’s freight compartment, serve and repair them in space and bring back to earth samples of explorations and observations and even the satellites themselves if they go out of order.” Although “creation of this new type of space apparatus” posed a host of technical problems, “modern science and technology can solve them” and “the time was not far off when such a plane would make its maiden flight.” (Gatland, CSM, 28 July 75, 11; Sputnik, “Plane for Outer Space,” Aug 75, 68-71)
During recovery operations of the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, the Apollo spacecraft would not be retrieved by helicopter as usual on Apollo missions, Dr. Donald E. Stullken, chief of Johnson Space Center’s Mission Support Branch, said during a press briefing. Instead, the recovery ship would steam up alongside the command module and haul it aboard using the ship’s boat and aircraft crane. Navy personnel would open the hatch and the crew would step out on the ship’s deck. Arnold D. Aldrich, deputy manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at JSC, said that the most extensive modification required for the ASTP mission was redesigning the Soyuz spacecraft to accommodate the newly added docking system. The front end of the Soyuz had been modified with respect to structural configuration, thermal design, and the requirement to fit all the new system under the launch shroud that covered the entire Soyuz during the boost phase. John E. McLeaish, JSC Public Affairs Officer, said that NASA would provide U.S. and Soviet air-to-ground communications, air-to-air communications, and U.S.- and U.S.S.R.-originated commentary for newsmen during the mission. All Russian would be translated simultaneously into English, using a “voice-over” technique; a few communication lines would transmit raw Russian with no translation. The U.S.S.R. would provide an interpreter to assist newsmen in the U.S. with interpretation or explanation, if necessary. Questioned about the political significance of the ASTP mission, U.S. crew member Donald K. Slayton replied, “I think we’d be naive to assume that this program is going to end all conflicts between our two societies, certainly. I think . . . it’s a step in that direction, but there’s little doubt in my mind that we’re going to continue to have conflicts in many different areas. However, if we can kind of break the ground and get at least one area where we continue to work constructively on something, we’re certainly not going to end up in any major confrontation.” (Transcripts)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph H. McConnell told a stockholders’ meeting that ComSatCorp was finalizing a contract with Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s Marisat maritime communications satellite scheduled for launch in summer 1975. McConnell also said that ComSatCorp had agreed to lease one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium led by Phillips Petroleum Co. Marisat would make available, for the first time, reliable voice, data, teletype, and facsimile communications to ships at sea and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell said that the success of the Marisat program would depend on the Navy’s use of the system and on ComSatCorp’s ability to develop a substantial market in the commercial shipping industry. (Snider, W Star, 14 May 75, FI) 13 —14 May: More than 500 representatives from government, industry, and universities attended a 2-day conference at Lewis Research Center to review progress in aerospace propulsion. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that high-speed performance was no longer the top priority among the propulsion researchers, emphasis having switched to quiet, clean, and fuel-conserving engines. Presentations and panel discussions included aircraft noise-reduction technology, fuel-conservative engine technology, upper-atmosphere pollution-measurement programs, and engine systems and component technology. LeRC’s John B. Whitlow reported that new technology generated by NASA’s supersonic cruise airplane research (SCAR) would develop an engine far different from the afterburning supersonic turbojet that was to have powered the first U.S. supersonic transport. A potential new engine might be a duct-burning turbofan with features such as a variable-geometry fan that allowed the engine to move as much as possible between straight turbojet and straight turbofan operational cycles. Other objectives for future NASA-developed SST propulsion systems included a 7400-km range with outstanding economy at speeds from mach 2.2 to mach 2.7, good subsonic cruise characteristics, good hold endurance and economy, and low takeoff noise. Whitlow stressed that, because of noise limitations, future SSTs would not be straight turbojets, and SCAR researchers were concentrating on low-bypass-ratio turbofans. As bypass ratio also affects engine weight, fuel consumption, drag, and cost-effective performance, no single bypass ratio of a conventional engine could meet all desired goals simultaneously. Thus SCAR researchers were developing variable-cycle engine technology that could tailor the bypass ratio and perhaps the fan/pressure ratio for optimum performance. Candidate engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass supersonic turbofan, a duct-burning turbofan, and a rear-valve variable-cycle engine. (LeRC Release 75—19; Yaffee, Av Wk, 14 July 75, 46- 49) 25.5 hr into the simulated mission. With both Soviet and U.S. crewmen participating in simulators in their respective countries and control centers fully manned, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft were “launched” and put through various maneuvers. Communications between the two control centers included voice, teletype, datafax, and TV. During the simulation, a technical problem prevented observers in Houston from hearing the two Soviet cosmonauts; NASA officials said later that that problem should not happen during a real flight. No other major problems were reported. A second simulation begun at 6:30 am CDT 15 May and continuing for 56 hr rehearsed Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, docking, crew transfers, and undocking and final separation. A third simulation, begun at 6:30 am CDT 19 May, was cancelled when the command module simulator in Houston did not work properly. The simulation, a 9-hr rehearsal of rendezvous and docking, was successfully completed 20 May. Final simulations by Houston and Moscow control centers and crewmen were scheduled for 30 June and 1 July. (NASA Release 75 — 141; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 16 May 75, Ul; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285; UPI, NYT, 14 May 75, 69)
Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, relaxing on the eve of their launch for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, viewed the film White Sun of the Desert. The film, following a tradition set by the cosmonauts’ predecessors in space, was a Russian action movie set during the civil war after the Bolshevik revolution in 1917. (Wren, NYT, 16 July 75, 1)
A Soyuz spacecraft, launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome and carrying Cosmonauts Vasily Lazarev and Oleg Makarov, was returned to earth shortly after launch when the launch vehicle failed to perform normally. Tass reported, “On the third-stage stretch the parameters of the carrier rocket’s movement deviated from the preset values and an automatic device produced the command to discontinue the flight under the program and detach the spacecraft for return to earth.” Tass also reported that the purpose of the mission had been to continue experiments aboard the Salyut 4 space station (launched 26 Dec. 1974). The Soyuz softlanded southwest of Gorno-Altaisk in Western Siberia. The search and rescue service brought the cosmonauts, both in good condition, back to the cosmodrome. During a telephone conference on 8 April, Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R. technical director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, told his U.S. counterpart, Glynn S. Lunney, that the launch vehicle that failed was not the version of the booster that would be used for the July ASTP launch. He promised to provide Lunney with additional details on the failure after they became available. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 7 April 75, Ul; NASA Release 75—97; W Star, 7 April 75, A4)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 782, a biological satellite carrying 4 U.S. experiments as well as materials from Russia, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, to be recovered in Soviet territory in about 3 wks. Launched from Plesetsk into an orbit with 405 km apogee, 227 km perigee, 62.8° inclination, and 90.5 min period, the satellite provided an opportunity for U.S. scientists to fly biology and weightlessness experiments that would otherwise have had to await flights of the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Last U.S. biology research spacecraft, Biosatellite 3, had been launched in 1969. Cosmos 782 was the first satellite equipped to simulate gravity in space, to compare effects on biological processes with those of weightlessness. A specially constructed centrifuge, consisting of a small disk that would rotate at a constant speed, would create a centrifugal force equal to gravity on earth for packages placed at the right spot on the disk. Comparing the specimens exposed to lack of gravity during orbital flight with similar specimens feeling the pull of gravity would prove any effects had resulted from weightlessness. Results of the experiments should be available in about 90 days, according to the Tass news agency. Ames Research Center managed the U.S. participation in the Cosmos 782 flight. It had had no advance notice of the launch date, place of launch, or mode of orbital operation, although life limitations of the biology materials had dictated a launch near this date. NASA had been invited to participate in a second Soviet biosat mission in 1977, and had planned to fly Russian experiments on its Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (NYT, 27 Nov 75, 62M; NASA Release 75—292; SBD, 28 Nov 75, 145; Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 148)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov* one of the Soviet Union’s leading space scientists, died in Moscow at the age of 80. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Commission for Space Research and head of the State Research Institute of Engineering Studies, was one of the key scientists responsible for launching the world’s first satellite, Sputnik 1, 4 Oct. 1957. Blagonravov had begun his career in the military and much of his early work was on the development of automatic infantry weapons. He later turned to the development of spacecraft, making major design contributions to the Soviet Union’s Lunik I, launched 2 June 1959, as the first man-made object to fly by the moon. Blagonravov also represented the U.S.S.R. in many international organizations: He had been vicepresident of the International Space Research Committee, permanent U.S.S.R. representative on the United Nations Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for the Peaceful Use of Space, and permanent deputy Soviet representative on the U.N. Space Committee. In 1962 Blagonravov held discussions with Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, during which details for exchange of satellite data were worked out. (Moscow Domestic News Service, FBIS—Sov, 7 Feb 75, Ul; WPost, 7 Feb 75, C8; McElheny, NYT, 6 Feb 75, 34)
The development of space law, which had begun about the time of the launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 in 1957, was a unique process. “The problems are both literally and symbolically out of this world,” NASA General Counsel Neil S. Hosenball said in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Star. Does any state have the right to claim the natural resources of celestial bodies? Were earth’s criminal and civil laws applicable in space? What was the difference between establishing a planetary base and planting a nation’s flag? Which court would rule on extraterrestrial squabbles? These were some of the questions lawyers and politicians would have to consider in the space age. Few precedents existed, and no judge had yet heard a case in a legal dispute originating outside the earth’s atmosphere. In fact, a world court, recognized by all major powers, did not exist. In 1962, a United Nations ad hoc committee on peaceful uses of outer space had developed principles later incorporated into the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. These included a ban against military activity in outer space and against any nation’s claiming a section of space or a planet as its own. Other treaties dealt with specific points such as the rescue of astronauts and the registration of spacecraft and space stations. Hosenball stressed that most charters and treaties were drawn up ahead of time in anticipation of problems likely to occur as space exploration expanded. The Sentinel quoted G. P. Zhukov, chief legal counsel of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, as saying that detente between , the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had been assisted by the success of “legal regulation in space. . . . Man’s foot had not yet stepped on the surface of-the moon and we had already formulated what man could and could not do on the moon. The law was ahead of science.” (Orlando Sentinel Star, 12 Aug 75)
Flight Research Center pilots began flight tests as part of a cooperative industry-government program to measure noise levels of five business-class jet aircraft during various landing approach maneuvers. Object of the tests was to define noise characteristics for this class of aircraft and the effectiveness of alternate landing-approach procedures in reducing community noise levels. Using a Rockwell Sabreliner, Grumman Gulfstream II, Gates Learjet, Beech-Hawker 125 provided by the National Business Aircraft Association, and Lockheed Jet Star provided by NASA, FRC pilots flew four landing approaches over a microphone array. A normal 3° approach provided baseline information; a 3° decelerating approach with engines at reduced power, a 4° approach with normal power, and a two-segment approach starting with 6° angle and shallowing into a 3° approach provided additional data. (NASA Release 75-103) During practice sessions similar to those held in the U.S. 7 Feb.— 1 March, the participants practiced communications skills, transfer procedures, joint activities, and contingency situations, using the Soyuz simulator at the Gagarin Cosmonaut Center in Star City. On 19 April the crews visited the mission-control center at Kaliningrad and, on 28 April, became the second group of westerners to visit the Baykonur cosmodrome (French President Charles de Gaulle had been the first western visitor when he witnessed the launch of Cosmos 122 on 25 June 1966). At Baykonur the U.S. crewmen saw the actual flight hardware as well as the primary launch pad 2 km away, and the prime and backup crews each spent an hour in the Soyuz spacecraft. The astronauts later reported to the press that they had found no significant differences between the actual spacecraft and the simulators used during training. (Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 278—280; JSC Releases 75- 22, 75— 25; WPost, 30 April 75, A21 ,SBD, 18 April 75, 273; A&A 66, 223)
Allegations that the Soviet Union had been testing a laser system to blind U.S. spy satellites were discussed in an article in the Christian Science Monitor. A satellite watching Russia from a spot in the sky over the Indian Ocean had set off false alarms of a missile attack 18 Oct. when its sensitive instruments detected heat such as might result from the firing of missiles. The heat had originated from a fire caused by breaks in a natural gas pipeline, as later satellite photographs confirmed, but between the alarm and the photographs U.S. intelligence had speculated that the Soviets had trained lasers on the satellite to prevent detection, in violation of the U.S.-Soviet agreement on arms. The gas fires had set off other warnings after 18 Oct., apparently because the ruptures and fires occurred at different times and places in Russia in both October and November. CSM quoted an article in Aviation Week magazine questioning whether lasers could be used to prevent monitoring of military activity on the ground by satellites, noting that officials at the U.S. Arms Control Agency had discounted the reported incidents. Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were known to be spending large amounts on laser research, and the December issue of the authoritative Jane’s Weapon Systems had discussed the implications of laser research for military uses in both countries. (CSM, 18 Dec 75, 3; Miami Herald, 24 Dec 75, 8A; Ft. Myers News-Press, 28 Dec 75, 1)
Final joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. simulations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crews and flight controllers began at Johnson Space Center and at the Moscow Mission Control Center at 6:30 am CDT. The simulations picked up the count at 47 hrs 10 min into the mission and continued for 56 hrs, covering the joint portion of the mission including rendezvous, docking, crew transfers and joint activities, and undocking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. U.S. and Soviet crewmen participated in simulators in their respective countries while both flight-control centers were fully staffed. The U.S. crew would also participate in the countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center on 3 July. (JSC Release 75—61; Ezell eta/., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
Soviet officials gave western newsmen their first glimpse of a Soviet space center during a tour of the main Soviet flight-control center 24 km from Moscow. The Washington Post reported that the group led by the center’s technical director, Dr. Alberty V. Militsin, toured a 5-yr-old six-story brick and sandstone building acknowledged by Dr. Militsin to be one of several space facilities near Moscow. The operations room, which was similar to the control room at Johnson Space Center, contained five rows of consoles, each with telephones and closed-circuit TV screens. Mission Control Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev told the newsmen that the consoles were staffed during missions by from 15 to 24 officials and technicians. An illuminated world map on the wall showed tracking stations and the orbited paths of spacecraft. Electronic screens flashed flight information. Other support consoles, communications systems, and computers were located elsewhere in the building. Dr. Militsin said that the center had contact with Soyuz spacecraft in .each orbit for 5 to 25 min, depending on the orbit. The newsmen also visited the three-room suite near the main operations room assigned to nine U.S. technicians for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (Osnos, W Post, 13 May 75, A10)
