President Ford signed legislation reestablishing the post of White House science adviser, a job abolished by President Nixon 3 yr previously. The signing took place in the White House rose garden, at a ceremony attended by leading scientists. President Ford had asked for legislation to set up the position and the White House Office of Science and Technology on the recommendation of Vice President Rockefeller and at the urging of major scientific groups; the job had previously existed under executive order. Originally established by President Roosevelt during World War II, the position lapsed until 1957 when President Eisenhower reactivated it after the launch of Sputnik. President Ford was expected to make a early choice of science adviser, who would direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy and would also be a member of the Domestic Council and adviser to the National Security Council. (W Post, 12 May 76, A-21)
Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO—the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—had been responsible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972 noted IMCO’s interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’s Maritime Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study and recommend a program of experiments and development work that would be necessary to form a new organization. The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety committee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international conference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite system. IMCO’s secretary general was to invite all UN member states and interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agencies and other organizations. The conference set up two working committees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second working group would consider procurement and financial policy. The conference concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council, type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procurement policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters within national jurisdictions. As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organizational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The arrangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed, however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, maritime unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed” organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT. The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of governments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also developed a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31 countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on “the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions. The international conference resumed in London in February 1976 with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agencies and international organizations. Texts of two documents—a convention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)—were adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to a third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory committee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT. The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was attended by delegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia, as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the convention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the conference. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77) As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the NYT. The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking 2 lander, which Martin said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.” Meanwhile, two of Viking 1 ’s three biological instruments repeated their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting that the nutrient was being metabolized) as the first trial had. The photosynthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first sample, however. The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia, nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobiologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life, they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable. {NYT, 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A— 1; WPost, 5 Sept 76, An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled many problems. {NYT, 6 Sept 76, 14) Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept, that what had appeared to be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2 landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic disturbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity. He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less active than the earth.” {W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3) As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S. Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center for the Viking missions managed by LaRC for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21) The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temperatures on the Utopia plains—warmer than at Chryse, where the nights were longer—were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photographs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of 14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or sulfates with other minerals in the soil. (W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
An unmanned Soviet spacecraft that returned to the earth 17 Dec. in Soviet Asia after 18 days in orbit might have been the test vehicle of a new Soyuz designed to carry three cosmonauts into space, instead of the two that have flown on the 13 Soyuz missions during the past 5 yr. Thomas O’Toole, reporting in the Washington Post, pointed out that the Cosmos 869 had flown the same pattern followed by all Soviet manned space flights, and noted that the USSR had long followed the practice of disguising unmanned test flights of Soyuz spacecraft by using the generalized Cosmos designation. At least four unmanned Soyuz vehicles had flown under the name of Cosmos during the past 4 yr, the article said. The USSR had not attempted a three-man flight since 1971, when the three crewmen of Soyuz 11 suffocated on their return to earth; the crew could have survived had they worn space suits, but the vehicle being used had no room for three men in space suits. Officials said then that the spacecraft would be modified to accommodate three-member crews in space suits, and Western observers predicted that the Inter-Soyuz flights scheduled to begin in 1978 with Russians and non-Russians together would use three cosmonauts again. (WPost, 22 Dec 76, A-2)
The USSR would be able by 1980 to produce a thermonuclear reaction by using a powerful laser, according to scientists at the Lebedev Physics Institute quoted in the USSR’s Academy of Sciences journal Priroda. Institute Director Nikolai Basov (sharer of the 1964 Nobel prize in physics, for work in laser amplification) emphasized that Soviet science had been first to begin work on this problem, which would be the basis of power engineering in the future. Scientists were using two approaches: building powerful installations called Tokamaks, in which a reaction would proceed continuously; or using a laser beam to compress a small quantity of material such as deuterium to “a hundred trillion atmospheres, thousands of times as great as inside the sun,” with accompanying rise in temperatures until a microexplosion occurred, to produce current for future power and heat stations. Unlike the Tokamak, this line of research could lead to production of transportable nuclear-power stations for delivery to remote areas, the article said. (FBIS, Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 14 Nov 76; A&A 64, 367)
An article in Moscow’s Krasnaya Zvezda reviewed the increasing use of satellites for military communications, especially in the U.S. Space communications had become available in Britain, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Canada, Brazil, and Norway, as well as other countries, and though basically designed for commercial purposes “there is no doubt” that most of the channels were used by the military, the article said. As an example, the national system of space communications in Iran was said to be developed to provide guidance for combat aircraft. Not satisfied with the potential of commercial systems, the Pentagon and the NATO command had established communications satellites exclusively for military purposes, the article said, quoting U.S. News and World Report as saying that since 1960 “the Pentagon has sent 83 communications satellites . . . into orbit but has not got what it wanted. Of all these satellites only 13 still continue in orbit, and not all 13 are functioning normally.” The Soviet magazine also pointed out that 6 launches of DSCS-2 satellites had been planned, but 2 had been lost during launch and 2 more had broken down in orbit; the 2 currently operating were over the Pacific and the Atlantic at about 36 000 km, and another 6 had been ordered, the first pair due for launch in spring 1977. As press statements showed that two thirds of the military communications with foreign countries were going through commercial systems, “foreign observers” had concluded that the military systems had proven less reliable than Intelsat; the Pentagon had explained that requirements on military satellites were considerably higher, as they had to work with small mobile stations in widely scattered locations, needed increased protection against jamming, and must be durable to withstand possible combat effects. The Russian commentator said the U.S. had begun developing a third generation of military satellites—the DSCS-3—with launch scheduled for 1981, and that these new spacecraft would be powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators with longer working life and greater capacity. Elimination of bulky solar panels would also make the new craft more difficult to detect in orbit. After describing the Fleetsat-com and Afsatcom systems, the article pointed out that “the creation of a manned multipurpose transport spacecraft” [the U.S. Space Shuttle] would have a major impact on communications-satellite systems; such spacecraft would be able to launch large mass and capacity comsats, eliminating “complex operations and devices [needed to prepare] the satellite for work following its injection into orbit,” and would simplify technical servicing and repair of the comsats while in orbit. Although many technical problems remained, space facilities had become the basis of military communications abroad, the article concluded. (FBIS, Krasnaya Zvezda, 26 May 76, 3)
Discrepancies in forecasting the size of the 1976 Soviet grain crop underlined the difficulty of accurately predicting worldwide harvests and food needs, the Washington Post reported. The U.S. Dept, of Agriculture estimated 22 June that the USSR would produce 190 million tons of grain; other sources objected that the estimate was several millions of tons below the figure set by the Central Intelligence Agency and between 4 and 10 million tons higher than estimates by 2 private firms (Cargill Investor Services of Chicago, and Schnittker Associates of Washington). The size of the Soviet crop was a crucial statistic, the Post noted, because—if low enough—it could send world grain prices on a rapid rise; the price of grain would affect the U.S. economy, triggering higher food prices and adding to domestic inflation. The world had had no excess food stocks since 1972, so that faraway droughts or political developments affecting food trade could make U.S. grain prices fluctuate wildly. Government and industry had invested millions of dollars to get information from satellites, computer banks, private weather consultants, translations of foreign broadcasts, and tipsters, the Post said. Banks, shipping companies, railroads, and other enterprises in agricultural trade or investment had increased their research in crop data to be ready for price changes or sudden shifts in markets. Despite the flood of information, global agricultural predictions remained inexact. A satellite equipped for crop surveys swept across the Soviet Union last year and “helped government analysts assess a major Russian crop disaster,” the Post noted. The information, fed into complicated computer models that collated soil moisture and temperature data with other inputs, produced a projection of Soviet grain production; however, the computer models of the Dept, of Agriculture and the CIA last year produced differing estimates. (W Post, 8 July 76, A-2)
The USSR launched a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 4, from an undisclosed site “in the medium latitudes” of European Russia to an altitude of 1512 km. Carrying “more than 10 complex and diverse scientific instruments” developed and built by specialists from Bulgaria, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR, the rocket was designed to sample a vertical cross section of the neutral upper atmosphere and ionospheric plasma in a 15-min time period. In a Pravda interview, Academician B. N. Petrov noted that composition of the atmosphere and ionosphere changed with height, the lighter gases being at the top. None of the previous Vertikal rockets (launched in 1970, 1971, and 1975) had reached altitudes of more than about 500 km, the oxygen section of the ionosphere. Vertikal 4 had reached the hydrogen region, or protonosphere, and had measured properties of the plasma affecting radio-wave absorption and investigated effects of shortwave solar radiation on the earth’s atmosphere. Results of the investigation would extend knowledge of weather and climate, Petrov said. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Oct 76; Pravda in Russian, 17 Oct 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 29 Oct 76) At what the NY Times described as “a restricted press conference before liftoff,” the rookie cosmonauts said their mission was to concentrate on practical scientific uses of the Soviet space stations, especially extraterrestrial manufacture of metals, glass, and pharmaceuticals. Rozhdestvensky said that every ruble invested in space exploration had “already been returned tenfold to the national budget in one way or another.’,’ Tass announced at noon Moscow time on 16 Oct. (5 am EDT) that the docking of Soyuz 23 with Salyut 5 had been cancelled “because of the off-design regime of [the] approach control system,” and the crew had been ordered to return to earth. The NY Times noted that this was “the first occasion on which the Russians have made public their problems before the completion of a space flight.” Usually no announcement had been forthcoming until the crew had returned to earth. At 8:46 pm Moscow time (1:46 pm EDT)—almost exactly 48 hr after liftoff—the descent module landed 195 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan “on the surface of Lake Tengiz” in a heavy snowfall. The search and rescue teams, working under difficult nighttime conditions, recovered the descent module and the cosmonauts from the first splashdown in the 15-yr history of Soviet manned space flight. Announcement of the adverse conditions of the landing was not made until 12 hr afterwards, a delay suggesting some difficulty in locating the capsule. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, said that helicopter and amphibious craft had aided the recovery. Residents of the nearby town of Arkalyk welcomed the returned cosmonauts at the airport and made them honorary citizens. The crew returned to the Baykonur cosmodrome by plane on the morning of 17 Oct. The splashdown of Soyuz 23 resulted from chance rather than planning, said the newspaper Izvestia on 18 Oct., describing fears at recovery-team headquarters that the landing craft might have gone into swamps near the lake, after a report that the craft had tilted on impact, putting the porthole below the water’s surface. The pilot of a plane had reported the capsule’s position and a helicopter had towed the capsule to shore amid fog, snow, and broken ice. The official comments were regarded as “an effort to avoid blaming the astronauts for the mission’s failure,” said the NY Times. The Soyuz 23 difficulty marked the fourth failure of a Soyuz mission to rendezvous; radar trouble had forced the crews of Soyuz 3, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 15 to return to earth without docking. The Wash. Post noted that about one in three Soyuz flights had failed to carry out its mission: Soyuz 1 and Soyuz 11 resulted in the deaths of one and three cosmonauts respectively, and two cosmonauts on an unnumbered mission in April 1975 had been forced to abort their flight before reaching earth orbit. (NYT, 15 Oct 76, A 13; 16 Oct 76, 6; 17 Oct 76, 29; 18 Oct 76, 32; 19 Oct 76, 17; W Post, 15 Oct 76, A-21; 17 Oct 76, A-17; 18 Oct 76, A-16; C Trib, 15 Oct 76, 1-5; 17 Oct 76, 1-3; 18 Oct 76, 1-8; WStar, 17 Oct 76, A-14; FBIS, Tass in English, 14-17 Oct 76)
U.S. intelligence sources reported the third failure of the USSR this year in testing an antisatellite system, when a Russian Hunter satellite failed to stay in orbit 21 July. The Hunter’s mission was to destroy the Cosmos 839 launched into orbit 12 days earlier; U.S. analysts did not know what was causing the Soviet problem. Soviet efforts to develop an antisatellite system dated back about 10 yr, with only 5 successful launches out of more than 20 attempts before testing stopped in 1971. All 3 attempts since testing resumed in Feb. 1976 had been failures, the U.S. intelligence sources said. The satellite-destroyer was reported to be about 8 m long and to weigh about 2.5 tons at launch; equipped with 5 main rocket engines, the interceptor was said to be able to close on a target at about 4 km per sec and to get as close as 30 m to the target before exploding on ground command. The Associated Press report noted that the U.S. had not tried to develop a similar system since the 1960s; Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said last winter that “we are very much concerned about satellite vulnerability.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-2; C Trib, 27 July 76, 2)
A 2-yr comparative study of data on dust storms on Mars and earth revealed that Martian dust storms were much like severe ones on earth, “only more so,” the Jet Propulsion Lab. announced. JPL investigator Peter M. Woiceshyn used Lowell Observatory data to conclude that a wall of dust more than 50 km high swept down the slopes of the Hellas area on Mars in July 1971 at speeds greater than 480 km per hr. Mariner 9 occultation data verified that winds of extreme velocity would be required to raise surface dust in the low atmospheric pressure of Mars, where the air density was only 1/100th that on earth. When Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in Nov. 1971, another dust storm had been raging for several weeks, and dust-cloud tops were estimated to be 50 to 70 km above the surface. The JPL report said the two 1971 storms and another detected by astronomers in 1956 began in the same location on the slopes of Hellas, triggered by a cold jet stream from the Martian north pole funneling down a long valley across the planet’s equator. Similar storms on earth in Russia, in Iran, and on the U.S. plains east of the Rockies caused great damage from soil erosion, similar to that on Mars revealed by Mariner 9. More storm data from Mars would be sought by the Viking spacecraft scheduled to land there in July and Sept. 76. (JPL release 13 Apr 76)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
A Russian system for intercepting and destroying satellites apparently was unsuccessful this week, U.S. intelligence sources said. The test involved Russian satellites only, and posed no threat to any U.S. satellites in space. A target spacecraft (Cosmos 803) launched from Tyuratam 12 Feb. was the object of the test, carried out by an interceptor spacecraft (Cosmos 804) launched 4 days later. Observers differed on whether the interceptor had been maneuvered close enough to destroy the target, although a routine announcement by the USSR said the second launch had successfully completed its mission. In 5 tests between 1968 and 1971, USSR interceptor satellites had blown up on radio signal after approaching the targets in orbit, and the explosions had destroyed both interceptors and targets; Cosmos 804 had not blown up. U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger had said that the 1972 nuclear arms limitation agreement with Russia forbade the 2 countries from interfering with each other’s satellites, but did not prohibit tests of an antisatellite system. (B Sun, 21 Feb 76, A— 1; W Star, 21 Feb 76, A-3)
ERDA announced selection of Clayton, N.M., as the first municipal utility to field-test its 200-kw wind-turbine generator. The Clayton utility would operate the modern windmill for 2 yr beginning late in 1977, and would assemble test data on the performance and economics of wind-energy systems connected with conventional power plants and providing power through existing utility lines. Clayton, a 3000-inhabitant town located in an area of the Great Plains with high average wind speeds, would be the first U.S. locality in more than 30 yrs to generate electric power for public consumption through the use of wind. Its conventional utility system used both gas and oil generators. Integration of the wind-power system would be supervised by technicians from NASA’s LeRC at Cleveland, 0., who would train the municipal utility employees in operating the wind turbine. (ERDA Release 76-348) Astronautics and aeronautics, 1976 Defense Donald Rumsfeld had stated that the U.S. satellites had been damaged by the glare of natural gas fires along a pipeline in Western Russia, but did not deny that lasers might have caused the damage. Newsweek said the U.S. had already developed chemical lasers requiring no electrical power, and described a possible fleet of U.S. “dark satellites” with radar-absorbing exteriors that would be invisible to Soviet detection. It also predicted that a full-scale war in space—a science-fiction type of clash of hunter-killer satellites, manned orbital shuttles, and laser death rays—could “leap off the drawing boards” in the 1980s. Reporter Tad Szulc said in the current Penthouse magazine that the U.S. government had not publicized the attack on its satellites used to police the 1972 arms pact with the USSR for fear of endangering negotiations with Moscow on a new strategic arms pact. He said Washington was perplexed by the Soviet effort to interfere with satellites that were verifying compliance with the 1972 treaty. The NY Times noted that spokesmen for both the State Dept, and the Dept, of Defense had denied the magazine reports of interference with U.S. satellites, although DOD had verified that the USSR had been attempting to intercept its own satellites already in orbit, not always successfully. Pentagon sources told the NYT that the Soviet hunter satellites used conventional explosives, although shockwaves from an explosion would not proliferate in the vacuum of space and a hunter would have to be accurate enough to close in and destroy a target with debris. A NYT editorial 26 Nov. said the “vast sums” needed for space weapons would be more wisely spent on peace and good relations on earth. (C Trib, 23 Nov 76, 4-15; NYT, 23 Nov 76, 15; 24 Nov 76, 12; 26 Nov 76, A-22)
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
Images from NASA’s Landsat 1 earth-resources survey satellite helped Alaskan Indians to choose the best areas of timberland and mineral deposits in compliance with the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971, NASA announced. The act set aside 99 million acres from federal public lands so that more than 200 native village corporations and 12 native regional corporations—representing about 100,000 Indians, Eskimos, and Aleuts—could settle claims going back to the U.S. purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867. A regional corporation—Doyon, Inc.—asked the Univ. of Alaska to recommend the best land out of inaccessible, irregularly shaped tracts scattered over the huge state. Though known to be rich in minerals and commercially profitable forests, the area had no detailed maps and few settlements, roads, or airfields. Scientists at the university’s Geophysical Inst, used Landsat images, combined with limited ground and aerial data, to map 7 million acres of which Doyon chose 2 million. The Doyon selections were based heavily on the Landsat maps; the university reported that application of Landsat data “at least doubled the value of the land selected . . .” (NASA Release 76-63)
The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifications to McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a 1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lockheed L-101 Is and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near Paris of a DC-10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a 1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976—without Me Lucas’s knowledge—but all U.S. airlines flying DC-10s had agreed to comply with the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 31 March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. (WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9) During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that, during the 69th annual general conference of the Federation Aero-nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FAI gold space medal was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for duration, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and execution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space. (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)
The USSR Ministry of Higher and Specialized Secondary Education had announced plans to build an Institute of Nuclear Energetics at Obninsk, in central Russia, site of the “world’s first industrial atomic power station,” the Tass news agency reported. First Soviet educational institution of this type, the new center would train engineers in design and use of nuclear power stations. In accordance with a new program of constructing nuclear power stations, Tass said the present 6-million-kw capacity would be supplemented by an additional 13 to 15 million kw; new stations were being built at Kursk, Smolensk, Kalinin in central Russia, and in the southern Ukraine. The Obninsk center would be the 860th higher education institution in the USSR, Tass noted. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Dec 76)
A celebration in Moscow of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s flight into space heard a speech by A.P. Aleksandrov, president of the Academy of Sciences, reviewing Soviet firsts in space: launch of the world’s first artificial satellite, first manned flights and walk in open space, first flight to the moon and delivery to earth of lunar soil samples by automatic devices, creation of orbital stations, and unique experiments in the study of solar-system planets. Aleksandrov recalled that the first manned space flight occurred only 3.5 yr after launch of the first artificial satellite, which he said made the Russian word “sputnik” common to all peoples in all languages of the world. He reviewed Soviet progress in space research and applications, especially in communications, mentioning that the number of Orbita network ground stations to reach remote parts of the Soviet Union had now climbed to 68. He referred to the success of the Apollo-Soyuz joint experimental flight as “a significant contribution to the progress of world cosmonautics.” (FBIS, Tass report 13 Apr 76)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
The Soviet Union’s earth satellites had added a new profession—that of printer—to those of meteorologist, cartographer, and communicator, the Tass news agency announced. A Molniya comsat tested in Khabarovsk had transmitted newspapers from Moscow to the Far East more economically and more rapidly than had been possible using the transcontinental cable. The high-resolution capability of the equipment had produced excellent images, the announcement said, adding that “papers received by Far Eastern subscribers will now be absolutely identical to those taken out of their letter boxes by the Moscovites.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Service in Russian, 27 Oct 76)
A new political-economic battle between the U.S. and Britain was expected as bilateral talks were scheduled in London for Sept, on renegotiation of the “Bermuda Agreement” of 1946 regulating airline operations between the U.S. and Britain, in the Caribbean, and in and out of Hong Kong. Britain had announced 22 June it would withdraw from the agreement. The pact (which originally settled wrangling between wartime allies over peacetime air commerce, and served as model for more than 60 bilateral air-travel agreements between the U.S. and other nations) specified the routes the two countries’ airlines could fly and prevented competition on prices. At the time, U.S. carriers had the advantage of new equipment to fly the North Atlantic, and Britain and other war-poor European countries were looking to tourism to bolster their economies. Britain’s objectives in renegotiation would be an equal share of traffic instead of the present 65 to 35% split in favor of the U.S., as well as a cutback in the number of North Atlantic flights. Constantine Menges, director of the international division of the U.S. Civil Aeronautics Board, said the British were interested in equality of results rather than equality of competition, and warned that encouraging airlines to equalize their shares of the market would endanger consumer interests by allowing the airlines to neglect measures that would increase their markets. Political factors would govern any decision: most non-American airlines (including Britain’s) were state-owned and symbols of national prestige. On many international air routes, competing airlines pooled operations and shared revenues and expenses. This cartel philosophy had not applied to North Atlantic routes because of the Bermuda principles; however, Britain now wanted to reduce the number of flights (now involving 28 airlines) that had became destructively competitive, with an estimated equivalent of 8 jumbo jets flying empty between the U.S. and Britain every day. The British view was that restricting the number of flights would enable each nation’s airlines to fly more profitably, eventually benefitting the consumer by easing the pressure for higher fares. On the other hand, U.S. legislation that created the CAB in 1938 had exempted international routes from regulation by subjecting CAB decisions affecting them to presidential review, leaving room for political influences. Whereas the U.S. airlines would be sympathetic to restrictions on flight numbers, the U.S. ideological commitment would uphold free enterprise and unrestricted competition. However, renegotiation might offer the U.S. some advantages: changes on other transatlantic routes where it was now at a disadvantage against European national carriers, increasing the use of charter groups to fill empty seats on scheduled flights, and securing greater equality in so-called fifth and sixth freedoms that permitted European carriers to lure transatlantic passengers with cheap stopovers in and transport to and from other cities besides the basic destinations. Dr. Menges suggested that the U.S. might best negotiate with the European Common Market as a whole, instead of with any one nation; the British rejected this idea as an affront to national sovereignty. (NYT, 8 Aug 76, 3-1) a preset point in near-moon space; a braking operation 14 Aug. put the probe into a circular selenocentric orbit 115 km from the moon’s surface, with 120° inclination and 1 hr 59 min period. (NYT, 11 Aug 76, 37; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 9 Aug 76, 14 Aug 76; Spacewarn bulletin, 17 Aug 76, 1; P lnq, 10 Aug 76, 6; LC S&T Alert #3407, 31 Aug 76) At 6:36 GMT (9:36 Moscow time) 18 Aug. the probe landed on the moon in the Sea of Crises (Mare Crisium) at 12°45/N and 62° 12/E, about 40 km from a northern isthmus between the moon’s 2 seas, where the oldest rocks (about 4.5 billion yr) on the moon might be sampled. The area differed from the Sea of Felicity—site of landings by Luna 16 (1970) and Luna 20 (1972)—not only in age but also in the presence of mascons, gravitational anomalies caused by mass concentrations of extremely dense materials. (The U.S. Lunar Orbiter 5 had discovered 5 such concentrations on the moon in 1968.) The USSR’s 8th successful unmanned landing on the moon in 6 yr was expected to make up for the failure of Luna 23, which sustained damage when it landed on the moon 8 Nov. 1975 and was unable to carry out its mission. The U.S. had not probed the moon since 1972, date of the last of 6 manned lunar landings. Luna 24 weighed 1880 kg upon landing; early reports contained no description of the probe, but photographs of it appeared in Oct. in Aviation WTc and Space Technology magazine, with comparisons of the earlier probes. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 18 Aug 76, 13 Oct 76; UPI, Denver Post, 19 Aug 76, 14-F; NYT editorial, 26 Aug 76; Science News, 28 Aug 76; Av Wk, 11 Oct 76, 53) Tass announced 19 Aug. that, after being on the moon 22 hr 49 min, Luna 24 had blasted off the moon’s surface at 5:25 GMT (8:25 am Moscow time) and was on its way back to earth with a sample of moon soil obtained by a device that drilled to a depth of about 2m and put the core sample into a hermetically sealed container in the return module. The bulk of the spacecraft remained on the moon’s surface; the New York Times noted there was no mention of a robot vehicle like the Lunokhods landed previously. Lunokhod 1 (on Luna 17) had spent 10 mo on the moon in 1970-1971, traveling about 10 km; Lunokhod 2 (on Luna 21) roamed the Lemonnier crater in the Sea of Serenity for 6 mo in 1973. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 19 Aug 76; NYT, 20 Aug 76, A-19; UPI, Denver Post, 20 Aug 76, 10; LA Times, 20 Aug 76, 3) On 22 Aug. the Luna 24 return craft parachuted to earth in a “forest site” 2400 km northeast of Moscow, soft-landing at 17:55 GMT (20:55 Moscow time). The landing craft and sample were flown to Moscow from the site. Research on the comparatively large moon sample would proceed at the Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow, where lunar samples returned by Luna 16 and Lunar 20 had been studied. Pravda was quoted as stating that the 1970 mission of Luna 16 brought back particles of lunar iron that “does not rust”; learning how to manufacture such a metal under earth conditions “would repay all the expenditures for space study,” the newspaper said. Metallurgy stations might be established in space or on the moon to make nonrusting iron in commercial quantities, a process requiring a powerful vacuum like that in space which would be difficult to establish on earth. The gray-brown lunar material was said to resemble the Luna 16 sample, also taken from a lunar “sea” area. Mineralogists studying the top of the 30-cm-wide column of material said they expected to find the same Mendeleyev elements existing on the moon as on the earth, but in different proportions because of fewer volatile materials. Scientists would search the lunar sample for any sign of water vapor, regarded as important “not only for space physics but also for the future exploration of space,” Tass said. The Luna 24 landing craft, still on the moon, would continue to function and flight controllers were still communicating with it. (FBIS, Moscow Tass Inti Serv in Russian, 21 Aug 76; Tass in English, 25 Aug 76; CSM, 24 Aug 76, 1; B Sun, 24 Aug 76, 5; SBD, 31 Aug 76, 223)
U.S. observers were concerned about spiraling strategic arms programs in the USSR, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Heavy payload in the Soviet nuclear system and an expanded program of deploying multiple warheads had aroused fears of a possible “first strike” by the USSR against U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) systems. Intelligence experts estimated the USSR would have 1500 land-based missiles by summer, compared with 1054 for the U.S.; an article in Foreign Affairs magazine by Paul Nitze—Secretary of the Navy in the Johnson administration—had stated the Russians believed they could “win” a nuclear war, whereas popular feeling in the U.S. was that all participants in a nuclear exchange would be destroyed. A Russian “cold launch” system for missile launching that did not damage the silo was contrasted to the U.S. “hot launch” system that damaged the silo during launch. The Pentagon had sought $78 million for development of a new ICBM called “MX,” and a FY 1977 budget of $9.4 billion for strategic forces. (CSM, 19 Feb 76, 6)
In a close race to tame the hydrogen-bomb reaction process—fusion—to make electricity, the U.S. and USSR were both ready for larger engineering units to demonstrate the practical production of electricity by the mid-1980s, reporter Robert Toth said in the Los Angeles Times. The Kurchatov Institute in Moscow had announced earlier in Feb. a “breakthrough” in the first successful test conducted in its Tokamak-10, the last purely experimental machine intended to prove feasibility of the approach. Last November, U.S. had announced a comparable achievement with the Alcator Tokamak at the Mass. Institute of Technology, described as a major development in fusion research. Although U.S. scientists claimed a fusion process had been first tested at Los Alamos 20 yr ago, it was not seriously pursued, whereas the late Dr. Lev Artsimovich of the USSR had worked along the same line independently and given the machine its name—a Russian contraction for current-machine chamber—upon achieving the first success. Advantages of the fusion process were that it was the most efficient reaction known, producing 180 times more energy than consumed; fuel, the heavy forms of hydrogen, would be as inexhaustible as the seas; and the process left no radioactive waste like that from atomic-power plants based on the fission reaction. Fusion would require containment of the reaction in a magnetic field, which had been accomplished, and continuous production of energy would require temperatures of a million degrees Centigrade and a density of 100 trillion ions for a second— conditions beyond the capability of present machines. Both the U.S. and USSR results had been 5 to 10 times less than needed, although they were 5 to 10 times greater than previously achieved. (W Post, 23 Feb 76, A— 1)
After a series of technical checks, the Ekran satellite launched in the USSR 26 Oct. had been activated, Tass annouced. Ekran, in synchronous orbit, had transmitted experimental television programs over “a vast territory in Siberia between the Surgut and Yakutsk meridians,” Tass said, describing the new service as a “gigantic telebridge.” USSR first deputy communications minister V. Shamshin said the new generation of comsats would provide a reliable and economical system of television communications throughout the Soviet Union. Ekran, whose transmitters were apparently more powerful than those of the Molniya series, would dispense with the need for 12-meter ground antennas used by the previous Orbita system, Tass said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 5 Nov 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 6 Nov 76)
Information of value to the U.S. Pioneer mission to Venus scheduled for 1978 was published by the USSR in Pravda after 4 mo of analysis of the 2 Soviet spacecraft that reached Venus in Oct. 1975. Each of the Russian craft, weighing about 5000 kg, separated into an orbiting section and a landing capsule; the two landers transmitted the first panoramic photographs of the Venus surface to earth. U.S. scientists had debated the angle at which landers should enter the Venus atmosphere; the Russian report stated that Venera 9 entered at 20.5° and Venera 10 at 22.5° to the horizon. Besides the entry angle, the report included details of descent, amount of sunlight on the surface, wind speeds, rock chemistry, and character of surface erosion. Although the 2 landers failed under surface temperatures of 482°C and pressure 90 times that of earth— Venera 9 lander operated 53 min., Venera 10 65 min—the orbiters continued to transmit data on cloud cover and upper atmosphere. The U.S. planned to launch 2 spacecraft, an orbiter and a lander, toward Venus in 1978, the lander separating into 4 or 5 probes to relay data via the orbiter to the earth. {NYT, 29 Feb 76, 34)
plane that flew around the global poles had previously been carried around the world on a balloon that came down in Central Africa, where a French member of the World Health Organization found it hanging in a tree and returned it to NASA; after the airplane trip, the unit served another year on a buoy before being retired from service. A 1914 Model T Ford originally scheduled to carry the tracking device [see 15 Feb.] was withdrawn from the race by its owner. (NASA Release 76-126) 17-19 July: Project scientists said the high proportion of argon in the Mars atmosphere might damage the life-detection instruments on Viking 1. In March 1974, a spectrometer pump on a Mars-bound spacecraft failed to work properly and Russian scientists concluded the problem was caused by argon, an element reluctant to form chemical compounds; the Russian pump apparently could not handle the high argon content of the Mars atmosphere. Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer contained filter material to screen out carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide in the search for organic compounds in Mars air and soil samples, which would be heated in the instrument to produce gas for analysis by the chromatograph; the high argon content might interfere with the readings. (NYT, 17 July 76, 24) JPL flight directors were checking out the instruments on Viking 1 for its Mars landing scheduled for 20 July. Immediately upon landing, the spacecraft would measure air temperature and pressure and wind speed and direction, and would detect any interior motions of the planet such as moving lava or shaking of the crust. It was also scheduled to take 2 photographs, one downward to record the terrain of the landing site and the other a panorama shot to show the general surface of Mars. Life-detection experiments would not begin until about a wk after the landing. (W Post, 18 July 76, A-10) Commands from JPL to turn on the $ 153-million instrument package to be landed by Viking 1 on the Plains of Chryse took between 17 and 18 min to reach the spacecraft nearly 346 million km away from earth. First spacecraft responses to the signals indicated the instruments and navigational equipment were in working condition. Landing was scheduled for 8 am EDT on 20 July; Viking 1 would separate early in the morning into 2 components, 2300-kg orbiter and 590-kg lander. The orbiter, powered by purple solar cells on panels, would remain in orbit to serve as a radio relay for the lander and to photograph nearly half the Martian surface over the next 12 mo. The lander, powered by an atomic battery, would coast for about 3 hr, slowed by a parachute and braking engines, and land on 3 aluminum legs at about 8 kph, more gently than most parachutists land on earth. (W Post, 19 July 76, A-3) Odds were heavily against existence of any form of life on Mars, said a Washington Post editorial, and against Viking 1 ’s finding evidence of it even if it were there. The Viking flights were “in some ways more remarkable an undertaking” than the Apollo flights because the spacecraft was on its own with no humans to correct errors and a sizable time lapse between sending and receipt of radioed instructions. The mission, said the Post, was “already a stunning accomplishment.” (W Post, 20 July. 76, A-16) The Viking spacecraft was “a breed apart,” the Wash. Post reported, as different from previous spacecraft “as a Cadillac from a Pinto.” Almost nothing on the lander had flown in space before; almost everything had to be built super-small to save weight. As the first tl.S. spacecraft to land on another planet, the Viking had to be designed to withstand chemical and heat sterilization to avoid contaminating Mars with earth organisms. The tape recorder, for instance, had to be made of bronze coated with phosphor, because no plastic tape could have survived the heat. (W Post, 20 July 76, A-2)
Tass announced that the yachts Rodina and Rossiya had left the port of Vladivostok in an attempt to repeat the route sailed by Russian navigators 250 yr ago on 2 expeditions to Kamchatka under the leadership of Vitus Bering (1681-1741). The 7-man crews of the ships would begin by visiting Okhotsk, the port where Bering built the ship that went to Kamchatka, then proceed to Kamchatka about 3700 km away. In 1977 and 1978, the expedition would cruise to the Bering Strait and go ashore in North America where Bering’s ship St. Peter visited 17 July 1741. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 July 76)
