Mstislav Keldysh, Soviet scientist and mathematician who had been spokesman for the USSR’s space program as head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died June 24 at the age of 67, the Washington Post reported. Soviet news agency Tass described the death as sudden. Dr. Michael DeBakey had traveled to the Soviet Union 5yr ago to operate on Keldysh’s circulatory system. Recognized in a wide range of scientific and mathematical disciplines bearing on aviation and rocketry, Keldysh had proved his administrative ability by rising to the top of his country’s scientific establishment. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences from 1961 to 1975, Keldysh had been not only USSR science spokesman but also a key figure in organizing and developing scientific research throughout the Soviet Union. He had won the Stalin Prize in 1942 for “The Theory of Calculating and Developing Methods of Reducing Various Types of Vibrations in Aircraft,” and in 1946 for “The Front-Wheel Shimmy of the Tricycle (Aircraft) Landing Gear.” In 1943, Keldysh had become head of a top secret aircraft-development institute with increasing administrative responsibilities. As head of the Academy of Sciences, he announced in Oct. 1969, shortly after the U.S. had put men on the moon, that the USSR had abandoned plans to do likewise and would concentrate on putting manned space stations into orbit around the earth. He acknowledged that the Soviet Union had been debating space expenditures, and said, “My personal view is that, when a man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (WPost, June 27/78, B6; FBIS, Tass Inti Serv in Russian, June 26/78)	•
Launch of Cosmos 1000, reported FBIS, had led Soviet scientists to review highlights of the series. The research program using Cosmos satellites had used several types of unified apparatus, and the USSR had always referred to them as a “series” irrespective of their scientific missions. The virtually mass-produced output of satellites had greatly assisted the high turnover speed of the series, which had reached the 1000 mark within 16yr and 2wk, more than 500 launches having come in the past 6yr. The Cosmos series had begun Mar. 16, 1962, with the launch of an unnamed satellite (named Cosmos 1 only 3wk later, when Tass reported launch of Cosmos 2). The USSR had seldom announced the purpose of Cosmos launches, a ploy that permitted concealment of their purposes as well as of their failures. Observers had classified Cosmos 96, for instance, as a Venus probe left or stranded in orbit; Cosmos 146, which had arrived in orbit measuring about 14m long and by next day was only 9m long, after emitting 2 capsules, was probably a Soyuz precursor. Georgy Narimanov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Institute of Space Research said the USSR had used Cosmos satellites to test long-range communications systems, reentry installations, life-support systems, and assemblies for the Lunokhod moon-rover, as well as automatic-docking procedures. Lack of information had encouraged speculation about military applications, including hunter-killer tests. USSR comments had stressed the practical aspects of the Cosmos program, such as experience accumulated during geophysical experiments for use on the “Meteor” spacecraft; basic research by Cosmos 321 that had defined distribution of the magnetic field over 94% of the earth’s surface; and Cosmos investigations of the upper atmosphere, the aurora, and the magnetosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, April 4/78; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, April 1/78 [2 items])
Tass reported that, in an interview marking the first anniversary of the Salyut 6 launch, Pilot-Cosmonaut Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov had recommended designing a new orbiting scientific Salyut laboratory with a minimum of 7 or 8 docking units. The presence of only 2 docking units on Salyut 6 meant that, after a cargo vessel had arrived and its equipment was transferred, it had to undock to make room for another vehicle. This was irrational, Feoktistov said. When a cargo ship departed, the Salyut would lose one complete “room” of the cosmic house (with a volume of about 6m3) that could accommodate equipment and scientific instruments. To add even one more component to a Salyut was not simple, as virtually its entire surface was covered with solar batteries, windows, television cameras, and various sensors. The nose fairing covering the station in the active phase of the launch also had restricted designers. Feoktistov stressed, however, the need to equip future space stations with several mooring ports to handle units for specialized research: technological, astronomical, and geophysical. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 26/78)
MSFC announced it had successfully completed at the National Parachute Range May 23 an airdrop test of the parachute system designed to recover Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters after launch. This was the fourth drop test in which a dummy booster had been carried aloft beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft; the recovery system’s three main parachutes had all deployed, and all had functioned as expected. The dummy booster had landed virtually undamaged. NASA engineers planned two more airdrops before certifying the system for flight. (.Marshall Star, May 31/78, 2) During May: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that a 15-member U.S. aerobatic team would travel in Aug. to Ceske Budejovice, Czechoslovakia, to compete in the ninth World Aerobatic Championships sanctioned by the Inti. Aeronautic Federation (FAI). The 1978 U.S. team would be all male, as no woman had qualified in competitions to determine team members. Three-time U.S. national champion Leo Loudenslager, an American Airlines pilot, said, “We have high expectations. We have even better trained pilots and more sophisticated aircraft than we did in 1976, and we are more knowledgeable about what to expect.” The 1976 U.S. team had lost to the USSR the titles it had captured in France in 1972: top team, best male, and best female. Loudenslager would fly his experimental modified version of the 200hp Stephens Akro, the Laser 200. Henry Haigh might fly the modified Pitts Special biplane in which he had competed in 1976, basically the same design flown by the remainder of the team. The five aircraft for the competition, disassembled Aug. 8 at Kennedy Inti. Airport for transport to Frankfort, would be reassembled and flown to Peine near Braunschweig in West Germany for 2wk of intensive practice, then to Budejovice for the competition. The championship event would mark nearly two decades of U.S. participation in FAI-sanctioned precision aerobatic competitions, first held in 1960 in Czechoslovakia. The event also would commemorate two-thirds of a century since the first recorded aerobatic flight: Lt. Peter Nesterov of the Imperial Russian Air Service was credited with performing in 1913 the first inside loop in a Nieuport monoplane. NAA, the aero club representing the U.S., had sanctioned as the official team representing the U.S. at the world championships the group selected by the Aerobatic Club of America, which would also be the only team competing in Czechoslovakia without government financing. (NAA newsletter, May 78, 1)
FBIS reported the Soviet Union’s Venera 11 had reached Venus Dec. 25, and its descent module had made a soft landing some 800km from where Venera 12’s descent module had landed. Main task of Venera 11 and 12 was to examine the characteristics of various areas of Venus. After the descent module separated from Venera 11 Dec. 23, the spacecraft had proceeded on a flyby trajectory some 35 000km from the planet’s surface. The Venera 11 module, during descent and while on the planet surface, had performed research similar to that done by the Venera 12 module (scientific and technical experiments and exploration of Venus’s surface at 446°C and pressure of 88 atmospheres) for 95min. Descent-module data received by Venera 11 were relayed to earth. After leaving the zone of radio visibility and completing receipt of data, Venera 11 would continue in a heliocentric orbit. Scientific measurement and research begun on the earth-Venus interplanetary route would continue during the flight of Venera 11 and 12. Data obtained from the two spacecraft would be processed and studied in the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Dec. 25/78)
Cosmonaut Valery Kubasov had spoken of the possibility of joint experimental flights by the USSR’s Salyut-type orbital station and the U.S. Space Shuttle, according to a Tass report. Kubasov noted that such flights could use the joint approach and docking procedures worked out for the Apollo-Soyuz test project and tested during the joint Soviet-U.S. flight of Apollo and Soyuz in July 1975. A new agreement between the USSR and the U.S. on cooperation in space research for peaceful purposes had came into force the previous May, Kubasov pointed out. He added that millions of Americans, like the citizens of the USSR, had viewed the Soyuz-Apollo program as a display of goodwill by the two nations and the beginning of great cooperation between nations in space. However, Av Wk reported that any U.S. Space Shuttle/Soviet Salyut space station joint mission was in deep trouble, if not already dead, because of increased U.S. concern over technology transfer to the Soviets and the current abrasive political climate between the two countries. A NSC interagency committee had reevaluated the entire joint mission idea, while U.S./Soviet discussions on the project were in limbo. The project probably would have been discussed during a planned technology-oriented trip to the USSR by presidential science adviser Frank Press, but the White House had canceled the trip in disapproval of the Soviet treatment of dissidents. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, July 12/78; AvWk, July 17/78, 13)
Using a multichamber furnace delivered to Salyut 6 by the Progress 1 unmanned tanker/freighter, Soviet cosmonauts had begun major spaceprocessing experiments, Tass reported. Operated in a Salyut airlock to vent into the vacuum of space, the furnace had three areas: one maintaining heat up to 1100C, a “cold” area maintaining 600 to 700C, and a “gradient” area allowing linear temperature change between maximum and minimum furnace-heating capabilities. The Salyut space-processing system, designated “Splav” (alloy), would use material samples in capsules, each containing 3 crystal ampules to fuse when heated in the furnace and form monocrystals in the “gradient” area, with 3-dimensional crystallization in the hot and cold sections of the furnace. Combinations of materials heated to form new substances not possible in earth gravity would be aluminum/antimony, aluminum/tungsten, molybdenum/gal-lium, copper/indium, and indium/antimony. Some of the alloys might have semiconductor properties, suggesting that Soviet interest would be in specific applications in earth orbit rather than in theory. The cosmonauts had also reported a major technology experiment using a closed-cycle cryogenic system designed to provide temperatures comparable to liquid helium (- 269C) but did not say whether or not the test actually used liquid helium. Cosmonauts had also used cryogenics to cool the receivers of a “submillimeter telescope,” Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 15/78, Feb 16/78; Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Feb 21/78; AvWk, Feb 27/78, 21)
FBIS reported the answer of Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov, USSR pilot-cosmonaut, when queried on the future of orbital stations. Feoktistov said they would develop as multipurpose scientific laboratories for extra-atmospheric astronomical observations, and for technological experiments to produce materials unobtainable under earth conditions. Orbital stations could seek out the most effective systems to develop methods for research and development and the design of scientific instruments and equipment. He went on to say: “Very broad prospects are opened up for manned stations if they are examined above all as the basis for industrial construction in space. Not everyone shares this view, but I personally believe that within the next few decades the development of technology will make it possible to actually set the task of creating power plants in space.” Feoktistov noted that such technology would mean putting millions of tons of diverse equipment into space to assemble enormous and complex structures. Such work could never be fully automated, he pointed out, and would require many people to control the equipment and carry out installation work. This would not happen quickly, he concluded, but it should not be relegated to the realm of fantasy. “After all, 17yr ago Yuri Gagarin’s flight also seemed a fantastic achievement.” (FBIS, Moscow Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya in Russian, Apr 12/78)
NASA announced it had planned, weather permitting, to have its Project Cameo release large bluish-white luminescent clouds of barium in the skies over Alaska beginning Saturday, October 28, and lithium over northern Scandinavia at a later date [see Sept. 19]. The agency said Project Cameo clouds should be visible to residents of Alaska, eastern Russia, western Canada, and the northwestern U.S. The chemicals would have been released from the orbiting second stage of a Delta rocket that would have launched the Nimbus 6 satellite into polar orbit Oct. 24. Of the many high-altitude sounding-rocket chemical-cloud launches conducted by NASA throughout the world, this would be the first from an orbiting vehicle; the Delta second stage was in a circular near-polar orbit at about 950km (590mi) altitude. (NASA Release 78-169)
FBIS reported the USSR interplanetary spacecraft Venera 12 had reached Venus Dec. 21 after a 98-day flight covering over 240 million km. The descent module had entered Venus’s atmosphere at 11.2 km/sec and soft-landed, transmitting scientific information from the planet’s surface for llOmin. During descent, the module made precise chemical analyses of the composition of the atmosphere and clouds, a spectral analysis of solar radiation scattered in the atmosphere, and a study of electric charges in the atmosphere from 62m above the planet’s surface. Scientific measurements continued after the module landed. The Venera 12 station was continuing its flight in space, carrying a Soviet-French experiment for studying solar and galactic gamma flares. Venera 11, launched 5da before Venera 12, would reach Venus Dec. 25. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Dec 21/78)
