FBIS reported on the status of the Soyuz 32 crew in its continuing flight aboard Salyut 6. Since launch February 25, Vladimir Lyakhov and Valery Ryumin had done daily exercises and physical tests, noted by Soviet press services as “the cosmonauts are feeling well.” Their May 3 activity was experimenting on the Kristall equipment, making “semiconductor monocrystals” of indium arsenide. On May 4 they operated a “submillimeter telescope” gathering data to predict cyclones in tropical zones of Earth. A commentator noted that this equipment was complicated, requiring exact calibration each time it was used, and could be aimed only by turning the entire station. On May 6 they used a “gamma telescope” to measure gamma radiation and charged particles in near-Earth space. On May 8 they replaced their television transmitter with a new one brought by Progress 5. On May 9-10 they used the Kristall to experiment with cadmium sulfide. Tass reported May 13 the launch of Progress 6; a commentator said that the cargo ship contained “an unusual present” to the crew, a tulip scheduled to bloom in space. An ongoing task was to study the efforts of weightlessness and “other space flight factors” on plant growth; small hothouses aboard the Salyut could provide fresh food containing vitamins. The crew was growing green onions; they had reaped their first harvest and “ate it with the permission of biologists.” They also had fennel, parsley, and garlic; Tass noted that “Despite successes of chemistry.. .scientists have not yet managed to create the same vitamins as in nature.” The cosmonauts on Soyuz 29 had repeatedly described the mushrooms they were picking as “really strange.. .their form was unusual with curly stems...”. “Nevertheless,” Tass said, “[the crew had been] greatly pleased. All living things evoke their enhanced interest. . .a psychological backup in their difficult work.” The tulip in outer space, “merely an experiment to scientists,” was for the cosmonauts “a symbol of spring” and an expression of solicitude for the crew that had been working for a long time in isolation. Progress 6 docked May 15, and the crew was unloading cargo and reloading used equipment for the next fortnight. The major job was refueling, difficult and complex in space, but the crew had completed it by May 28. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Dom Svc in Russian, Inti Svc in Russian, May 3-28/79)
