The Soviet Union said that Soyuz T-5 cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, in their fourth week aboard Salyut 7, had finished unloading Progress 13, launched May 23 to refuel and replenish the orbiting station, and undocked it to make room for a spacecraft carrying a French-Soviet crew later in June. Progress 13's propulsion unit had served twice to adjust the orbit of the Spyuz-.Salyut complex. Tass reported that ground control had reoriented the Progress June 6 to reenter and burn up over the Pacific Ocean. (FBIS, MscWldSvc in English, Tass in English, June 4/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 6/82)
The Washington Post noted the 25th anniversary of the USSR’s launch of an orbiting satellite, saying that “no single event in history assaulted America’s image of itself as did Sputnik.” Subsequent U.S. space ventures “did nothing but tarnish that image,” the Army and Navy arguing over which would launch the first satellite, while the Soviet Union orbited dogs, rats, and mice and took pictures of the dark side of the Moon. The Navy got the first opportunity December 6, 1957, with Vanguard on the pad at Cape Canaveral and “literally blew it.” The Army was given four days in January 1958 to launch Explorer from the Cape. When the launch finally took place after being delayed two days by unsafe winds, sea air had so corroded Army tracking radios in the Caribbean that, the Cape never received the signal that the satellite was in orbit. In 1961 “the roof fell in” when Yuri Gagarin became the first man to orbit the Earth, and Gherman Titov orbited 17 times. The “best U.S. orbital effort that year was that of Ham the chimpanzee.” Not until 1962 did John Glenn orbit the Earth, and then for only three orbits. By the end of that year the Soviet Union had sent four cosmonauts into, space.	. President John F. Kennedy had told Congress May 25, 1961, that the U.S. goal would be to put a man on the Moon and return him safely “before the end of the decade.” By the time a three-man crew in Apollo 8 orbited the Moon in 1968 at Christmastime, “the space race was over. What happened to the Soviets?” Former JSC Director Chris Kraft said in an interview that the Soviet Union PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED INTFNU0NAUt RUN* “abandoned their moon program. We took the wind right out of their sails.” Critics said that not all of the effects of the space race were good: it “spurred U.S. determination to improve the quality of schools and students, but whether that succeeded is debatable.” Kennedy “never saw the flight of anything to which he gave the initial impetus”; President Johnson, “who did more for the Apollo manned program than any president, suffered through the fatal Apollo fire”; President Nixon “basked in all of the Apollo triumphs only to answer for Watergate.” One educator said “Sputnik is one reason Johnny can’t read today. He’s more interested in Pac-Man, which you might call an outgrowth of Sputnik.” If Sputnik led to Pac-Man, the Washington Post said, it also “helped to produce the high technology of the computer revolution. . .Today’s state-of-the-art computer processes 5 million operations a second.” W Post, Oct 4/82, A-l)
The Soviet Union launched Cosmos 1374 from Kapustin Yar into a “round orbit” at 225-kilogram altitude and 50.7° inclination. Press reports said that Australian aircraft watched a seven-ship Soviet task force retrieve from the Indian Ocean an object that might be either a nuclear test craft or a “fairly small” shuttle. United Press International (UPI) said an Australian spokesman claimed to know what kind of craft was recovered but gave no details because the information was “classified”; also, U.S. scientists said that the spacecraft had “an unusually low trajectory.” Associated Press (AP) quoted U.S. government sources “who asked to remain anonymous” that the Soviet Union had launched and recovered, after 1 1/4 orbits, its first space-shuttle type of vehicle; they did not know whether the craft was manned. A Reuters report said that Maj. Gen. Alexey Leonov, who had been one of the cosmonauts on the Apollo-Soyuz mission, hinted that the shuttle guess was right but would give no details. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 4/82; W Post, June 9/82, A-7; June 10/82, A-26; June 11/82, A-35; W Times, June 11/82, 6; AvWk, June 14/82, 18-19)
NASA launched Canada’s Telesat-G, called Anik D-1 in orbit, from ESMC on a Delta at 7:10 p.m. EDT. Transfer-orbit parameters were 36,358-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, and 24.5° inclination. Firing of a booster motor at 5:29 p.m. EDT Augusl 29 put Anik D into synchronous orbit, and it was maneuvered to a station 104°W above the equator. Anik D, weighing 2,370 pounds at liftoff, was the heaviest payload launched into transfer orbit by a Delta from that site. Initial on-station weight was 1,454 pounds. This was a 30th consecutive success for the Delta, a new record. The 24-channel communications satellite would provide Canada with television, data, and voice communications. Anik D was Canada’s tenth satellite and fifth in a series of domestic commercial communications satellites owned and operated by Telesat Canada. It would be a backup in orbit for three aging Anik A satellites (launched 1972, 1973, and 1975) and Anik B (1978). (NASA MOR M-492-201-82-05 [prelaunch] Aug 24/82, [postlaunch] Jan 17/83; NASA Release 82-126; Spacewam SPX-346, Aug 31/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 1/82; SSR, Sept 2/82; A/D, Aug 31/82, 343; AvWk, Sept 6/82, 53) During August: Dr. Christopher C. Kraft announced his resignation as director of JSC. He had retired from federal service in March 1980 but had stayed on at the request of the NASA administrator to see the Shuttle program through the flight-test phase that ended July 4. Kraft had begun working for NASA’s predecessor organization, NACA, in 1945 and was appointed director at JSC in 1972. He would be succeeded by Gerald D. Griffin. (NASA Release —Pravda announced the death of Nikolai Pilyugin, 74, a key figure in development of the Soviet space program. An obituary signed by President Leonid Brezhnev said that Pilyugin, who had headed a large research institute for 20 years, was an outstanding designer in the field of space-rocket engineering. He was credited with designing the control system for Soviet launch vehicles, space ships, and interplanetary stations. (FBIS, Pravda in Russian, Aug 3/82)
At 8:30 p.m. Moscow time (4:30 p.m. GMT), the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-6 carrying cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Alexandr Ivanchenkov, with French “spationaut” Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, to spend a week with cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, the Soyuz T-5 crew who had been occupying orbiting laboratory Salyut 7 since May 13. This was the first time a five-man crew would occupy an orbital station. Initial orbit elements were 277-kilometer apogee, 248-kilometer perigee, 89.6-minute period, and 51.6° inclination. Chretien, who had trained with his French backup Maj. Patrick Baudry in the Soviet Union for 21 months, was the first westerner to take part in a Soviet space mission. (The last east-west venture was the U.S.-Soviet Apollo-Soyuz linkup in July 1975.) The mission had been approved by French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing in 1979. This was also the first Soviet life television coverage of a launch, beginning two hours before liftoff with taped views of crew training, Salyut assembly, Soyuz rollout, departure of the crew by bus, interviews with the crew orbiting in the Salyut, and ending with a live broadcast of the liftoff plus 10 minutes. During the two-hour broadcast, all three crew members gave speeches praising the trip as symbolic of friendship between French and Soviet peoples. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, June 24/82, June 28/82; Mosc DomTVSvc in Russian, June 24/82; NY Times, June 25/82, A-9; W Post, June 25/82, A-22; Spacewam SPX-344, June 29/82)
FBIS reported that the People’s Republic of China successfully launched “another scientific experiment satellite.” This was the People’s Republic’s 12th satellite (the first was launched in 1970) and was timed for the opening of the national congress of the PRC Communist Party. Later reports said that the satellite had “landed with precision at the predetermined recovery site” on September 14 at 2:00 p.m. Beijing time. (FBIS, Xinhua in English/Dom Svc in Chinese, Sept 9/82, Sept 14/82; Pravda in Russian, Sept 10/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 14/82) ESA began investigating the failure. First reports said that the problem was in third-stage turbopump parts in the casing or the lubrication system. The first and second stages operated correctly, as did the separations and jettison of the fairing. The third stage ignited and ran for 275 seconds when rotation speed dropped, reaching zero at 325 seconds. The drop in thrust and engine cut-out led to a downward trajectory. (WPost, Sept 10/82, A-l; ESA Info 27, 29, 30)
NASA named Dr. Peter J. Denning head of a new Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS) to begin at ARC in June 1983. Denning, chairman of computer sciences at Purdue, would direct research in computer science and engineering with potential for use in NASA programs. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Association (USRA), RIACS would be an academic center for applications of the computer to solve scientific and engineering problems. {NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 3/82) On December 10 the crew returned to Earth at 10:03 p.m. Moscow time in the preset area 190 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan “not far from” the space center at Baykonur. Beijing’s Xinhua press service said that a special lighthouse equipped with a strong beam was installed at the site to guide helicopters with ground crews to assist the cosmonauts. Difficulties with the landing meant that journalists for the first time were not at the site. Berezovoy later reported that “Judging from previous crews, who hardly felt the shock of landing, this landing was quite severe: and was followed by a few more rolls, apparently because we were on a small incline, and we ended up on our side with one on top of the other—Valentin [Lebedev] was on the (?up-per) couch and I was on the lower. . . .We spent about 20 minutes in the descent module while an offroad vehicle was made ready but then spent 5 hours in this vehicle because of poor conditions. It was not bad, it was warm. We changed our clothes for clean and dry ones, replacing spacesuits with flight suits.” (Interview recorded for Moscow DomSvc in Russian, December 13) Later press reports said that the cosmonauts had “a harrowing reentry” in a craft rolling across a steppe swept by a blizzard and fog. Although initial USSR reports implied all had gone well, the New York Times said that the crew had “anxious moments” when unexpected bad weather landed them in darkness, near-zero temperatures, and blowing snow. One helicopter “force-landed” without injury, and another had to turn back. (NY Times, Dec 14/82, C-2; WPost, Dec 12/82, A-31)] Tass carried reports December 12 of the first meeting with the cosmonauts. Their doctors said that “the cosmonauts feel fine which is somewhat at variance with the real state of their organisms.” Good appetites indicated “energetic adaptation to terrestrial conditions. In 24 hours the cosmonauts gained about a kilogram in weight each. They particularly liked a bath with the air temperature of up to 70 Berezovoy said afterward “If we could have such a pleasure at the Salyut station I would have worked for more time in orbit.” On December 16 Ivan Skiba, chief physician of the space training center, said that the cosmonauts had been “put on a regime approximating their usual lifestyle.” He said that the doctors were “naturally worried over the decree to which the additional 26 days spent by [Berezovoy and Lebedev] in outer space over the 185-day space mission of [Popov and Ryumin] will affect the human organism. These 26 days constituted the “unknown path” both for the cosmonauts and for us physicians. Now we can say with certainty that the [additional] time in space.. .has not affected the cosmonauts’ organisms. Their cardiovascular activity, blood composition, and other characteristics are returning to preflight figures.” Skiba recalled that Boris Yegorov, “a representative of the medical profession,” was among the first cosmonauts and hoped he would not be the last medical man to fly in space. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov told a magazine December 17 Berezovoy and Lebedev had “made an important step in increasing the endurance of weightlessness.. .essential for activity in large orbital stations, space plants and factories, and interplanetary missions.” When the two returned from the 211-day mission, they “were sunken physically and had become thinner and paler... [wanted] regular human communication with friends. They eat with a good appetite.. .swim every day.. .to have some weightlessness in water and make their life easier. They still find it a bit difficult to be seated as the muscles that make the position comfortable are out of their elementary function.” U.S. space officials were watching the cosmonauts’ adaptation to gravity after 30 weeks of weightlessness. A television broadcast three days after their return showed them moving unaided to the edge of a whirlpool where they were assisted down a ladder. A commentator noted they were “like infants” and would have to relearn how to walk. The Soviet Union had announced plans for a station orbiting for a year and permanently manned, its crews remaining in space indefinitely to reduce ferrying costs. Soviet experts, like former cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, had talked of manned missions to destinations such as Titan, a satellite of Saturn. (Longest U.S. flight so far was the 84-day mission flown by Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue on Skylab in 1973 and 1974.) The Washington Times said that Soviet planners were “seriously divided about what to do next.” Valery Ryumin, who spent 175 and then 185 days on Salyut 6 and was now a senior program chief at the space center, talked of grave risks to crew health on long-term missions and said that “four months is about the optimal period.” Ignoring reports that Berezovoy and Lebedev were in fine health, Ryumin said that it would take “through medical tests on earth” to show how they had fared. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 9-17/82; Beijing Xinhua in English, Dec 11/82; NY Times, Dec 11/82, 12; Dec 14/82, C-2; W Post, Dec 11/82, A-23; Dec 12/82, A-31; W Times, Dec 15/82, 8A)
The Soviet news agency Tass reported that the Soviet Union had launched space station Salyut 7 apparently to replace Salyut 6, home in space for cosmonauts since September 1977, for a joint French-Soviet manned flight this summer. Orbital parameters were 278-kilometer apogee, 219-kilometer perigee (between 136 and 172 miles), 89.2 minute period, 51.5° inclination. Agence France-Presse said that a Soviet-French team would shortly be launched in a Soyuz-T craft to link up with Salyut 7. Lt. Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, France’s “spacecraft” who had had “intensive training in Soviet facilities” with his backup, Col. Patrick Baudry, would fly to Salyut 7 with two Soviet cosmonauts about June 22. The report said that the French preferred the neutral word spacenaut because the Soviets used “cosmonaut” and the Americans “astronaut.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/82; Paris AFP in English, Apr 20/82; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-18) The New York Times reporter in Moscow said that the French-Soviet mission would be the first launch of a noncommunist in a Soviet spacecraft and the first East-West spaceflight since Apollo-Soyuz in 1975. Flight commander Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Aleksandr Ivanchenkov would occupy Salyut 7 a few days earlier. An three-man crew on another spacecraft—two cosmonauts, Leonid Kizim and Vladimir Solovyev, and Jean-Loup Chretien—would join them. The Soviet Union had released few details on the mission. The USSR’s goal was said to be deployment of a 12-man station weighing more than 100 tons, permanently occupied by rotating crews. Salyut 6’s lifetime had included two “marathon missions” of 185 and 175 days; the U.S. record was 84 days during the Skylab program of 1973 and 1974. Soon after the last mission on Salyut 6 the Soviet Union had sent a large craft (Cosmos 1267) to link with it and test “methods of assembly of orbital complexes of great size and weight.” No one said what would become of the Salyut-Cosmos; Western observers believed that the assembly, even with a combined weight of 36 tons could safely burn up on reentry. The U.S. Skylab that scattered debris on western Australia in 1979 during its uncontrolled plunge to Earth had weighed 77.5 tons. (FBIS Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/83; NY Times, Apr 21/82, A-12)
