On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
The USSR had launched Meteor-2, a meteorological satellite that would obtain global pictures of cloud cover and the surface below in visible and infrared frequencies in both the recorded and direct transmission mode and would observe penetrating-radiation flow in near-earth space, FBIS Tass International Service in Russian reported. The satellite also carried an earth-orientation system, equipment to automatically align solar panels to the sun, a radiotelemetry system for satellite monitoring, and a radio complex for transmission of data to earth. All equipment was functioning normally, the service reported. (Tass Inti. Service in Russian, Feb 7/85)
A Congressional Office of Technology Assessment report on space cooperation, commissioned by Sens. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hi.) and Claiborne Pell (D-R.l.), said the U.S. and USSR could conduct valuable scientific exchanges, but the U.S. must handle any renewal of exchanges carefully in order to protect national security, the Washington Times reported. The report, the release of which coincided with the 10th anniversary of the joint Soyuz-Apollo docking mission in space, said the U.S. space program could particularly benefit from Soviet expertise in the life sciences and planetary sciences and that cooperation could lead to "substantive gains" in some areas of U.S. space research and applications. In 1982 the U.S. cut off scientific contact between the two countries to protest the Soviet's invasion of Afghanistan, the declaration of martial law in Poland, and the exile of Russian human rights activist Andrei Sakharov. However, Congressional attitudes toward joint U.S.-USSR ventures had changed since then. The report addressed scientific and practical benefits of cooperation, the potential for transferring sensitive military technology and know-how, the foreign policy aspects of space cooperation such as reducing tensions, and perceptions about Soviet motivations and behavior with respect to overall U.S.-Soviet relations. Angelo Codevilla, an aide to Sen. Malcolm Wallop (R-Wyo.) and an expert on strategic space programs, said the key to cooperation with the Soviets is "to what extent do we give away the whole store" of the U.S. technology advantage. (VV Times, July 17/85, 2A)
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)
At a news conference to discuss the recent flights of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgiy Grechko, Soviet space officials said today that they expected to have a permanently manned space station by 1990, but that the Salyut 7 orbital laboratory would not be the spacecraft that hosted the rotating crews, the NY Times reported. Oleg Gazenko, head of the health ministry's Biomedical Problems Institute, which oversaw space medicine, said no unresolved problems remained to block development of the permanent station and that the crew rotation on Salyut 7 showed that incoming cosmonauts performed their research work better when they were spared the start-up operations needed to reactivate the space laboratory. At about the same time, Soviet officials told a U.S. Congressional delegation headed by Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) [see U.S. Space Policy/International, Oct. 10] that it was building a new space station that would be ready for launch in 1986, Defense Daily reported. Because the Soviets did not want to have two space stations in orbit at the same time, timing of the launch depended on the condition of the orbiting Salyut 7station, which was nearly doubled in size in September by the orbiting and deployment of a large new module. Nelson said the Soviets gave no details of the new station, which, if it is designed to be permanently manned, would beat the planned U.S. space station by seven or eight years. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C11; D/D, Oct 21/85, 259) October31: The Soviet Union, which had kept its space program under tight military control since it launched in 1957 the first satellite, announced creation of a civilian space agency, the NY Times reported. The agency would be responsible for the design, construction, and use of spacecraft for scientific research, remote sensing applications such as surveys of resources and crops, and joint space programs with other countries. In making the announcement, the government newspaper Izvestia identified the new agency as the Main Administration for the Creation and Use of Space Technology for the Economy and for Scientific Research, the Post said. It would be known as Glavkosmos, an acronym for the Russian terms "main" and "space." Izvestia did not specify the position of the agency in the Soviet government's table of organization but did identify the head of the agency as A. I. Dunayev. The only other publicly disclosed space-related agency in the Soviet Union was the Space Research Institute, founded in 1965 and a unit of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Western officials generally regarded that institute as performing some civilian space coordinating functions. However, in announcing Glavkosmos, Izvestia said, "It goes without saying that the effective use of space technology is of interest to many government ministries and agencies and to scientific organizations. The space program has reached such scope as to require the creation of a special coordinating agency." According to the announcement, the new agency would consider proposals for projects, work out long-term plans, and administer programs. It would also be responsible for launching satellites on vehicles expected to be supplied by the military and for collection and dissemination of satellite information. Izvestia said the agency would administer the Intercosmos program and the search and rescue satellite program, an international effort of the Soviet Union, the U.S., Canada, and France. The announcement did not make clear whether the new agency would administer any manned flights; but the emphasis seemed to be on automated space vehicles concerned with remote sensing, which until then had been part of the Cosmos series, a mixture of nearly 1700 civilian and military satellites launched since 1962. (NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13)
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgi Grechko in the Soyuz T-13 spacecraft returned to earth September 26 from the Salyut 7 orbiting complex, making a soft landing 220 km northeast of Dzhezkazgan, the Washington Post reported. Vladimir Vasyutin, Viktor Savinykh, and Aleksandr Volkov remained onboard Salyut 7. The partial replacement of the crew, FBIS Moscow Domestic Service in Russian reported, for the first time provided for continuous use over a prolonged period of a manned space complex, thus substantially enhancing its efficiency. The present Soviet space effort was the fourth long-term expedition aboard the Salyut 7 station since its 1982 launch. The overlapping of crews meant that the Salyut 7 would not have to be shut down and restarted. Left empty after the previous mission ended in October 1984, the station suffered an electrical failure that created severe and dangerous problems for Dzhanibekov and Savinykh when they docked June 8 with the station. The Soviet space program emphasized endurance flights in space with the ultimate goal of establishing large permanently manned orbiting complexes. The previous Soviet space mission set a record for human endurance in space when three crew members lived aboard Salyut 7for 237 days. (W Post, Sept 27/85, A21; FBIS Moscow Service in Russian, Sept 26/85)
The USSR launched at 10:40 a.m. Moscow time today the Soyuz T-13 carrying cosmonauts Col. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, mission commander and a veteran of four previous space missions, and Viktor Savinykh for a rendezvous with the Salyut 7space station in the first Soviet manned launch in nearly a year, the Washington Times quoted the official news agency Tass as saying. By late evening, Soyuz T-13, fitted with new flight controls, was in an orbit ranging from 203 to 182 miles above earth. On June 8 the Soyuz spacecraft docked with the space station using the new flight controls and an onboard computer in the Soviet program's first known manual docking. The time between launch from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan and the rendezvous with Salyut 7 was twice as long as in previous Soviet space missions, leading observers to believe the time was spent testing the new flight controls. In the past, personnel on the ground and automated onboard systems controlled Soviet spacecraft docking with Salyut stations, while cosmonauts on board simply monitored the operation. But since there had been aborted dockings in recent years, the Soviets might have given more control to Dzhanibekov. The Salyut space station had been mothballed since the previous October when three Russians returned to earth after 237 days in space, a record. (W Times, June 7/85, 7A; NYT, June 8/85, 4; W Post, June 9/85, A27) During June: Although the Soviet Union in the past had responded to the introduction of every new U.S. weapons system by installing a corresponding system of its own and many observers assumed the same would be true with the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), there were increasing indications that the Soviet leadership might decide to restrict itself to taking countermeasures against the U.S. system and renounce the development of any Soviet counterpart to SDI, the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists reported. In 1983 Henry Trofimenko, head of the Foreign Policy Department of the Institute for the Study of the USA and Canada, said that in giving effective answer to the U.S.'s military program "the USSR is not going to match the U.S. in development of every new system of weapons, nor is it going to imitate it." More recently, a Soviet analysis by a committee of scientific and strategic experts of the implications of SDI stressed that Soviet countermeasures against a prospective U.S. system could be very effective, could be taken quite easily and quickly, and would cost much less than the system against which they were directed. Possible countermeasures discussed in the analysis included destruction of the space platforms (done by relatively small missiles, by land-based lasers, by armed satellites functioning as "space mines," or by "clouds" of obstacles set in their path; encasing missiles with material capable of absorbing laser beams or of reflecting them; masking missile launches by means of smokescreens; designing a pattern of missile launches over time that would force the lasers constantly to redirect themselves in haphazard fashion, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the system; or launching dummy missiles in order to use up the destructive power of the system. The Soviet scientists agreed with western investigators that an estimated total cost of SDI could eventually reach $2 trillion, and even at that expenditure SDI could not guarantee that at least a few missiles in a hypothetical Soviet first strike might not get through to their targets. The Bulletin also pointed out that Soviet scientists had noted that the technologies required for countermeasures were in a much more advanced state than those required for SDI itself; in fact, much of the necessary technology already existed. Well before SDI would be in place, "an effective means of counteraction" could be set up and would probably cost only 1 or 2% as much as the system it was designed to counteract. (Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, June/July 85, 38)
