Air Force Secretary Donald Rice voiced strong support for designing a National Aero-Space Plane capable of flying into orbit. Rice's statement came in response to news reports about plans to lower the aerospace plane programs' goals in response to Congressional concerns about the cost of the program. France and Russia were also reported to be working jointly to develop aerospace-plane type engines that could threaten America's leadership in the field. Known as the X-30, the plane would be the world's first single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. (Antelope Valley News, Dec 19/92)
NASA announced that a Space Shuttle flight link up with the Russian Mir Space Station, tentatively planned for September 1994, would be retargeted for launch in April 1995. A flight by a Russian cosmonaut aboard the Shuttle Discovery remained on track for launch on November 16, 1993. The first flight to begin building the planned Space Station Freedom was rescheduled for July 1996. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
Three U.S. scientists, including one from NASA's Ames Research Center, completed the first joint U.S./Russian Antarctic expedition since the breakup of the former Soviet Union. The purpose of the expedition was to investigate the physical, chemical, and biological properties of ice-covered lakes in the Bunger Hills Oasis of East Antarctica. This was the first time U.S. scientists had explored these lakes, which are near a Russian research station. (NASA Release 92-73)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
The Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science announced in Washington, D.C., that scientists from the United States, Japan, Russia, and Europe were mounting a coordinated, multi-mission effort in solar-terrestrial science during the next four years. The effort began with the launch of Japan's Geotail satellite in July 1992 and was to continue with the 1993 launch of NASA's WIND spacecraft and missions from Russia in 1993 and Europe in 1995. NASA's Interplanetary Monitoring Platform and Japan's AKEBONO spacecraft were to provide important data as well. (NASA Release 92-193)
NASA announced that Charles F. Bolden, Jr. Col., USMC, would command Space Shuttle mission STS-60 in November 1993. Other crew members would be Pilot Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr.; and mission specialists Franklin R. Chang-Diaz; Jan Davis, Ronald M. Sega, and a Russian cosmonaut yet to be designated. (NASA Release 92-188; Space News, Nov 2-8/92)
A Russian industry grouping called the Space Regatta
Albert Parry, 92, a professor emeritus of Russian civilization and language and founder and former chairman of the department of Russian studies at Colgate University, died in Los Angeles. In 1954, Dr. Parry warned in an article that the Soviets would soon be able to launch a space satellite, and in another article published in July 1957, he predicted the launching would occur on September 17. The Soviet Union launched Sputnik I on October 4. (NY Times, May 8/92)
Rockwell International and a Russian company announced plans to collaborate on a system to enable the Space Shuttle  Atlantis to dock with Russia's MIR Space Station. Rockwell said it had signed an agreement under which NPO Energia would develop hardware for the system and build some components. (AP, Sept 9/92)
Russian space authorities reported that they had developed a new design for their Mir 2 Space Station and that initial production of the primary module had already started. The new Mir 2 design envisioned a core with five modules that were to be attached to the middle of a long beam. The officials said they expected Mir 2 to be launched in the mid-1990s and that it represented Russia's determination to continue its long-term plan of manned flight activities despite the difficult financial and political situation in Russia. (AvWk, Aug 10/92)
Lockheed Corporation formed a joint venture with Russian aerospace firm Krunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches, a move that could help make Russia one of the dominant forces in the world-wide commercial launch business. Lockheed was to be responsible for marketing the Russian rocket to Western customers and would provide payload integration. Rockets were to be launched from the Baikonur site in Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92)
NASA chose Rockwell International's Palmdale plant in California to refit the seven-year-old Space Shuttle Atlantis, allowing the spacecraft to stay aloft longer and possibly enabling it to rendezvous with the Russian Space Station Mir.  (LA Times, Jul 2/92)
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the fate of the Russian space program is in doubt. Although most of the republics that make up the successor to the Soviet Union, the Commonwealth of Independent States, had signed an agreement pledging to continue the space program and to honor all the Soviet Union's international agreements on space projects, many experts questioned the impoverished nascent union's ability to follow through. "There is a high level of uncertainty," said James Head, a planetary scientist at Brown University. "The commonwealth will absolutely not be able to maintain a space program at the same level of activity," declared Roald Sagdeev, former director of the Soviet institute that ran all scientific research programs in space. (C Trib, Jan 29/92; Boston Globe, Jan 30/92)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
Russian cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kalery worked outside the Mir Space Station on an unscheduled two-hour spacewalk to activate a pair of gyroscopes that help stabilize the Space Station. The gyroscopes had worn out naturally during the course of Mir's life and had to be replaced. (AP Jul 8/92)
NASA announced that scientists from the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and across the United States would participate in a Russian biomedical space mission later this month. The Cosmos '92 "biosatellite" was to be an unpiloted, recoverable spacecraft that carried plant and animal experiments. Cosmos '92 would become the eighth Russian biosatelite mission in which NASA had participated. (NASA Release 92-223)
NASA and NPO-Energia, A Russian company, planned to meet during the next two weeks for a final review on the feasibility of using the Soyuz TM spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard the Space Station. The Soyuz spacecraft was one of various concepts being considered for use as a return vehicle. (NASA Release 92-212)
The Russian Space Agency announced plans for three piloted missions and six Progress flights in 1993. The first mission of the series was scheduled for January 24, 1993. (Itar-Tass, Dec 11/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
Dr. Wesley T. Huntress, Jr., Director of NASA's Solar System Exploration Division, last week received the Korolev Medal, awarded by the Russian Federation of Astronautics and Cosmonautics for achievement in space research. (NASA Relesase 92-151)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev returned to earth five months later than originally planned. The 33-year-old flight engineer's stint in space aboard the Mir Space Station had been originally scheduled to end in October. But because of the disintegration of the Soviet Union, money problems in Moscow, and Kazakh nationalism, he was asked to extend his space journey by almost five months, creating a predicament for him and making him a media celebrity. (NY Times, Mar 26/92; USA Today, Mar 26/92; W Post, Mar 26/92; WSJ, Mar 26/92; B Sun, Mar 26/92)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
A Russian space capsule containing a cut-glass replica of the Statue of Liberty and greetings from Russian President Boris N. Yelstin splashed down in the Pacific Ocean off Washington state. The Resource 500 satellite was billed as Russia's first private space launch and honored the 500th anniversary of the voyage of Columbus in 1492. (The Sun, Nov 23/92; P Inq, Nov 23/92 and Nov 25/92; W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; USA Today, Nov 23/92; UPI, Nov 23/92; LA Times, Nov 25/92)
European, Canadian, and Finnish ministers, meeting in Granada, Spain, approved spending cuts for the European Space Agency of about 13 percent through the year 2000--down to $26 billion. The biggest cuts will affect the Hermes Space Shuttle. The ministers also launched a three-year study of ways to work with Russia on future space missions. (WSJ, Nov 11/92)
NASA announced the selection of 33 participating scientists to take part in a wide range of investigations on the Mars Observer mission, planned for launch September 16, 1992. These scientists would  be added to the current science teams in October 1992 to increase the range of studies planned for the 2-year global mapping mission. Besides representing U.S. universities and research centers, the newly selected group of participating scientists included four individuals from the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Six scientists from Austria, the United Kingdom, France and Germany were already involved in the mission, and a group of 10 participating scientists from Russia were to be added later this year. (NASA Release 92-45)
Loral Corporation became the first U.S. aerospace company to win government approval to buy advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. The Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Palo Alto, California, to import tiny electric satellite thrusters that are used to position satellites in space. Loral's Russian partners are Fakel Enterprises of Kaliningrad, which makes the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of Moscow. (WSJ, Apr 2/92)
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
The Associated Press reported that Japanese space officials recently had travelled to Russia for two weeks of talks and tours of previously off-limits space facilities. During the trip, the officials discussed a space cooperation treaty that would grant Japan access to Russian manned spaceflight data for use in medical research and to remote-sensing technology for use on satellites. (AP, Aug 9/92)
The Boeing Aircraft Company announced plans to produce some jetliner parts in the former Soviet Union as soon as possible. The effort would enable Boeing to gain increased access to the Russian aviation market and to meet stiff competition from Russian and European firms. (WSJ, Sept 11/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a French researcher landed safely in Kazakhstan after completing scientific experiments aboard the orbiting Mir Space Station. The 14-day mission brought to a close the third joint Russian-French flight since 1982. The three worked on experiments involving astrophysics, biology, and bioengineering. They also conducted geophysical research based on commercial contracts from several European countries and members of the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AP, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 10/92; The Sun, Aug 11/92)
If Japan follows through on plans to launch a probe toward Mars in 1996, it will become the third nation to explore the red planet, following the U.S. and Russia. Budgeted at $96.8 million, the 550-pound Japanese probe has been dubbed Planet B. It would begin to orbit Mars by October 1997, according to Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Science, which is planning the project. (Parade Magazine, Mar 3/92)
The main Russian TV news reported that some members of the former Soviet Union's cosmonaut ground controllers planned a warning strike to protest low wages, which in many cases were equivalent to $6 a month. The television report said that "One of the most prestigious jobs on Earth had become one of the lowest-paid." (W Times, Jan 28/92; P Inq, 28/92)
Yuri N. Koptev, a top Russian space official, declared in Izvestiya, that the six-year-old Space Station Mir must be replaced by 1994 and suggested turning to the West for technical and financial assistance. "We do not exclude attracting foreign capital and forming a joint stock company for joint use of the Mir Station," he said. (AP, Feb 28/92)
An article in the Chicago Tribune discussed the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran; built in the early 1980s, the Buran flew only once in November 1988. Today all three models of the spacecraft sit idle, victims of the economic downsizing in Russia. The Buran program seems destined for oblivion. (C Trib, Nov 8/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts made a spacewalk to position a cable that will power an exterior engine on their Mir Space Station. (AP Sept 9/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts on Tuesday completed a series of spacewalks to install an engine and move an antenna on the Mir Space Station, partly in preparation for docking with a U.S. Space Shuttle in 1994. (AP, Sept 15/92)
After two failed launch attempts, the Earthwinds around-the-world balloon flight was postponed until November. The captain, airline pilot Larry Newman of Scottsdale, Arizona, and his crew, Don Moses and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov, need near-calm conditions on the ground and the right trajectory to launch the trip, expected to last from 12 to 21 days at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. It would be the first balloon to circle the world. (LA Times, Feb 23/92;)
It was reported that Russian scientists successfully tested an engine for a space plane in 1991. (Time, Feb 24/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
NASA announced that Sergei K. Krikalev and Col.Valadimir G. Titov had been approved as the two Russian candidates to be trained to fly on a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993. (NASA Release 92-166)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said that they would take part in a Russian biomedical space mission. Ames scientists expected to use monkeys to study the effect of lengthy space travel on bones, eyes, and inner ear receptors. The space mission would involve experiments from several nations and was expected to be launched December 29. (UPI, Dec 14/92)
It was reported that the Bush Administration's commitment to keeping Russia's nuclear scientists employed by offering financial assistance and technical cooperation was running into obstacles as U.S. officials held up some deals and sent conflicting signals about others. Among the projects awaiting approval were requests by federal agencies to acquire Russian-made plutonium, buy a Russian-made reactor for the U.S. space program, and join an international consortium with Russia and others to explore use of fusion energy.  (W Post, Mar 25/92)
At the Asia-Pacific International Space Year Conference in Tokyo, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Shatalov called for strengthened space monitoring to determine compliance of major military powers with strategic nuclear arms reduction treaties. Shatalov said such collaboration in space also would help uncover possible efforts by smaller countries to develop nuclear weapons. Japan announced a plan to allow Southeast Asian countries to use a module that will be built onto the future international space station for scientific experiments in orbit. (UPI, Nov 16/92)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Samuel W. Keller as Associate Administrator for Russian Programs. The new position was established to provide focus for the many programs involving NASA and the former Soviet Union. (NASA Release 92-103)
The U.S. Department of Energy and the Mayak Production Association of the Russian Ministry of Atomic Energy signed a contract by which the Energy Department would buy Russian-produced plutonium-238 for use as a power source in U. S. spacecraft. The contract provided for the United States to purchase up to 40 kilograms (88 pounds) over five years. The plutonium is not weapons-grade and is to be used by NASA to power unmanned space missions that are being planned. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; W Post, Dec 29/92)
Russia launched a spaceship carrying two monkeys and insects into orbit to conduct radiation experiments on the creatures. Experts from the European Space Agency as well as Italian, German, and other foreign scientists were to oversee the biological experiments. The ITAR-Tass news agency also said that Cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyov and Sergei Avdeyev, who had spent five months aboard the Mir Space Station, were in good condition following routine medical examinations. (AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
Russia faced a new dispute over the famed Baikonur spaceport in Kazakhstan. Russian President Boris Yeltsin revealed that Kazakhstan had prevented the liftoff of a satellite at the Baikonur cosmodrome. "Kazakhstan was playing games. It wanted to show that there has to be a Russian-Kazakhstan agreement on Baikonur," Mr. Yeltsin said. Mr. Yeltsin said he would propose to Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev either joint financing of the famed spaceport, Russian purchase of the property, or a form of joint venture with the Kazakhstan republic. (W Times, Apr 30/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
Evgeny Sverdlov, director of the Institute of Molecular Genetics in Moscow, told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), that the demise of the former Soviet Union had created a "brain drain" that challenged the future existence of the Russian scientific research community. Because of the lack of funds, many research centers were on the verge of collapse. He added that it was good for young scientists to hone their skills abroad. But he said it would be a disaster for science in his country if they did not return. (CSM, Feb 13/92)
It was reported that a NASA-led team might travel to Russia to explore areas for joint cooperation on axisymmetric scramjets. At the top of the list was the possibility of the U.S. joining in a second flight later during the year of the Russian scramjet that already had achieved about three seconds of supersonic combustion. (AvWk, Apr 20/92)
Fearing that unemployed scientists in the former Soviet Union might put their talents to use building weapons of mass destruction for unsavory regimes, the United States, Germany and Russia announced the formation of an international center to promote "non-military endeavors." (P Inq, Feb 26/92)
